DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/10033Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look atGermany and the United States260 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-07310-3 | DOI 10.17226/10033Committee to Study Global Netoworks and Local Values, Computer Science andTelecommunications Board, National Research CouncilGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Global Networks and Local ValuesA Comparative Look at Germany andthe United StatesCommittee to Study Global Networks and Local ValuesComputer Science and Telecommunications BoardDivision on Engineering and Physical SciencesNational Research CouncilNATIONAL ACADEMY PRESSWashington, D.C.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Boardof the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medi-cine.  The members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special
competences and with regard for appropriate balance.This study was supported by a grant between the National Academy of Sciences and theGerman-American Academic Council.  Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommen-

dations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflectthe views of the organizations or agencies that provided support for this project.International Standard Book Number 0-309-07310-3Library of Congress Control Number:  2001099571

Additional copies of this report are available from:National Academy Press2101 Constitution Avenue, NW
Box 285Washington, DC  20055
800/624-6242
202/334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area)http://www.nap.eduCopyright 2001 by the National Academy of Sciences.  All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of AmericaGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating soci-
ety of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedi-cated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general
welfare.  Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863,
the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government onscientific and technical matters.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts is president of the National
Academy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter
of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding
engineers.  It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its mem-
bers, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advis-ing the federal government.  The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors

engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education andresearch, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers.  Dr. Wm. A.
Wulf is president of the National Academy of Engineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions inthe examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public.  The Insti-

tute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by itscongressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon itsown initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education.
Dr. Kenneth I. Shine is president of the Institute of Medicine.The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sci-
ences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with
the AcademyÕs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal gov-ernment.  Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the
Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in provid-ing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering com-munities.  The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute

of Medicine.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts and Dr. Wm. A. Wulf are chairman and vice
chairman, respectively, of the National Research Council.National Academy of SciencesNational Academy of Engineering
Institute of Medicine
National Research Council
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ivCOMMITTEE TO STUDY GLOBAL NETWORKSAND LOCAL VALUESKENNETH H. KELLER, University of Minnesota, ChairKENNETH W. DAM, University of Chicago Law School (resigned)PAUL A. DAVID, All Souls College, Oxford UniversityKENNETH KENISTON, Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyHENRY H. PERRITT, JR., Chicago-Kent College of Law, Illinois Instituteof TechnologyROBERT SPINRAD, Xerox Palo Alto Research Center (retired)GEORGE VRADENBURG, America Online, Inc. (resigned)German Delegation from the Max-Planck-Projektgruppe
CHRISTOPH ENGEL, Max-Planck-Projektgruppe, Chair of the GermanDelegationKLAUS W. GREWLICH, Center for European Integration Studies, Bonn;College of Europe, Bruges; Universit−t FreiburgBERND HOLZNAGEL, Universit−t Mnster, Institut fr Informations-,Tele-kommunikations- und MedienrechtMICHAEL HUTTER, Universitaet Witten-Herdecke
RAYMUND WERLE, Max-Planck-Institut fuer Gesellschaftsforschung
MARTINA ZITTERBART, Institut fuer Betriebssysteme undRechnerverbund (resigned)U.S. Staff
National Research CouncilHERBERT LIN, Senior Scientist
NICCI DOWD, Project Assistant (through September 1999)
MICKELLE RODRIGUEZ, Senior Project Assistant (through February2001)JANICE SABUDA, Senior Project AssistantGerman Staff
Max-Planck-Projektgruppe Recht der GemeinschaftsgterJOACHIM D–LKENANJA MOOSMANN
LORENZ MƒLLERWOLF OSTHAUSNOTE:  Though this report is formally a report of the National Research Council, prepared
in accordance with NRC rules and procedures, it is in fact the product of a U.S./Germansteering group effort that was carried out with Christoph Engel and Kenneth Keller servingas cochairs.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARDDAVID D. CLARK, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, ChairDAVID BORTH, Motorola Labs
JAMES CHIDDIX, AOL Time Warner
JOHN M. CIOFFI, Stanford University
ELAINE COHEN, University of Utah
W. BRUCE CROFT, University of Massachusetts at Amherst
THOMAS E. DARCIE, AT&T Labs Research
JOSEPH FARRELL, University of California at Berkeley
JEFFREY M. JAFFE, Bell Laboratories, Lucent Technologies
ANNA KARLIN, University of Washington
BUTLER W. LAMPSON, Microsoft Corporation
EDWARD D. LAZOWSKA, University of Washington
DAVID LIDDLE, U.S. Venture Partners
TOM M. MITCHELL, WhizBang! Labs, Inc.
DONALD NORMAN, Nielsen Norman Group
DAVID A. PATTERSON, University of California at Berkeley
HENRY (HANK) PERRITT, Chicago-Kent College of Law
BURTON SMITH, Cray, Inc.
TERRY SMITH, University of California at Santa Barbara
LEE SPROULL, New York University
JEANNETTE M. WING, Carnegie Mellon UniversityMARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL, DirectorHERBERT S. LIN, Senior Scientist
ALAN S. INOUYE, Senior Program Officer
JON EISENBERG, Senior Program Officer
LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Program Officer
CYNTHIA PATTERSON, Program Officer
STEVEN WOO, Program Officer
JANET BRISCOE, Administrative Officer
MARGARET HUYNH, Senior Project Assistant
DAVID DRAKE, Senior Project Assistant
JANICE SABUDA, Senior Project Assistant
JENNIFER BISHOP, Senior Project Assistant
DAVID PADGHAM, Research Assistant
BRANDYE WILLIAMS, Staff AssistantGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiPreface
BACKGROUNDIt is described alternatively as the Òthird wave,Ó the 
Òinformation revo-lution,Ó or the 
Òvirtually connected world.Ó Whatever the rhetoric used to
capture the impact of information technology in general and global net-
works in particular, it leads inevitably to the assertion that these develop-
ments will have a profound and increasing impact on individual life, social
communities, commerce, and government. But what kind of impact and
how, specifically, will it occur? For some it appears to be a set of risks and
threats. For others, it amounts to almost unbounded opportunity.Both assertions may have elements of truth. Opportunities and risksare twins. Unfortunately, because most discussions of the likely effects
have been rather general and conjectural, there has been little basis for
judging either the optimism of the technophiles or the pessimism of the
technophobes. Where opportunities are concerned, conjecture and uncer-
tainty have few negative consequences; the ingenuity of creative people,
the workings of the market, and the acceptance by society of useful new
tools will determine soon enough which technological applications will
find a place in our lives and in what ways. The risks are another matter. It
is important to try to anticipate the social effects of a new technological
development in order to understand what tools and strategies might be
used to reduce the risks or minimize the negative impacts.The societal implications of new information technologies have notbeen universally welcomed. Most nations, including both fundamentalist
and dictatorial nations as well as liberal democracies that tend to haveGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiiPREFACEhigh respect for personal freedom, have individual values that may bethreatened by new information technologies. For example, in 1996 the
Bavarian Attorney General forced CompuServe to ban a couple of
newsgroups on issues of homosexuality that were perfectly legal in Cali-
fornia. Similarly, some types of Nazi propaganda that would be crimi-
nally prosecuted in Germany are constitutionally protected as free speech
in the United States.Local governments have traditionally been responsible for counter-measures against information regarded as socially harmful. However,
todayÕs global telecommunications may constrain the options available togovernments for controlling information, limit the effectiveness of old

policy tools, and make it more difficult for governments even to under-
stand or identify the values held by the populace at large. Governments
might lose considerable ability to influence or preserve values that are
different from those elsewhere in the world, or even to manage regional
differences within their own boundaries.Many questions regarding social organization arise. To what extent isit possible to organize power along territorial lines in a world of global
telecommunications? What new loci of power and influence are made
possible?  To what extent do global telecommunications enable power to

be organized around personal interests rather than geographically based
or limited communities? What is the impact of such organization on so-
cial development?   How will the roles of government and of society

change as a result of global networks?  Will all governmentsÑor even alldemocratic governmentsÑchange in the same way?   Are there scenariosin which governments may use the power of networks to enhance their
power?To address some of the issues related to the impact of global networkson local values, the German-American Academic Council asked for a
study in this area.  In response, the U.S. National Research Council estab-

lished a committee in accordance with its usual procedures.  The German

delegation, under the auspices of the German Max-Planck-Project Group
on Common Goods, Law, Politics, and Economics, were intimately in-
volved in all aspects of the development of this report (participating in
meetings, writing, and so on), but were not formally approved as NRC
committee members.A comparison of Germany and the United States was thus appropri-ate for two reasons. The procedural reason is that the expertise of the
committee members was more concentrated on these two nations than on
others, and that it was the German-American Academic Council that

asked for the study. The substantive reason is that Germany and the
United States have many important similarities (e.g., a well-developed
information-technology infrastructure and a commitment to democracyGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACEixand the rule of law) and many important differences as well (e.g., differ-ing values that each nation wishes to uphold). For this reason, this report
is structured around an exploration of the potential impacts of global tele-
communications on values of Germany and the United StatesÑspecifi-cally some of the values associated with democracy, privacy, freedom of
information, and free speech.STUDY PLANIn carrying out its study, the Committee to Study Global Networksand Local Values met for the first time in the spring of 1998 and six more
times (including two symposia described below) to deliberate. The sym-
posia were integral to the study, as they involved speakers from a range
of disciplines and helped to expose the committee to a much broader range
of input and perspectives than what was represented by committee
expertise.  In this role, the speakers served admirably. (Individually

authored papers from these symposia can be found online at <http://www.mpp-rdg.mpg.de/dresden1.html> for Symposium 1 and at <http://www.mpp-rdg.mpg.de/woodsh.html> for Symposium 2. These papers
are also available in hard copy.1)PURPOSE OF THIS REPORTThis report focuses on the relationship between global informationnetworks and political, economic, and cultural institutions and norms,
which, in aggregate, are referred to as Òlocal values.Ó The study has exam-
ined the effect of global networks on the ability of individual nations and
communities to protect or perpetuate indigenous values and systems, and
it has examined the policy approaches available, at least in the United
States and Germany, to achieve those endsÑthat is, to alter, control, orotherwise affect the local impact of information networks.This report is intended to help policymakers understand the issues,how they are linked to one another, and how action targeting one prob-
lem or issue can have effectsÑoftentimes unintendedÑon others. It com-bines positive and normative analyses. The positive analysisÑdescribingand explaining the current situation, attempting to predict likely develop-
ment paths and their future effects, and forecasting the consequences of1Christoph Engel and Kenneth H. Keller, eds., 2000, Understanding the Impact of GlobalNetworks on Local Social, Political and Cultural Values,Ó Law and Economics of International
Telecommunications, Vol. 42, Baden-Baden: Nomos; Christoph Engel and Kenneth H. Keller,eds., 2000,  Governance of Global Networks in the Light of Differing Local Values, Law and Eco-
nomics of International Telecommunications, Vol. 43, Baden-Baden: Nomos.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.regulatory actionsÑaims at making clear what the present and potentialproblems are. The normative analysisÑassessing the seriousness of theproblems, making judgments on whether they require societal action, and,

if so, commenting on what the course of action might beÑemphasizes thedifferent levels and the range of formal and informal structures, institu-
tions, and policies available to deal with the problems identified. Further-
more, the report recognizes that legislators and the traditional political
structures are not the only institutions that societies depend on to deal
with perceived problems. A host of less formal political institutions and
actors can, at times, be more effective, as they have been in much of the
development of global networks that has already occurred. Therefore, the
analysis in this report is not directed exclusively to traditional policy-
makers, but is also intended for professional groups, commercial institu-
tions, nongovernmental organizations, and the broad array of other enti-
ties that make up civil society.Finally, it is worth noting that the report does not make specific policyrecommendations. Rather, it offers insights that the committee hopes will
be useful to policymakers in thinking about critical decisions.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSThe committee wishes to express its gratitude to the participants inthe two symposia, whose contributions were critical for helping the com-
mittee to better understand the issues. Staff of the Max-Planck-Project
Group on Common Goods, Law, Politics, and Economics and the U.S.
National Research CouncilÕs Computer Science and TelecommunicationsBoard provided helpful support, both logistically and intellectually.Most importantly, the U.S. and German delegations to the committeeacknowledge each other for a willingness to overcome their cultural dif-
ferences and work through the misunderstandings that often characterize
multinational study teams. At first, a common vocabulary and working
style seemed to elude the committee. But over time and with patience,
committee members from the two delegations were able to work out a
rough consensus on important concepts and definitions. (Indeed, at times
the process of deliberation was self-reflectiveÑsome of the issues dis-cussed in this report played out during the committee process.)The committee also thanks the German-American Academic Council(GAAC) for making this project possible, noting in particular the help of
Dr. Rolf Hoffmann and Dr. Johannes Belz in facilitating interactions be-
tween the committee and the GAAC.xPREFACEGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Acknowledgment of ReviewersThis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen fortheir diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with pro-
cedures approved by the National Research CouncilÕs (NRCÕs) ReportReview Committee.  The purpose of this independent review is to pro-

vide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in mak-
ing the published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report
meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsive-
ness to the study charge.  The review comments and draft manuscript

remain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process.
We wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:Michael Froomkin, University of Miami School of Law,James Hamilton, Duke University,
Herwig Kogelnik, Lucent Technologies,
Viktor Mayer-Schoenberger, Kennedy School of Government,
David Post, Temple University,
Margaret Jane Radin, Stanford University, and
Debora Spar, Harvard Business School.Although the reviewers listed above have provided many construc-tive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the con-
clusions or recommendations, nor did they see the final draft of the report
before its release.  The review of this report was overseen by Morris

Tanenbaum.  Appointed by the National Research Council, he was re-
xiGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.sponsible for making certain that an independent examination of this re-port was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that
all review comments were carefully considered.  Responsibility for the

final content of this report rests entirely with the authoring committee
and the institution.xiiACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERSGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiiContentsEXECUTIVE SUMMARY1
1INTRODUCTION AND CONTEXT15
1.1Aims of This Report, 15

1.2Background, 17

1.3This Study, 18

1.4Germany and the United States: Some Contrasts, 19

1.5Structure of This Report, 22
2THE EVOLUTION OF GLOBAL NETWORKS23
2.1Introduction, 23

2.2Evolution and Design of Global Telecommunications
Networks, 262.3The Value Dimension of Networks, 36

2.4Global Networks and Changing Values: Toward
Convergence or Divergence?, 423UNDERSTANDING LOCAL VALUES AND HOW THEY
ARE AFFECTED BY GLOBAL NETWORKS46

3.1Introduction, 46

3.2Are Values Always the Issue?, 48

3.3The Function of Values, 51

3.4The Locality of Values, 58

3.5The Legitimacy of Values, 59

3.6The Impact of Global Networks on Values, 61
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xivCONTENTS4DEMOCRACY AND POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS74
4.1Democracy, Political Institutions, and Power, 74

4.2The Impact of the Internet on Democracy, Political
Institutions, and Power, 754.3Constitutional Policy, 97
5FREE SPEECH AND THE INTERNET106
5.1Introduction, 106

5.2The Values Involved in Free Speech, 107

5.3Common and Different Traditions and the Internet, 108

5.4Operationalizing the Regulatory Goal, 119

5.5Internet Content Regulation as a Challenge to
Governance, 1236PRIVACY AND FREEDOM OF INFORMATION133
6.1Introduction, 133

6.2Privacy, 135

6.3Freedom of Information, 156

6.4Note Added in Proof, 169
7THE IMPACT OF GLOBAL E-COMMERCE ON
LOCAL VALUES170

7.1Introduction, 170

7.2Commerce and Values, 171

7.3The Impact of E-Commerce on Local Commercial
Values, 1737.4Effects on Local Commercial Values, 177

7.5The Impact of E-Commerce on Global Networks, 185

7.6The Impact of E-Commerce on Local, Social, and
Political Values, 1888GOVERNANCE IN CYBERSPACE: MULTI-LEVEL AND
MULTI-ACTOR CONSTITUTIONALISM190

8.1Introduction, 190

8.2Governance, 190
9INFORMATION NETWORKS AND CULTURE205
9.1Introduction, 205

9.2Cultural Hegemony, 208

9.3Global Networks and Class Issues, 216

9.4Public and Private Spaces, 218

9.5Generational Phenomena, 221
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSxv10PRINCIPLES AND CONCLUSIONS224
10.1Governments and the Evolution of Local Values, 224

10.2Democracy, 225

10.3Regulatory Structure, 226

10.4Free Speech, 227

10.5Privacy, 228

10.6Freedom of Information, 229

10.7Technology Development, 229

10.8Culture and Technology, 230
APPENDIXÑBIOGRAPHIES233
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Global Networks and Local ValuesGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Executive SummaryHow do global networksÑespecially the InternetÑaffect a com-munityÕs political, economic, and cultural values? How do these values,
in turn, affect the ways in which global networks are designed, operated,
and regulated?As a first step toward addressing some of the issues related to theimpact of global networks on local values, and vice versa, the Computer
Science and Telecommunications Board of the National Research Council
(United States) and the Max-Planck-Project Group on Common Goods,
Law, Politics, and Economics (Germany) conducted a study whose goal
was to help policymakers understand the issues, how they are linked to
one another, and how action targeting one problem or issue can have
effectsÑoften-times unintendedÑon others.To keep the scope of the study manageable, the Committee to StudyGlobal Networks and Local Values concentrated its work on Germany
and the United States, two countries that are different enough to contrast
on a variety of critical issues yet similar enough to invite useful compari-
sons. In addition, the study did touch on some questions from a more
global perspective.  Furthermore, instead of making specific policy rec-

ommendations, it sought to develop insights that will be useful to policy-
makers around the world in thinking about policy decisions.THE INTERNET AS GLOBAL NETWORKThe Internet was initially created for the purpose of linking academiccomputer scientistsÕ research, and the technologyÑmost importantly, theGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESprotocolsÑto support the early version of the network was created to meetits needs. But while todayÕs Internet is widely regarded as a new mediumfor all to exploit and use, the underlying protocols have not changed sig-
nificantly since, and they still embody the values of those early days. For
example, one value of that era was trust; destructive hacking was not re-
garded as much of a problem, and the protocols were designed with that
assumption in mind. Today, much of the concern over cyber-vulnerabil-
ity results from those protocolsÕ inattention to security.
The Internet is a network of networks that is truly global. The TCP/IPprotocol, on which the Internet is based, allows a network to be designed
in such a way that the ÒintelligenceÓ that controls interactions is located
primarily at the nodes and edges of the network (i.e., under the control of
information suppliers and end users rather than some ÒglobalÓ central
authority). Thus, the Internet is not subject to strong centralized manage-
ment in its day-to-day operations. Technical decisions about architecture
and design are coordinated at present through an informal working
group, the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), though this may
change in the future. In particular, as the Internet becomes more impor-
tant to governments and business interests, commercial and political pres-

sures are likely to emerge that seek to change the traditional forms of
Internet management.It should be noted, however, that the success of the Internet is largelythe result of the lack of a master plan to guide its development. In its early
stages, the Internet was promoted and funded, but not designed, by the
U.S. government. This is not to say that government input was irrelevant.
Indeed, the government made three critical decisionsÑto allow the origi-nal research and education network to evolve toward a general-purpose
network, to select TCP/IP for the NSFNET and other backbone networks,
and subsequently to privatize the NSFNET backboneÑthat had a power-ful influence on the InternetÕs evolution. Nevertheless, direct control overfuture development of the Internet through comprehensive action plans
will be even more difficult in the future, if only because the Internet has
now extended itself across so many national borders and has mobilized
such a diverse ensemble of interested parties.Because the Internet is not subject to centralized management over itsoperations (and arguably should not be in the future), the fact that it
crosses local and national boundaries introduces new dimensions of con-
cern for communities accustomed to exercising sovereignty within their
borders. Thus, the presence of the Internet raises the essential question of
how (or whether) they should exercise authority over this new medium.
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY3VALUESPublic opinion tends to start from a simplistic hypothesis: global net-works threaten local values. But before they take action, policymakers
should first understand whether values are really the issue; what values
do for the individual, society, and government; whether the values are
legitimate and thus deserve protection; and how global networks might
affect local value orientations.Values help individuals understand, decide, and even exist. Valuesendow individuals with a normative language that allows them to distin-
guish and judge their own behavior. And this allows them to decide on
courses of action, and to preserve self-esteem.Values help society to convey information, facilitate coordination, andgive the group an identity. Precisely because they share values, the mem-
bers of a society can interpret the behavior of other members and estab-
lish expectations about it.  Through the sharing and communication of

values, the behavior of individuals can be coordinated and made cohe-
sive.  Building a community essentially involves aligning people with

shared values.For government, values are the link to its citizenry. They provide abasis for the development of statutes to which people are inclined to ad-
here. They give legitimacy to governmental action. And shared values are
the bedrock of a national identity.Individuals are not likely to have a consistent order of values, andeven less are societies or states. A more appropriate picture is a basket of
values that are in tension and in permanent motion. History, culture, and
public discourse shape the dominant balance of these values at any given
time. Nations, societies, and individuals differ less by adhering to entirely
different values, and much more by how they balance them.Values can be either formal (like tolerance) or substantive (like na-tional pride).1  Modern societies are characterized by strong formal and
relatively weak substantive values; but no society has ever existed with-
out some shared substantive values.Protecting local values is not a value as such. The locally prevailingvalues can be inappropriate for a changed world, for example, or they can
be illegitimate (like obedience to an autocratic regime).1Formal values (American legal scholars might term these ÒneutralÓ values) are, to a first
approximation, those associated with social processesÑrules of behavior that facilitate dis-course and, indeed, can be a key element in making a community possibleÑwhile substan-tive values come closer to moral convictions or beliefs.  While the committee recognizes that
this distinction is not always crisp, it is useful for this report.  More discussion of this point
can be found in Chapter 3.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESTHE POTENTIAL IMPACT OF GLOBAL NETWORKSON LOCAL VALUESGlobal networks can influence local values in a number of ways. Thenetworks may enable individuals to remove themselves from the reach of
a communityÕs influence on enforcing a particular set of values. That is, ifan individual dislikes a value or a set of values dominant in his or her
local environment, networks enable that person to exit from the commu-
nity.Global networks give individuals access to values that differ from theones prevailing in their society of origin, and to different ways of balanc-
ing competing values.  Having been exposed to the fact that values and

their balance are historically contingent, individuals can use this knowl-
edge for questioning their societyÕs traditional values.Global networks may lead to a convergence of values, raising con-cerns over cultural hegemony. In particular, the central role of the United
States in developing and populating the Internet, the predominance of
English in Internet content, and the vitality of the traditionally egalitarian
Internet culture all contribute to what some outside observers character-
ize as U.S. cultural hegemony.Global networks enable communication that is almost devoid of con-text.  The user often does not know the content provider.  Internet use is

mostly unnoticed by the physical communities to which the user belongs.
This is important because values are embedded in context. Trespassers
cannot be reminded of the value if the violation remains invisible.THE INTERNET AND THE DEMOCRACTIC PROCESSThe Internet has potentially large effects on democracy and the politi-cal process generally.  Established political arenas are more easily engaged

through the Internet than through conventional channels, and the exist-
ence of new arenas may challenge existing institutions, especially those in
government. Political actors gain leverage by virtue of the InternetÕs abil-ity to facilitate organization; the Internet also allowsÑfor better orworseÑa larger degree of unmediated communication between the pub-lic and its political leaders.The Internet can also change the political process. It enables issues tobe brought to the forefront of policymaker attention in very short times,
and it lets stakeholders and advocates press their cases in a multiplicity of
forums. Meanwhile, the Internet and its associated technologies provide
tools for policymakers to make their case to the public without intermedi-
aries.The Internet can change the balance between direct and representa-Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY5tive democracy in favor of the former: it allows broader and faster publicdissemination of more types of information and ideas relevant to the
policymaking process. But whether the Internet will result in a more ef-
fective selection processÑthrough which ideas can be sifted and evalu-ated in a reasonable and deliberate mannerÑis an open question.Because of its pluralizing potential, the Internet increases the likeli-hood that transnational conflicts will ariseÑbut because there is no sover-eign international authority to adjudicate and, especially, to enforce, the
resolution of Internet-driven conflicts is highly complex. At the same time,

the Internet and information technology have the potential to fractionate
the public because they allow individuals to customize the information
they receive.The Internet poses different challenges to the legal and constitutionalenvironments in which the United States and Germany operate. To the
extent that the courts are able to rely on the values expressed in their
respective constitutions (rather than rights that have been explicitly ar-
ticulated in the documents themselves), they will have greater flexibility
to facilitate evolution of their legal and constitutional environments as the
technologies and uses of the Internet change.Finally, government reactions to the Internet may not necessarily bebenign or constructive. Indeed, governments may well choose to use more
traditional command-and-control regulation to deal with what they may
see as problems created by the Internet. Such actions do not necessarily
serve democratic and freedom-preserving interests.FREEDOM OF SPEECHAlthough both the United States and Germany recognize a constitu-tional right to freedom of expression, the interpretation of that right in the
two countries is significantly different. Moreover, and just as important,
the weight given to that right in comparison with other values is different
in the two societies. As a result, the legal structures and protections that
have developed to implement the right are different, and they exemplify
why harmonization of the laws related to many aspects of freedom of
expression on the Internet is likely to remain quite difficult.Consider two types of speech for which the United States and Ger-many have different legal regimes. Hate speechÑthe willful public ex-pression or promotion of hatred toward any segment of society distin-
guished by color, race, religion, or ethnic originÑis generally proscribedby the German legal system. Such a prohibition is not surprising given the
nationÕs determination to avoid the reestablishment of a national socialistauthority. By contrast, hate speech is generally deemed a constitutionallyGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESprotected form of expression in the United States; only when such speechcan lead to a hate-engendered crime is it prohibited.A second type of speech that the two countries regard differently isspeech that is deemed detrimental to minors. Both nations proscribe child
pornography. But they have dealt differently with material that might be
psychologically traumatic to minors. The United States has sought to pass
laws that hold providers criminally liable for supplying minors with ma-
terials that are Òobscene,Ó Òindecent,Ó Òpatently offensiveÓ (the Commu-
nications Decency Act, or CDA), or Òharmful to minorsÓ (the Child Online
Protection Act, or COPA). CDA was held unconstitutional, and COPA
was overturned at the district level and now awaits appeal. Germany has
proscribed the distribution to minors of material that is Òimmoral, [has] abrutalizing effect, [gives] incentive to violence, crimes or racial hatred, . . .
[or glorifies] the war,Ó but these laws have not been seriously challenged
in court.The global nature of the Internet makes it extremely difficult andcostly for national authorities to unilaterally implement laws and regula-
tions that reflect national, rather than global, moral standards. But com-
mercial law (or private law, as it is usually known in Europe), self-regula-
tion, and encouragement of intermediation provide additional tools.
Commercial law is useful when material on the network injures a clearly
identifiable party (for example, if a Web site published libelous material
about a person or violated someoneÕs legally protected privacy).Self-regulationÑthrough site-identification and labeling schemes,age-verification software, and the provision of filtering softwareÑallowsfor greater diversity of Internet material, enhanced freedom of expres-
sion, and customization of controls to fit the needs and desires of indi-
viduals. Intermediaries, such as host providers, can play a useful role in
offering the public a regulating or authenticating service. That is, host
providers can market their Internet access software by promising to in-
clude certain kinds of content and to exclude others. In each of these alter-
natives, government has a role in ensuring their quality; thus, they are
examples of ÒhybridÓ regulation, combining governmental and nongov-
ernmental approaches to the overall regulatory process.THE INTERNET, PRIVACY, AND FREEDOM OF INFORMATIONPotential tensions between privacy and freedom of information (FOI)illustrate contrasts between a substantive value (privacy) and a formal
value (transparency in government, as exemplified by freedom of infor-
mation).  Privacy asserts the ability of individuals to control and restrict

the dissemination of information about themselves, while FOI refers to
the free availability of information related to the conduct of governmentGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY7business. Both public and private institutions gather, organize, store, andin some instances disseminate information about people. Thus both kinds
of institutions are key actors in threats to, as well as protection of, privacy.
Both are also involved in FOI issues, though private institutions play only
an indirect role.Though privacy and freedom of information are not necessarily inopposition, they do come into conflict in some instances. For example,
information on individuals is collected by governments. Asserting an ab-
solute right to privacy would argue for never releasing such information,
while asserting an absolute right to FOI would argue for releasing any of
it on demand. In these cases, the substantive value of privacy is in conflict
not only with the formal value of transparency of state activities, but also
with the public interest (in the prevention and prosecution of criminal
offenses) and commercial interests (in the collection and exploitation of
data).Global networks such as the Internet have raised the stakes signifi-cantly for both privacy and freedom of information. Clearly, they facili-
tate dissemination of information held by both public and private institu-
tions. But perhaps more significantly, computers and software have
greatly enhanced the storage, mining, sorting, and reorganizing of data.
This has increased the ability of institutions to develop comprehensive
and accessible profilesÑon private individuals as well as on the actions ofgovernmental bodiesÑfrom disparate databases and put the informationinto useful formats.The German and American approaches to privacy and freedom ofinformation are opposites of each other. Germany, and European nations
in general, have comprehensive systems of law and regulation that reflect
strong commitments to protection of privacy. The United States has a
patchwork of incomplete protections reflecting uncertain commitment to
privacy. With respect to freedom of information, the situation is reversed.
The United States has a comprehensive system in place that reflects its
commitment to access.  Germany has a patchwork system, reflecting its

ambiguity about access.In the context of the Internet, privacy and freedom of informationraise many policy issues. For example, because routine consumer transac-
tions can easily involve players in a number of countries, applying na-
tional regulations represents a major extraterritorial extension of domes-
tic or regional law. Furthermore, attempts to find a common solution to
privacy problems in a globally networked world are difficult because na-
tions such as Germany and the United States approach privacy from very
different political and legal viewpoints and traditions. Germans tradition-
ally vest considerable trust in government to protect their privacy inter-
ests. By contrast, Americans tend to mistrust governmental institutionsGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESand have a strong tradition of relying on market forces not only to regulatethe economy but also to serve many other social needs. As a consequence,
Americans have been more ambivalent about turning to the government
to protect their personal privacy.Despite these differences, both Germany and the United States overthe last 25 years have developed fair-information principles that reflect
substantial agreement on basic questions regarding privacy. These prin-
ciples include openness, individual participation, collective limitation,
data quality, finality, security, and accountability.  However, it should be

noted that implementation of fair-information practices may differ sig-
nificantly from system to system even though the same general principles
or framework applies in all cases.International law could theoretically play an important role in the le-gal protection of personal privacy because of the ease with which per-
sonal data can be transferred electronically across national borders. Har-
monization can be effected through conventional treaties that express
substantive rights and that obligate national authorities to enforce those
rights through national legal institutions. But treaties work only when
there is near-complete agreement on the values involved; furthermore,
negotiating them is a very slow process.An alternative to treaties are framework agreements based on Òhy-bridÓ forms of international organization. In these matrices, or frame-
works, of  international public law, private self-regulation is used to work

out the details. Such hybrid regimes will be acceptable only if they offer
new flexibility in rule makingÑif they tailor substantive requirements tothe realities of rapidly changing technologies. They also must offer more
flexibility and lower transaction costs for complaint- and dispute-resolu-
tion, and an effective state-based system to ensure compliance.Freedom of information is a pillar of democratic societies, and one ofthe greatest potential contributions of global networks is enhanced public
access to government information. As court decisions, legislative docu-
ments, and regulations of administrative agencies become more easily
available through the InternetÕs World Wide Web, the rule of law isstrengthened.Such Òprimary legal informationÓÑinformation having the force oflaw, such as parliamentary enactments, judicial decisions, and comparable
instruments from administrative agencies such as rules and ordersÑmustbe public for effective governance. But as noted above, public records con-
taining personal information can pose a conflict between freedom of in-
formation and privacy rightsÑa conflict exacerbated by advances in in-formation technology that make it more practical to extract and cross-link
personal data from public records.Similarly, notes, drafts, and intermediate documents of public offi-Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY9cials and bodies can give the public insights into the decision-making pro-cesses of government and administration, but how far a society should go
in providing access to such records is a matter requiring further discus-
sion. The value of transparency in the decision-making process must be
weighed against the need for administrators or judges and their advisors
to have candid discussions without which the quality of decisions might
well be reduced. Government also needs space and time in which to as-
sess arguments and conduct its own debates with a degree of privacy.The international legal complications related to freedom of informa-tion are neither as pervasive nor as challenging as those related to privacy
protection, and the drive for harmonization is less urgent. The differences
arise because in the FOI area, the principle underlying national law is to
compel disclosure of government information, while in the privacy arena
the principle is to prohibit disclosure of personal information. Therefore,
transborder data flows are a lesser threat to freedom-of-information val-
ues than they are to privacy values. Even under changed technological
conditions, each country can pursue its own FOI policy since it exercises
control at the point of origination of information.Nevertheless, there are reasons for a nation such as Germany to try tobring its freedom-of-information principles closer to those of the United
States. First, global networks expose people to governmental openness in
other states, which can lead them to demand more openness and access in
their own country. Second, a restrictive national policy with respect to
freedom-of-information principles can be undermined to a certain extent
by the dissemination capabilities of the Internet. Third, and perhaps most
important, economic considerations may provide an even stronger moti-
vation for adopting freedom-of-information principles in Germany; ac-
cess to public information increases the predictability of political condi-
tions that may affect economic actors.COMMERCEValues associated with commerce can be placed in three categories:those values directly related to the fairness of doing business (e.g., ÒfairÓtaxation and competition); those related to basic constitutional founda-
tions of commerce (e.g., property and contract); and those related to other,
more general institutions (e.g., the rights to privacy and to information
access or delivery).In an Internet environment, small businesses often face lower costs ofentry than they might in the physical world. Thus, they can occupy new
niches of promising commercial activity more easily, and large numbers
of small-business entities seek to identify and construct such niches. On
the other hand, Ònetwork effectsÓ associated with the Internet environ-
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESment can help lead to Òwinner take allÓ situations for larger companies
that already enjoy significant market share, thus facilitating their further
growth and dominance. As for taxation, the relative permeability of na-
tional borders to Internet traffic (and many of the goods and services the
network can carry) is likely to increase the difficulty of imposing taxes on
sales made to foreign customers through the Internet.Enforcement of intellectual property rights in an Information Age isgreatly complicated by global networks. Because these networks make it
profoundly easier to copy and transmit information, old balances of prop-
erty rights against Òfair useÓ have been upset, and a new political and
social equilibrium has not yet been established.  The moral rights of au-

thors, which allow an individual to try to prevent the distortion of his or
her workÑa concept well-recognized in the European Community butnot in the United StatesÑseem particularly challenged by the ease withwhich digital representations can be disseminated.New practices in the Internet realm also appear to raise issues aboutcontract. For example, in an electronic transaction, it is arguably harder to
confirm the voluntary and informed consent of the parties involved, as
contract terms are often hidden on a Web page. In other cases, computer
programs make selections that imply contract acceptance.  In still other

cases, obligations may automatically be incurred with an acquired infor-
mation product.GOVERNANCEThe examples addressed aboveÑcommerce, free speech, privacy,freedom of information, democracyÑillustrate that Germany and theUnited States differ on the role of the state in promoting social integration
and protecting local value systems. Americans emphasize individual lib-
erty, reliance on markets to organize economic activity in the face of tech-
nological change, and the use of a variety of nongovernmental organiza-
tions to mediate political change. Germans tend more to look to the state
as a protector of values, especially when these values are threatened by
market and technological forces.Despite these differences, it is clear that for both nations, the state isan important actor in managing the impact of the Internet on theseÑandotherÑareas.  States will be obliged to come to terms with how gover-
nance in cyberspace is to proceed, and in doing so will need to draw on
the full range of governance mechanisms available to them.At one level, nonregulatory mechanisms are available. Technical so-lutions and informal rules of behavior can help to lubricate points of fric-
tion caused by the conflict of values. For example, filtering and portalsGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY11help to target the information that is accessible to individuals, and infor-mal rules for behaviors, such as ÒNetiquette,Ó facilitate interaction.
On the other hand, social conventions are nonbinding, which makesthem weak tools for compelling behavior in persons unwilling to conform
to such conventions. Thus, when rules are necessary, legal tools of one
sort or another will generally prove more effective.National law and regulation are likely to be of limited effectiveness,however, because global networks make national boundaries highly po-
rous with respect to information. In principle, extraterritorial enforcement
of national laws and rules is possibleÑassuming cooperation from othernation-statesÑbut in practice such cooperation is the exception ratherthan the rule. Nevertheless, while before-the-fact denial of access to infor-
mation is technically hard to achieve, the presence of individuals on sov-
ereign soil provides a route through which local laws can be enforced.
Further, intermediaries such as service providers or credit card agencies
are subject to national regulation as well.International legal harmonization is an obvious solution to conflictsover values in cyberspace. It can be achieved through agreements that
allocate regulatory authority or by harmonizing the regulations them-
selves. The former is unlikely, however; states tend to balk at cooperating
when their own laws and attitudes toward a particular issue differ from
those of the state whose laws they are being asked to enforce. Only when
there is consensus about an issue can international cooperation be quickly
and effectively achieved.A second possibility is the use of internationally coordinated privatelaws to regulate conduct on global networks. The role of the state under
those circumstances is simply to interpret and judge the validity of con-
tracts, to protect peopleÕs interests in the contracting process, and to helpthem in the enforcement of legal titles. In addition, tort law can establish
liability, generating financial incentives for private entities to refrain from
inappropriate conduct. As a general rule, national private-law systems
are much better coordinated internationally than are systems of public
law; thus private law may have greater potential to facilitate governance.Finally, hybrid regulationÑan arrangement that involves elementsboth of private cooperation and public lawÑhas some potential. Fromthis perspective, governance is about the allocation of power not only in a
public setting but within private associations as well, and power is exer-
cised by a multitude of actors at different levels of authority and opera-
tion. In hybrid regulation, public law provides a framework for private
self-ordering that meets certain minimum requirements. Over time, this
may lead to an increasingly limited role for the state, as new actors appear
who assume regulatory powers that have traditionally been exercised by
the state.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESGLOBAL NETWORKS AND CULTUREGlobal networks affect culture in three ways. First, they give rise toconcerns about hegemony. Networks provide an infrastructure whose
actual characteristics are largely determined by those who design and use
them, and the fact is that one nation is dominant. The majority of the
InternetÕs designers and users, and much of its hardware and software,hail from the United States. Thus some fear that the preponderance of the
information available on the network is likely to reflect the interests and
culture of American users more than those from less influential states.The Committee to Study Global Networks and Local Values believesthat these fears are overdrawnÑat least for Western industrial nations.The reason is that these states have the resources to create language and
cultural ÒzonesÓ that cater to their own interests and tastes. So, for ex-
ample, most German, French, and Japanese computer and Internet users
can conduct all of their day-to-day activities in their native languages be-
cause content providers have already generated or translated information
for local consumption. Furthermore, even if it is indeed U.S. companies
that provide the bulk of the software in use, these companies realize that
other nations represent markets large enough to warrant the development
of software customized to their particular needs. Thus for developed na-
tions it appears likely that the use of information networks will reflect
local values rather than replace them.For the developing world, the situation is far more complex. In thenewly industrialized countries of East Asia, for example, economic glo-
balization is considered a key to development.  These nations see global

networks as a tool that they have a natural advantage in adopting rather
than as a threat to local culture.  On the other hand, the incentives for

localization of network content and applications are much fewer there
than for the developed world. To the extent that the United States seeks to
promote democratic change in developing nations, its efforts may be seen
as promoting forms of cultural hegemonyÑfor example, in the technicalstructure of global networks that make it difficult for these nations to in-
terdict the flow of information they deem undesirable.Second, global networks affect the distribution of power and infor-mation within and between social classes. In fact, these networks appear
more likely to affect relationships between groups defined by profession
and level of education than between those defined by national identity.
Because Internet technology will not diffuse throughout a society in a

uniform manner, and those that obtain it first are most likely to be mem-
bers of privileged classes, incentives to provide societal services to all
classes may wane if the privileged classesÑbecause of their access to theInternetÑare able to obtain such services on their own; this may be espe-Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY13cially true in nations without a strong countervailing tendency towardegalitarianism.  Such changes result from the differential relationships of

these groups to the Internet, different interdependencies between groups
that occur as a result of the Internet, and changes in the modes of opera-
tion of certain professions that affect activities unrelated to electronic net-
works as well as those directly related to the networks.Finally, global networks shift boundaries between public and privatespaces. Historically, those boundaries, in both principle and practice, have
been largely determined by cultural norms. Which people know about us
and what they know, what they physically see of us, how we feel about it
and the extent to which we control it, differ widely from one culture to
another. How and where one entertains, the candor and directness with
which one expresses ideas, how publicly and under what circumstances
one displays oneÕs body, are all related to the boundaries between publicand private spheres but follow no obvious, logical, or consistent pattern.
In the physical world, it is reasonably clear how to maintain these bound-
aries. But network technologies have the potential to shift them in either
direction, depending on circumstances and the sophistication of the user.
Encryption technologies, for example, can increase the effective domain
of private space; on the other hand, connecting to the Web can increase
public space by exposing the contents of oneÕs computer to inspection oralteration.PRINCIPLES AND CONCLUSIONSGlobal networks present a variety of new challenges to national gov-ernments.  While in some cases governments have faced these challenges
before, global networks have some potential for altering the balances of
power between government and those governed that were established in
pre-network eras.   Nevertheless, the Internet is not the only influence on
the evolution of values, and a multitude of other influences will affect
such evolution as well.  Thus, a government
Õs stance toward global net-works (and the Internet in particular) must be part of a larger strategy
aimed at promoting the healthy evolution of a societyÕs value set.  That is,
government must respond to (rather than simply resist) the many changes
occurring as society becomes better educated, more diverse, and more
fully connected to the wider world around it.Because the Internet is only one factor, albeit an important one, inglobalization and modernization, the focus of policymakers when policy
action is necessary should be on outcomes rather than on tools or modali-
ties. Thus they should seek to define what outcomes are desirable and
undesirable rather than seek to regulate one particular instrumentality
such as the Internet.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESA second important point is that command-and-control regulation isunlikely to be well matched to the technological realities of the Internet.
An alternative to command-and-control regulation is the use of self-regu-
lation and intermediation within a statutory framework. This hybrid ap-
proach to regulation is likely to be more effective than command-and-
control regulation in addressing many aspects of the public interest, and
it serves as counterpoint to formal regulation. One reason is that global
networks are characterized by a complex system of market forcesÑpri-vate, public, and quasi-publicÑand a stable balance among them is easierto achieve when stakeholders are well informed and can take an active
part in shaping their roles. Command-and-control regulation often attacks
a well-balanced status quo; because hybrid regulation builds on the status
quo, it is more likely to be successful.Finally, the history of the InternetÕs technology suggests that it wouldbe a mistake for governments to seek to control the future development
through comprehensive action plans.  Indeed, despite U.S. government

promotion and funding of the Internet in its early stages, at no time did
some kind of master plan exist to guide the InternetÕs evolution.   Alterna-
tives to centralized approaches, such as coordination and self-regulation,
are worth considering, though they may require new forms of hybrid pub-
lic-private international regimes.Chapter 10 discusses other principles and conclusions related to freespeech, privacy, and freedom of information.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.151Introduction and Context
1.1AIMS OF THIS REPORT
Global telecommunicationsÑparticularly the InternetÑcan in prin-ciple change the ability of national governments to preserve their nationsÕ
values. The ever-increasing bandwidth of communications technologies,
and their diffusion internationally, makes it possible for large volumes of
information to cross national borders much more easily than in the past.
And because informationÑdepending on its content and who receives
itÑcan enhance or detract from a nationÕs ability to govern itself, we may
reasonably expect that information technology will have a nontrivial im-
pact on the conduct of national policy.Clearly, no easy generalizations can be made in advance about thesocial and political effects of most technological developments. The influ-
ence of a new technology on a society is seldom determined solely by its
technical characteristics alone. The innovations it spawnsÑthe systemic
changes it promotes or makes possibleÑdepend on interactive, bi-
directional, and iterative processes that constitute the societyÕs social, po-
litical, economic, and cultural life. Indeed, much has been written on this
subject1 describing the intricacies of those interactions.
Global information networks are no different in this respect, althoughtheir very breadth and transformative nature make the challenge all the1See, for example, Merritt Roe Smith and Leo Marx, eds., 1998, Does Technology Drive His-tory? Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESgreater. As the very term implies, they are not developed by nor are theycontained within a single, homogeneous, or even coherent society. Much
of their power and potential derives from the connectivity they provide
across large distances, geographic barriers, time zones, and political

boundaries.The effectiveness of global information networks depends on someuniformity in technical standards, agreed-upon rules and operating pro-
cedures, and compatibility of hardware and software. In each of these
respects, choices have to be made that are based primarily on technical
considerations and the values held by the technologyÕs first developers
and users. But although uniformity or interoperability may be technically
desirable, it is much less clear that it is socially desirable, at least to the
extent that it limits the accommodation of local needs and values.Moreover, as the global network diffuses more and more widely
within each nation, the values, needs, and desires of a much broader spec-
trum of people have to be considered. The target is a moving one in sev-
eral respects: the increasing level of penetration brings additional groups
with different characteristics into contact with the new technology; the
groups themselves evolve in their adaptation to the network; and the tech-
nology continues to develop, offering new potential uses as well as new
challenges.Taken together, these considerations suggest three kinds of questionsthat define the aims of this report: What can be said about the interactions
between information networks and different social/political/cultural sys-

tems? How are these interactions affected by the global nature of the net-
works? What changes in these relationships can be expected over time?The last question is particularly troublesome and, in a report focusedon the future, particularly important. Because of the iterative and interac-
tive nature of technology development, analyses of the present state of
affairs may be either irrelevant to or misleading about the future. Who
would be willing to predict with confidence that the so-called Òdigital
divideÓÑthe seriously skewed access at present to the benefits of infor-
mation technology among different nations and different socioeconomic
groupsÑwill be a transient phenomenon or, alternatively, an embedded
condition that will only intensify in the future? Are the perceived threats
to civil society, local businesses, or government-taxation authority inher-
ent in the technology or will they disappear as societies adjust to the dy-
namics of a new system? To what extent can one expect that, over time,
there will be technological fixes for the tensions or conflicts created by the
introduction of global networks?The working hypothesis in this report is that each country is affecteddifferently by global networks, depending on its own local values.  Even

when the nominal effect is substantially the same in different countries,Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND CONTEXT17they may perceive the impact differently; that is, their governments ortheir people may find it more or less disruptive. Finally, countries may
react in different ways, in accordance with the structures and traditions of
their governance systems.Although it is difficult to provide answers to the questions posedabove, this report attempts to explore them in some detail. The premise is
that by raising the issues at this early point in the development of global
networks, societies and policymakers will be encouraged to monitor de-
velopments. And they will have a framework for doing so, thus position-
ing themselves to take action as the dynamics of the interactions between
these new global networks and local values become clearer. The discus-
sion also highlights the importance of incorporating, both through insti-
tutional and technological design, as much flexibility into the system as
possible, thereby allowing for salutary changes to cope with tensions or
conflicts as they arise or are recognized. In this respect, technological

Òlock-inÓ is something to be studiously avoided.1.2BACKGROUND
This report focuses on and compares the United States and Germany.That choice grew out of an interest in both countries to pursue the study
on which the report is based. As noted in the preface, the German-
American Academic Council asked the U.S. National Research Council
and the German Max-Planck-Project Group on Common Goods, Law,
Politics, and Economics to undertake the task as a joint venture. Both in-
stitutions saw this as an opportunity not only to explore an issue of mu-
tual interest but to do so in a way that could draw on scholarly strengths
in both countries, provide greater clarity about the issue itself through the
comparisons and contrasts that would be possible, and build a model for
possible future collaborations. In this last respect, it was not lost on either
institution that developing models for collaborations of this kind is one
important social/political response to the very changes being brought
about by the globalizing influence of information technology.A study limited to the United States and Germany has obvious short-comings. To be truly comprehensive in addressing the interactions between
global networks and local values, one would have to examine the entire
spectrum of countries. It would range from the Scandinavian nationsÑ

which are extensively penetrated by the Internet and have the greatest

homogeneity and the least rigid political and social systemsÑto those, like

North Korea, Myanmar, or certain countries in the Middle East, that tightly

control or even attempt to seal themselves off from global networks.On the other hand, comparing two industrialized, relatively wealthy,and extensively networked countries with similar but not identical politi-Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUEScal systems and similar but not identical value systems can yield insightsfor policymakers in both countries. The United States and Germany obvi-
ously meet these criteria. In addition, they are countries whose languages
are primarily English (in one case) and primarily German (in the other),
and they are sufficiently large that each has already made practical choices
in deciding how to react to the influence of global networks. Their simi-
larities serve to control the number of variables; their differences make
clearer how global networks can affect and be affected by relatively well-
identified local values. Furthermore, it is hoped that the comparison will
offer some guidance as to how differences in judgment or reaction in the
two countries might be resolved or accommodated, given the constraint
that the networks must operate globally and harmoniously.This reasoning suggests, in fact, that although a study of a broaderrange of countries might provide greater insight into the interactions be-
tween global networks and local values, it could actually be of more lim-
ited use to policymakers. Countries with vastly different cultures or po-
litical systems will certainly be challenged by global networks in very
different ways, but there may be less to be learned that is applicable to
policy choices through an explicitly comparative study of the kind under-
taken here; that is, there is likely to be little in the way of policy approaches
that is adaptable to one country from the other when the two are widely
different and there are few options available that would harmonize poli-
cies across the much broader cultural and political gaps.1.3THIS STUDY
The U.S.-German committee that was assembled to plan and carryout this study (see the appendix) covered a range of disciplines, including
economics, law, political science, sociology, engineering, and science and
technology policy. In addition to its several planning and writing meet-
ings, the committee organized two symposiaÑone in Dresden in Febru-
ary 1999, and another in Woods Hole, Massachusetts, in June 1999, to
which individuals with an even broader range of professional, academic,
industrial, and public-policy backgrounds were invited.The Dresden symposium focused on the numerous ways in whichglobal networks are affecting local institutions and values, or are likely to
do so in the future. Commissioned papers addressed conceptual ques-
tionsÑsuch as the meaning of values and the several ways in which val-
ues are embedded in political, social, and economic institutionsÑas well
as analytical questions concerning actual or potential impacts. The values
that inhere in the global networks themselves were also considered.The Woods Hole symposium focused on potential responsesÑby gov-ernments, other institutions, and less structured groupsÑto the new con-Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND CONTEXT19text, potential conflicts, and other changes that the penetration of globalnetworks into local societies may likely bring about.The papers commissioned for the two symposia have been publishedin their entirety.2 These papers and related discussions also provided thecommittee with much of the background material on which this report is
based, although its organization and content were separately determined.1.4GERMANY AND THE UNITED STATES: SOME CONTRASTS
The similarities between Germany and the United States are fairlyapparent. The question is, How do they differ?  Obviously, any attempt to
describe two complex cultures with a few brief comments based on a lim-
ited number of characteristics is bound to lead to oversimplification. How-
ever, if one views the exercise as merely an attempt  to identify political,

social, and cultural differences that might give rise to different kinds of
interactions with global networks, it can provide a useful starting point
for this study. The following descriptions should be viewed in that light:¥Political/social organization. Many observers would contrast Germanyand the United States by describing the former as somewhat ÒhierarchicalÓ
in a number of respects and the latter as rather Òhorizontal.Ó Germans are
more willing to delegate authority for many kinds of societal decisions, to
believe in and rely on experts or on those formally charged with decision-

making responsibility, and to expect that social and political problems can
be approached using an orderly, rational, and formal process.Americans, on the other hand, are increasingly impatient with rep-resentative democracy, as evidenced by the growing use of ballot refer-
enda in many states and the number of issues that have moved from the
agendas of specialized agencies to the forum of public debate. The advent
of the Internet has caused many to envision a return to a style of gover-
nance much like that of early New England town meetings. Americans
are now much more likely than most Europeans to turn to the Internet as
a source of information rather than to designated experts.Much has been written in recent years about the demise of citizeninvolvement in the United StatesÑfewer people voting in elections, reduced
participation in civic groups, and a loss of public support for a Òsocial safety2Christoph Engel and Kenneth H. Keller, eds., 2000, Understanding the Impact of GlobalNetworks on Local Social, Political and Cultural Values, Law and Economics of International
Telecommunications, Vol. 42, Baden-Baden: Nomos; Christoph Engel and Kenneth H. Keller,eds., 2000, Governance of Global Networks in the Light of Differing Local Values, Law and Eco-nomics of International Telecommunications, Vol. 43, Baden-Baden: Nomos.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESnet.Ó3 Some have argued that the concern may be overstated (or they have
questioned some of the explanations offered for the phenomenon), but poll-

ing data show increasing numbers of Americans responding in the nega-
tive to a question asking, ÒDo you trust your neighbors?ÓOn the other hand, one explanation offered for the willingness inGerman society to delegate authority is the relatively high level of trust
among citizens with respect to government. The trust appears to be re-
lated to the expectation that individuals in and out of government will
fulfill their responsibilities. Moreover, the reaction to abuse of that trust
may be all the greater in Germany, as evidenced by the strong backlash to
recent revelations of fundraising improprieties in the Christian Demo-
cratic Party.¥Social cohesion. The United States is a highly mobile society withlittle attachment to place. University students often choose schools with-
out regard to where they have grown up, routinely moving hundreds to
thousands of miles to do so. Workers expect to relocate to other parts of
the country several times in the course of one or several careers. Extended
families do not expect to live close to one another. The countryÕs popula-
tion density is relatively low, single-family dwellings are the norm, sub-
urban communities continue to grow, and city life is the exception rather
than the rule. With place a less important factor, the Internet offers a par-
ticularly viable organizing link. E-mail is now a common mode for family
communication. And with distances from home to work a major problem
and public transportation very limited, new ideas such as Òtelecommut-
ingÓ offer an attractive possibility.Germany has a higher population density, shorter commuting dis-tances, and relatively stable attachment to place. City life is a central fea-
ture of social structure, personal marketing, and living generally. Thus
there are fewer needs for and attractions to a Web existence, and more to
be sacrificed in choosing that alternative.¥Nationalism and internationalism. Germans, like most Europeans,have a strong sense of history and geography. They also have an interna-
tional perspective: their educated classes are multilingual; their television
programming is polyglot; their economic interdependence with other
countries is evident in everyday life. Indeed, Germans have been leaders
in the integration of Europe. Within their own country, their awareness of
history and the relative homogeneity of their society create a sense of tra-
dition, which leads to skepticism about change. At the same time, their
history has sensitized them to the dangers of nationalism and led them to3See, for example, Robert Putnam, 2001, Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of AmericanCommunity, New York: Touchstone Books.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND CONTEXT21the pragmatic view of the nation-state as a rational construct rather than adivine or natural order.Americans, on the other hand, generally have little sense of historyor geography. Moreover, separated by oceans from both Europe and Asia,
they have an impatience with internationalism that manifests itself today
as either neo-isolationism or unilateralism. Their lack of knowledge of
other languages is well known. Unconstrained by an historical perspec-
tive, and ethnically heterogeneous, they are unusually open to change. It
is a society with great social mobility, a widespread entrepreneurial spirit,

and receptiveness to technological innovation. One observer has noted
that Americans tend to look first at the opportunities presented by change,
while Germans look first at the risks.At the same time, Americans create unity by promoting a shared pride
in the idea of their country as a nation of immigrants and the values it repre-
sents. That very heterogeneity saves Americans from the worst aspects of
nationalism, but they do not have a sense of proportion about their role in the
world. Combined with their population size and economic power, this omis-
sion often leads them to be inadvertent agents of hegemony.¥Technical/economic factors. In a number of ways, the efficiency ofGerman society, its trust of government, and its commitment to narrow-
ing economic gaps and class distinctions provide an impetus for the
spread of new technologies in everyday life. Magnetic insurance cards,
automated videotape rental, and information-technology-based systems
for regulating and monitoring traffic have all penetrated German (and
European) society more than they have that of the United States. On the
other hand, the local telecommunications systems remain de facto mo-
nopolies. This creates a pricing structure that slows Internet penetration
and use by raising the cost of broadband Òlast mileÓ communication links
and by failing to make flat-rate access schemes available.The more decentralized governance and market orientation struc-tures in the United States have facilitated deep penetration of a Web cul-
ture in several ways. Competition in telecommunications has led to sub-
stantial reductions in the cost of Web connection, to flat-rate access
schemes being the norm, and to the availability of many competing high-
bandwidth systems via telephone lines, cable systems, and satellites. De-
centralization, market orientation, and a somewhat lower level of concern
for uniformity of access have led to a faster, if inhomogeneous, spread of
Internet connections and use.¥Religion. Both the United States and Germany nominally separatechurch and state, but the role of religion is different in the two societies.
Americans, far more than Germans, attend religious services and are in-
volved with church, synagogue, or mosque activities on a regular basis.
This is a source of perennial political conflict in the otherwise secular
United StatesÑwhether it be on prayer in public schools and at publicGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESevents, or the teaching of evolution, or stem-cell research. These conflictsextend to the Internet world on issues such as pornography and free
speech. In German society, on the other hand, the overlap of religious and
secular life appears to be relatively modest.1.5STRUCTURE OF THIS REPORT
In examining the influences of global networks on the two countries,this report attempts to be specific but not exhaustive. It looks at pornogra-
phy and hate speech, at privacy and freedom of information, at cultural
diversity and hegemony, at the local values associated with democracy,
and at electronic commerce. In separate chapters, it puts these specific
issues into a general framework that addresses global networks, local val-
ues, and their reciprocal influence. In so doing, it singles out issues for
examination in order to illustrate how diverse the relationship between
global networks and local values can be.The body of the report is divided into three sections. The first dealswith contextual issues: how the technology evolved to its present form,
how that form may affect its future growth and regulation, and how we
can come to an understanding of values that would be useful in this as-
sessment. The second section uses these concepts to examine the effects of
global networks on a number of specific issues, including privacy, free-
dom of information, free speech, and the political and commercial struc-
tures in which global networks are embedded. It also suggests alternative
approaches to network governance. The third sectionÑthe penultimate
chapterÑraises a number of cultural issues not discussed elsewhere; it
provides an opportunity to raise questions that cannot easily be ap-
proached in the U.S.-German context, and so it is more open-ended. The
final chapter summarizes the high points of the report and offers conclu-
sions.Clearly, some very important issues are not considered here in anydetail. The most obvious among them are intellectual property, electronic
cash, consumer protection, and the impact of global networks on financial
markets. Two factors led to the decision not to include them. First, much
has already been written about these issues elsewhere.4 Second, they ap-
pear to be sufficiently far-enough removed from the other issues consid-
ered in this report that there would be no great gain in treating them here.
Given the practical limitations on the reportÕs length and comprehensive-
ness, it seemed better to exclude them than to address them superficially.4See, for example, Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National ResearchCouncil, 2000,  The Digital Dilemma, Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.232The Evolution of Global NetworksWe shape our buildings; thereafter they shape us.ÑWinston Churchill2.1INTRODUCTION
This chapter examines the evolution of global networks, mainly theInternet, and seeks to relate general features of the architecture and de-
sign of these communications systems to the values inherent in or rein-
forced by the technology. The focus is not on specific values such as pri-
vacy, intellectual property rights, or free speech, some of which are
analyzed in other chapters of this volume, but rather on two more general
phenomena: how values and interests have shaped and become embed-
ded in the specifications of technological systems, and how the technical
features of such systems in turn affect the values of the communities that
make use of them.The Internet emerged as a mega-network, so to speak, of technicallyand socially heterogeneous electronic communications networks. There
were no formal obligations imposed on participants to converge on any
uniform set of technical practices or social values in developing or using
the Internet. At the same time, the benefits of ever-wider connectivity
achievable by the system provided strong incentives for diverse public
and private entities to ensure that hardware, software, and organiza-

tional structures were compatible and complementary. Thus far, this
process of de facto standardization has been limited to technical specifi-Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUEScations for interoperability and to basic social norms and business prac-tices that are recognized as being conducive to the further growth of
Òinter-networking.ÓThe way that the Internet has evolved historically from its origins inARPANET, and the development of the World Wide Web (WWW) from
its beginnings at the European Center for Nuclear Research (CERN) in
Geneva, underscore a paradox. Although the Ònetwork of networksÓ has
provided a culturally and politically heterogeneous array of societies with
global connectivity, the key technologies of the system were originally
designed to suit the needs of publicly funded scientific research groups.
While widely distributed geographically and situated in a variety of aca-
demic and quasi-academic institutions, these groups were nonetheless
very homogeneous with regard to the values shared among their respec-
tive work cultures.Moreover, the scientific work groups within which the InternetÕs coretechnology was formed made little provision for coping technically with
such issues as content, privacy, security, and identity.1 The relative em-
phases reflected a focus on resource sharing, communication, and col-
laboration among the original communities of designers and users, whose
members were scientists and engineers selected according to criteria of
technical competence and, in some cases, of national security.It should not be surprising, therefore, that some palpable sociocul-tural frictions emerged as the network of networks became a universal
communications facilityÑthe Òglobal information superhighway,Ó in
1990s argot. The difficulties that have arisen over the control of content
(based on ÒacceptabilityÓ concerns) on the Internet are, in some sense, a
reaction to the technical and, increasingly, economic ease with which the
InternetÕs reach can be extended into many diverse cultural settings. The
set of electronic communications systems that evolved into the Internet
carried with it technological design features that were in some respects
quite unlike those of the existing telecommunications networks: more con-
tent can be discovered and pulled in from more sources, and more can be
sent, relatively easily and inexpensively.One consequence of these features was that they enabled the rapidspread of digital communications channels that simply bypassed estab-
lished licensing procedures and other kinds of authorization that are evi-1Of course, given the limitations on resources embodied in the first connected computingsystems, an early feature was simply logging in, which could be enhanced to support differ-ent levels of security in access control. Attempts to introduce security for specific contexts or
user groups date from the 1970s. See Stephen S. Kent, 1999, ÒSecurity and the Internet (circa1980-1990),Ó ACM SIGCOMM Tutorial: A Technical History of the Internet, available online at<http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/dragon/sigcomm/tl/kent.slides.ppt>.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE EVOLUTION OF GLOBAL NETWORKS25dentÑfor example, in broadcasting. Radio and television have affordedlocal or national political jurisdictions the opportunity to pre-assign re-
sponsibilities for, and place a variety of restrictions on, the content and
conditions of programsÕ delivery.A second noteworthy dimension of the ÒvalueÓ conflicts that haveemerged with the InternetÕs explosive growth stemmed from the forma-
tion, among some pioneer users of these internetworked facilities, of a
new and distinctive cultural ethos of Òcyberspace.Ó This culture drew
strength from the fusion of network engineersÕ and software program-
mersÕ enthusiasms for experimentation in this new technological domain,
and it evinced an occasional anti-authoritarianism that took many facesÑ
for example, frustration with the controlled telecommunications context
in which the Internet technology arose, the extracurricular development
of UNIX (a programming language fundamental to the early Internet)
within AT&T, and the creativity of the Òcomputer hackerÓ communities
that only later became associated with destructive intent.Popular perceptions tend to inflate the role of the Internet as the mostrecent among the Òtechnologies of freedom,Ó2 and they tend to intensify
representations of any governmental posture other than laissez-faire as
contests between a reactive authoritarian state and those who adhere to
the libertarian, democratic ethos of the Internet. But although anti-
authoritarianism is now part of the popular culture or ideology often as-
sociated with the Internet and its early developers and users, this aspectÑ

given the role of large institutions in guiding and funding much of the
fundamental Internet development workÑshould not be overstated.Nevertheless, anti-authoritarianism was one major reason why theevolution of the Internet led to significant technical departuresÑwith re-
spect to network architecture, cost structures, the services it carried, and
the innovative Òbusiness modelsÓ that have co-evolved with itÑfrom pre-
vious telecommunications systems.3 As with other technological devel-
opments, social and organizational goals affected the design and evolu-
tion of the Internet, first becoming ÒembeddedÓ in specific network
implementations and later manifesting themselves in protocols, technical
standards, and operating procedures.  This ensemble of characteristics, in

turn, shaped the social conventions and behavioral norms that developed
among users of the technology. Much may be learned from this history,
which is presented in more detail in the next section.2Ithiel de Sola Pool. 1983. Technologies of Freedom. 
Cambridge MA: Belknap Press.3These fundamental attributes of the Internet have been chronicled in a series of Com-puter Science and Telecommunications Board reports: Realizing the Information Future (1994),The Unpredictable Certainty (1996), and The InternetÕs Coming of Age (2001), all National
Research Council reports published by the National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESA third major issue that needs to be addressed is the extent to whichthe ubiquity of the InternetÕs technology-based infrastructure will pro-
mote convergence in the values of the disparate user communities around
the world. This is a complex matter, raising questions about whether the
changing purposes for which the network of networks is being used will
drive alterations in its architecture and technical features, as well as ques-
tions about the extent to which those changes can accommodate local pres-
sures to affect network configuration or to control content through local
regulatory interventions. This issue is discussed below and in Chapter 3.
Without drawing premature conclusions at this point, it appears unlikely
that a single, globally uniform value system will emerge. Still, one should
be cautious about attempting to Òpredict the unpredictable,Ó4 given theuncertainties that surround, and are in turn created by, the continuing
rapid pace of advance in digital network technology.2.2EVOLUTION AND DESIGN OF GLOBAL
TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETWORKSGlobally pervasive telecommunications networks, even those in theprosaic form of the public telephone and telex, are a comparatively new
phenomenon. In the last decades of the 19th century telegraphy was able
to acquire something approaching global reach by means of submarine
cables, but the number of nodes of the ÒVictorian InternetÓ remained lim-
ited to the industrially advanced countries and their colonial possessions.5Even in those regions, telegraphic access tended to be restricted to the
major commercial centers that lay along the seaboards or that were linked
by railways. Indeed, it was not until the 1960s and 1970s that mature tele-
communications systems, which had evolved as mono-functional
(single-service) networks for the transmission of voice and text, achieved
high penetration rates throughout industrialized countries and something
approaching truly global coverageÑalbeit with an emphasis on major
population centers.Thus global ÒcoverageÓ is not the same as a ubiquitous presence oreven universal access to basic telecommunications. The great majority of
the worldÕs people still live under conditions that do not afford them ba-
sic local telephonic services, let alone global connectivity (which still re-
lies to a considerable degree on the telephone network).4David J. Farber. 2000. ÒPredicting the UnpredictableÑTechnology and Society,Ó in Un-derstanding the Impact of Global Networks on Local Social, Political and Cultural Values,  Christoph
Engel and Kenneth H. Keller, eds., 29-37. Baden-Baden: Nomos.5Tom Standage. 1998. The Victorian Internet: The Remarkable Story of the Telegraph and theNineteenth CenturyÕs On-line Pioneers. New York: Berkeley Books.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE EVOLUTION OF GLOBAL NETWORKS27Progress, of course, has involved changes in the mix of technologies.While the telephone network continues to grow, the number of telex users
has fallen as that technology has been replaced by facsimile (fax), which
grew explosively during the 1980s. Around the world, all these networks
have been affected by the operation and ownership largely of entitiesÑ
public administrations (postal, telephony, and telegraphy authorities, or
PTTs) or private regulated monopoliesÑthat provided the services under
common-carrier and universal-service regimes.The rise of the Internet has been associated with privatization of tele-communications and relaxation of PTT control in many countries (e.g., with
the introduction of competitive service from nontraditional players such as
Internet service providers, or ISPs). This pattern reflects movement away
from the inherently hierarchical architecture and control model of telephony
and telex (both within countries and historically in the international, inter-
connected network environment), the rise of direct country-to-country di-
aling and other modern features associated with the new global network
environment, and declining relative telecommunications prices (which still
tend to be higher than in the United States and less likely to be flat-rate than
to vary with time on the line and distance), itself a goal.The design of the telephone system and the prevailing business mod-els, as well as cultural and economic factors, powerfully shape the way
we use the telephone, which is nowhere more obvious than in comparing
user behavior across nations. For example, flat-rate local charges for busi-
ness and residential customers may encourage frequent and long tele-
phone calls (though charges do not fully explain the extent to which, in
Western societies, the teenage children of middle-class householders en-
gage in interminable after-school telephone conversations). Other evident
changes beginning in the late 1990s relate to the spread of mobile (cellu-
lar) phones, and observers speculate about the cultural impact of any-
where/anytime calling behavior.But although private communications practices, and the organizationof commerce and industry, have been transformed in many respects by
the diffusion of the telephone, we have no evidence that local and na-
tional cultural values have been significantly altered by the telephoneÕs
advent. Still less is there evidence to support the claim that the spread of
ubiquitous telephone access, in and of itself, has been a strong force pro-
moting convergence of social or business norms toward uniform regional
and national, let alone global, value systems.66Ithiel de Sola Pool, ed., 1978, The Social Impact of the Telephone, Cambridge MA: The MITPress; Christian Pinaud, 1985, Entre Nous, les Telephones. Vers une Sociologie de la Telecommu-nication, Paris: Insep Editions; Claude S. Fischer, 1992, America Calling: A Social History of theTelephone to 1940, Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESNetworks for data communication have a more uneven history thanthose for voice, although they have largely been built on the same under-
lying infrastructure (e.g., through the use of lines provisioned by tele-
phone companies). Early data communications networks emerged in the
1960s and 1970s along with time-sharing computer systems. The major
computer vendors developed software that supported interconnection of
their machines, and consequently the early data communications net-
works were proprietary rather than public. Most of them were corporate
networks linking different sites of a firm via leased telephone lines. Pio-
neer users were large corporations in the electronics and automobile in-
dustries and firms in the financial services sector; the multinationals took
the lead in creating private global networks, primarily to facilitate intra-
organizational data exchange.Beginning in the 1970s, this same approach was expanded by interme-diaries, third-party providers of so-called value-added networks (VANs,
such as Telenet and Tymnet in the United States) to serve companies that
could not afford the cost or inconvenience of developing their own net-
works. VANs grew in the 1980s by expanding points of presence in coun-
tries around the world, providing them with dialup and leased-line con-
nections. Also in the 1980s, some of these companies began to offer service
(e.g., GE Information ServicesÕ GE*nie) to the general public at compara-
tively low rates for non-business-hour use. They competed with other busi-
nesses having a Òbulletin boardÓ style as well as time-sharing roots, such as
CompuServe (which introduced consumer service in 1979).This was also the period during which VANs experimented withthird-party interconnection of different businesses through the structured,
controlled technologies associated with electronic data interchange (EDI).
These EDI services supported the exchange of documents in standard for-
mats through central host-computer systems; all parties to a transaction
(e.g., buyer and seller) needed to be subscribers to the VANÕs EDI service.
VANs were treated as enhanced services in the U.S. regulatory context,
making them exempt from telecommunications regulation.7State-owned and regulated private monopoly-telephone-network op-erators around the world moved slowly to enter the growing markets for
data services. A combination of regulatory restrictions and technical and
managerial incompetence (reflecting, in part, emphasis on voice and lack
of experience in data communications) appear to have constrained these
organizations. Initially some of the PTTs in Europe, with the German
Bundespost at the forefront, developed circuit-switched data networks7Provision of international service involved arrangements with international record carri-ers for international transit service and arrangements with PTTs for local points of presenceand/or gateways to local data networks.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE EVOLUTION OF GLOBAL NETWORKS29that mimicked the model of the telex network, thereby displaying the ex-tent to which they remained Òlocked intoÓ the traditional commercial vi-
sion associated with the architecture of the basic telephone system.Only in the early 1980s did the already-existing telephone organiza-tions move to packet-switching technologies. PTTs tended to select the
non-proprietary protocol standard, X.25, which was associated with the In-
ternational Organization for StandardizationÕs (ISO) Open Systems Inter-
connection (OSI) reference model; X.25 was approved in 1984 by the Inter-

national Telecommunication Union (ITU, through what is known as the
ITU-T, the telecommunications standards-setting arm).8  As noted above,
most of the private corporate networks at this time relied on proprietary
protocols, such as the IBM CorporationÕs Systems Network Architecture
(SNA) or the Digital Equipment CorporationÕs DECNET standards. The
packet-switching mode in the proprietary as well as in the X.25 networks
relied on a hierarchical network architecture, which conformed to tradi-
tional management notions of the manner in which information should
optimally flow and be controlled within the large corporate organization.This, as shall be seen, was very different from the architecture of theInternet. Outside the United States, this public-utility approach to packet
switching was associated with country-specific public data networks
(PDNs), some of which involved country-to-country gateways (based on
the sister protocol standard, X.75, also used for connections to VANs).
Similar to telephony charging, PDN and VAN pricing tended to involve
connection-time and traffic (e.g., Òkilo-packetÓ) charges.Early commercial data-communications networks and servicesÑcor-porate and VAN plus PDNÑprovided crucial experience that shaped the
development of the global telecommunications system and created readi-
ness for the Internet takeoff in the mid-1990s.9 The context was confused,
however.  It was an intersection, and occasionally a collision, of the busi-

ness and engineering orientations that were traditional in the world of the
PTTs, and the world of computer vendors and data-processing and data-
communications services.  Stalemates and acrimony sometimes marked

proceedings of technical committees in national and international tele-
communications standards organizations during the 1980s.108Marvin A. Sirbu and Laurence E. Zwimpfer. 1985. ÒStandards Setting for Computer Com-munication: The Case of X.25. A Detailed Examination of the Development of X.25,Ó IEEECommunications Magazine 23:35-45.9Marjory S. Blumenthal.  2000.  ÒArchitecture and Expectations: Networks of the World-
Unite!,Ó The Promise of Global Networks, Jorge Reina Schement, ed., 1-52. Washington, D.C.:Aspen Institute.  Available online at <http://www. aspeninst.org/publicationsl/bookstore

communications-promise.asp>.10U.S. Congress, Office of Technology Assessment. 1992. Global Standards: Building Blocks forthe Future, TCT-512. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, March, pp. 12-14.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESThis discord gave way, by the late 1990s, to broad agreement on manybasic principles concerning global networks. These principles include glo-
bal interoperability (compatibility) and even openness of networks. But
the process, unfolding largely in the 1980s but extending into the 1990s,
involved complex tussles among ISO, the ITU and its principal constitu-
ents, the PTTs, U.S. telephone companies, corporate representatives (no-
tably IBM, with a major stake in SNA), and the heterogeneous supporters
of the Internet protocol suite known as TCP/IP. Complicating the picture
was telephone-company development of standards for enhancing tele-
phony networks, such as the integrated services digital network (ISDN)
and asynchronous transfer mode (ATM) technology. But to simplify dis-
cussion, a major focus of international negotiation was on the relative
merits of TCP/IP vs. OSI, which the former ultimately dominated.11The OSI Reference Model describes a seven-layer architecture defin-ing functions, services, and interfaces for data-communications systems.
There is a related family of OSI protocols, such as X.25 and X.400 for mes-
saging and X.500 for directories, that implement what is described in the
reference model and that have been developed through conventional stan-
dards-setting processes.12 Hence, OSI has been described as a Òmeta-stan-
dardÓ rather than a conventional set of interoperability standards.13 Acritical dimension of OSI is the European prominence in its development,
measured by the locus of key engineering activities and ISOÕs location
and environment. In particular, European computer vendors, European
governments, and the Commission of the European Union saw the OSI
program as an instrument of industrial policy to protect European manu-
facturersÑwhich already were major vendors of proprietary network so-
lutionsÑfrom the predominance of IBM and other U.S. firms. The effort
to provide an alternative, or even the prospect of one, was intended by
some to arrest the widespread deployment of IBMÕs SNA network stan-
dard in Europe.1411Susanne K. Schmidt and Raymund Werle. 1998. Coordinating Technology: Studies in theInternational Standardization of Telecommunications. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.12Todd Shaiman. 1995. The Political Economy of Anticipatory Standards: The Case of the OpenSystems Interconnection Reference Model. University of Oxford M.Sc. Thesis in Economic andSocial History. September.13Paul A. David and Mark Shurmer, 1996, ÒFormal Standards-setting for Global Telecom-munications and Information Services. Towards an Institutional Regime Transformation?,Ó
Telecommunications Policy 20(10):789-815; Paul A. David, 2000, ÒThe Internet and the Eco-
nomics of Network Technology Evolution,Ó Understanding the Impact of Global Networks onLocal Social, Political and Cultural Values, Christoph Engel and Kenneth H. Keller, eds., 40-71,Baden-Baden: Nomos.14In the same way, many in the European telecommunications industry came to regardISDN not only as the route to providing a seamless means of data communication via tele-Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE EVOLUTION OF GLOBAL NETWORKS31The interplay between OSI and TCP/IP was not straightforward;15recollections of those involved reveal a fair amount of acrimony there aswell. Yet experience and familiarity with TCP/IP, the development of
which had been documented publicly since 1969 through Requests for
Comments (RFCs), clearly contributed to OSI.16  The articulation of seven
layers, for example, is an elaboration of the traditional four layers ascribed
to basic Internet technology. That description, plus specific references to
layers 1 through 7, is widely used in discussing internetworking today,
though otherwise the terminology tends to be different.In the end, however, some of the concrete engineering design work ofOSI standards committees was acknowledged or absorbed by the Internet
Engineering Task Force (IETF). In 1989, for example, the IETF Open PDN
Routing Working Groups addressed internetworking involving X.25-
based PDNs using X.121 addressing, and the Network Working Group
even proposed experimentation with OSI network layer protocols over
the Internet and the creation of an experimental OSI Internet (RFC 1070).As these examples illustrate, there were individuals who were Òbilin-gualÓ in these standards environments, people who attempted to work on
some kind of coordination, if not integration, of approach. But they were
not in the mainstream of Internet technology development.17 Although
TCP/IP was adopted as a U.S. military standard (around 1980), the con-
tention with OSI in the United States came to a head in the late 1980s
when the National Institute of Standards and Technology promulgated aphone lines, but also as the means of stabilizing the PTT monopolies on the eve of deregula-tion and liberalization. The peculiar combination of abstract principles and concrete eco-nomic interests may be one reason why neither OSI-based networks nor ISDN was ever
translated into an integrated system diffused widely within national networks, let alone ona global scale. See Paul A. David and W. Edward Steinmueller, 1990, ÒThe ISDN BandwagonIs Coming, But Who Will Be There to Climb Aboard?,Ó Quandaries in the Economics of DataCommunication Networks, Economics of lnnovation and New Technology, 1:43-62.15T.M. Egyedi. 1999.  ÒTension Between Standardisation and Flexibility Revisited: A Cri-
tique,Ó Standardisation and Innovation in Information Technology SLIT 1999, Proceedings of the IstIEEE Conference on Standardisation and Innovation in Information Technology (SIIT 99), Aachen,Germany, September 15-17, 1999, Kai Jakobs and Robin Williams, eds., 65-74.  Piscataway,
NJ: IEEE.16David M. Piscitello and A. Lyman Chapin, 1993, Open Systems Networking: TCP/IP andOSI. Addison-Wesley Professional Computing Series; T.M. Egyedi, 1999, ÒTension BetweenStandardisation and Flexibility Revisited: A Critique,Ó Standardisation and Innovation in Infor-mation Technology SLIT Ô99. Proceedings of the Ist IEEE Conference on Standardisation and Innova-tion in Information Technology (SIIT 99), Kai Jakobs and Robin Williams, eds., 65-74,Piscataway, NJ: IEEE.17This social attitude and discrimination were evident in the criticism lobbed occasionallyat the original executive director of the Internet Society, who had a history of involvement instandards setting both at U.S. and international organizations.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESFederal Information Processing Standard that related OSI to U.S. govern-ment needsÑthe climax of the Government Open Systems Interconnection
Protocol (GOSIP) initiative. GOSIP crystallized evolving concerns with OSI
in the technical and business communities, and its demise in 1994 (through
a finessing that offered a choice between it and TCP/IP in government pro-
curement) marked the end of serious U.S. consideration of OSI.18By the mid-1990s, the market preference for TCP/IP was clearly es-tablished, in part because of its comparative simplicity, which facilitated
development of commercially viable products across a range of comput-
ing platforms.19 By the late 1990s, the penetration of TCP/IP technology
into private (e.g., corporate) networks was reflected in the use of the term
Òintranets,Ó an obvious play on ÒInternet.ÓTensions and misunderstandings among OSI and TCP/IP proponentshad as much to do with attitudes toward standards-setting as about tech-
nology or even international competition. People in the Internet commu-
nity have historically looked askance at telephony standards-setting, as-
sociating it with the slow progress that helped to occasion their own work
and with highly bureaucratic and time-consuming procedures. By con-
trast, the Internet standards-setting process focused on working imple-
mentations. The philosophy was articulated by MITÕs David Clark (the
original Internet architect and architecture board leader), who had been
involved in protocol development since the 1970s: ÒWe reject kings, presi-
dents, and voting. We believe in rough consensus and running code.Ó
This widely repeated characterization, voiced at a 1992 meeting, has been
echoed as a motto by many and codified in official documentation of the
InternetÕs architectural principlesÑthemselves embodied in the TCP/IP
protocol suiteÑand of the IETFÕs approach to their implementation.20The IETFÕs roots date back to the ARPANET.  Its RFCs were initiatedto facilitate quick dissemination and discussion of the ideas and technical
specifications that had been suggested by members of what was then a
small but geographically dispersed networking community, funded by
the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA).21 If a suggested proto-
18Shirley M. Radack. 1994. ÒThe Federal Government and Information Technology Stan-dards: Building the National Information Infrastructure,Ó Government Information Quarterly11(4):373-385.19It has been observed that standards can benefit from a bandwagon effect, and this wasthe case with TCP/IP, for which software and product development grew steadily. See

Martin C. Libicki. 1995. Standards: The Rough Road to the Common Byte. Washington, D.C.:Center for Advanced Concepts and Technology, National Defense University.20Brian Carpenter, ed. 1996. ÒArchitectural Principles of the Internet,Ó Internet Engineer-ing Task Force RFC 1958. Available online at <http://info.intemet.isi.edu:80/in-notes/rfc/files/rfcl958.txt>.21Janet Ellen Abbate. 1999. Inventing the Internet. Cambridge MA: The MIT Press, pp. 73-74.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE EVOLUTION OF GLOBAL NETWORKS33col seemed interesting, it was likely that someone would implement andtest it. Implementations that proved useful were copied to similar sys-
tems on the Net.In this way, the number of technical specifications and the number ofpeople involved in ÒstandardizationÓ grew. Everyone who was interested
and had access to the ARPANET could participate, and the results were
available free of charge. With more and more people getting involved in
Internet standardization, however, the IETF procedures and the stan-

dards-approval procedure became somewhat formalized. Only since 1992

has the term ÒstandardÓ been officially used for technical specifications
that have completed the full process of standardization (RFC 1311).The IETF is now split into more than 100 working groups coveringeight to ten functional areas. Working groups can be easily created, and
most of them are dissolved after they have finished their task. In contrast
with most standardization organizations, participation in the IETF and its
working groups is open to anyone. A formal membership is not required.
Broad and unrestricted discussion of the proposals via electronic discus-
sion groups and mailing lists is possible. Before Internet standards are
approved, at least two independent implementations must have been

completed. They must work and must be interoperable.The success of TCP/IP does not imply that the way it developed couldbe emulated. By the mid-1990s, the IETF was under strain, reflecting growth
in the number of participants and a diversification of interests in develop-
ing and implementing the technology. New users, service providers, and
network operators make it much more difficult to use the same informal
consensus mechanism as before to coordinate further technical changes in
the system. Development of the protocols for the Web, for example, has
proceeded under the auspices of the World Wide Web Consortium, which
coordinates with the IETF but is a membership organization. And a variety
of industry-based consortia have emerged to address specific kinds of tech-
nology and expedite the standards-development process.The difficulties encountered in attempting to move to a new genera-tion of the TCP/IP protocol stack, which would enlarge the address space
significantly and add other features, illustrates the problem.22 Although
the new protocol (IP Version 6) was adopted by the IETF, and although
backwards compatibility with IP Version 4, now widely in use, is guaran-
teed, not many are ready to migrate from a good to a better technical stan-
dard; they hesitate to incur switching costs because no authority can guar-
antee that everyone else will also switch. In the old NSFNET days, the
decision to switch to a new protocol would have been comparatively easy22See CSTB, The InternetÕs Coming of Age, 2001.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESbecause the National Science Foundation (NSF) could stipulate it as a con-dition for those who wanted connection to this attractive network. As an-
other committee of the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
observed, Ò[f]or the Internet, . . . the explicit government directive to set

standards [in the early ARPANET period, the beginning of the Internet] has
been replaced by a process driven by vendor and market pressures, with
essentially no top-down control. . . . Currently, the Internet community

seems to make short-range decisions with some success, but long-range
decisions, which reflect not only immediate commercial interests but also

broader societal goals, may not get an effective hearing.Ó23Virtually the only public global data network open to corporate andpersonal use is the Internet. The fact that the Internet comprises thou-
sands of technically distinct networks is a direct result of the design of the
TCP/IP protocol suite, which allows Internet services to be run on top of
networks based on other protocols, such as X.25, SNA, and Ethernet. The
InternetÕs architecture and standards separate applications (from the Web
to Internet telephony) from the underlying infrastructure, whereas con-
ventional telephony grew as an application that was tightly coupled to its
infrastructure. In telephony, the ÒintelligenceÓ that made applications
possible was based in equipment inside the network; in the Internet, that
intelligence is largely in the software running on equipment attached by
users at the ÒendsÓ of the network.24That the Internet standards were developed in an open process facili-tated their diffusion; broad participation was possible and use of the stan-
dards was unencumbered. Meanwhile, implementations by hardware and
software vendors could be proprietary, contributing to the profitability of
many businesses built on this technology.25 There has also been openness
of a sort in the business of Internet service provision: No single network
operator or service provider owns or controls Òthe Net,Ó and this network
of networks essentially constitutes an ÒunmanagedÓ system.That characterization is a mixed blessing. As a union of different net-works, the experience of a user communicating across multiple networks
may devolve to a lowest common denominatorÑone slow-speed or low-
quality segment can degrade the whole experience. This problem is of 23
See CSTB, Realizing the Information Future, 1994, p. x.
24For a fuller explanation of the InternetÕs generality, flexibility, and architecture, seeCSTB, Realizing the Information Future (Chapter 2) and The InternetÕs Coming of Age.25Ironically, despite the openness and bottom-up character of Internet standardization, itis not easily accessible to outsiders. Only insiders understand what is being negotiated in
Requests for Comments and discussed in developersÕ meetings. A meritocracy, the IETFpioneers believed that there were technical solutions for every problem, and that a solutioncanÕt be the optimal one if it needs to be voted on.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE EVOLUTION OF GLOBAL NETWORKS35particular concern for users (a minority today) with applications that de-mand high speed or minimal delay. Thus, the InternetÕs technology and
architecture do not make it a uniform experienceÑone reason why large
providers such as America Online or UUNET have been trying to grow
larger and provide complete end-to-end communications, much as the
VANs did.26As competition for customers has grown among ISPs, and concernabout service quality along with it, connections among networks have be-
come problematic; ISPs tend to discriminate among networks in making
judgments about whether and on what terms to effect interconnections.27Although the technology makes interconnectionÑinternetworkingÑeasy
in principle, business decisions have made it complicated in practice since
the mid-1990s. At the same time, the growing use of the Internet increases
its value as infrastructure for a growing body of users and uses. This, in
turn, will increase pressures for some kind of management and/or coor-
dination system, as well as for mechanisms to support enhancements to
quality of service (which might minimize delay for critical applications,
for example).28In its early commercial period, the Internet architecture has promoteda horizontal pattern of organizations, in contrast to the more vertical, hi-
erarchical, and controlled world of telephony. The ease of user attach-
ment to the Internet makes it comparatively easy now to set up links to a
variety of sources of information and entertainmentÑand to exchange
information and communicate with other usersÑall without being tied to
a single service provider. Even the smallest enterprise thus has the poten-
tial to achieve a global market presence. But this potential can be mislead-
ing, as new issues are arising now that a growing number of enterprises
and individuals have figured this out. How, for example, can all these
players compete for attention, or even be found, in an increasinglycrowded Internet marketplace? And how do small enterprises thrive in
the face of an economics that continues, as time progresses, to promote
consolidation in markets for both suppliers and users of Internet technol-
ogy?  Chapter 7 on commerce has a related discussion.
26See CSTB, The InternetÕs Coming of Age, 2001.27See CSTB, The InternetÕs Coming of Age, 2001.28See Blumenthal, ÒArchitecture and Expectations: Networks of the World-Unite!,Ó 2000.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUES2.3THE VALUE DIMENSION OF NETWORKS
Different social values and goals have influenced the evolution of datanetworks. Systems engineers, military leaders, business executives,
policymakers, and private usersÑwhether consciously or otherwiseÑ
shape the technical characteristics of these communications systems
through technical proposals and practical decisions that reflect their indi-
vidual needs, preferences, and world views. Once these values become
ÒembeddedÓ in the implementation of a particular network, they become
latent, not only in the technical standards themselves but in the operating
procedures, social conventions, and behavioral norms that develop among
the technologyÕs users.These phenomena are not unique to the Internet; they are evidentacross a wide range of technologies, such as various forms of manufactur-
ing automation, and reflect the very human processes of technology de-
sign and use. They arise because standards affect the architecture of infor-
mation. As Libicki notes, standards promote different patterns regarding
who is connected to whom and what is expressed easily or not; social
relations vary, depending on whether a communications protocol is top-
down or bottom-up; and the choice of programming language affects the
relationship of programmers to their managers.29Like protocol standards, many nontechnical norms facilitate compat-ibility and interoperability among users. Because they, too, have Òpositive
network externalitiesÓ that promote their de facto acceptance, this larger
structure of technological and social practices acquires considerable iner-
tia and hence becomes difficult to change.30 Moreover, the stronger the
complementarities among the component elements of the resulting struc-
ture, the more likely it is to undergo gradual adaptations through incre-
mental modification rather than radical change.This is the sense in which one may speak of particular features of thesystemsÕ software components, or of certain conventions among network
users, as having become Òlocked in.Ó But it is important to emphasize that
the extent of Òlock-inÓ depends on the degree of complementarity among
components. TCP/IP illustrates the point. Because the Internet, compared
to other communications networks, can tolerate great heterogeneity
among the components that may be interconnected, it permits a greater
diversity of practices and associated values among its users, facilitating
the inclusion of a broad range of systems in the overall network. This29See Libicki, Standards: The Rough Road to the Common Byte, 1995.30Karl Wameryd. 1990. ÒConventions: An Evolutionary Approach,Ó Constitutional PoliticalEconomy, 1:83-107.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE EVOLUTION OF GLOBAL NETWORKS37inclusiveness can inhibit radical modification of the systemÕs underlyingtechnologies. This is another face on the Internet as infrastructure: broad
dependence can slow evolution.InterconnectionÑinter-networkingÑis thus the most obvious valuein the Internet, though just one stage in a complex evolution. It embodies
one possible technical solutionÑalbeit a solution that was reinforced by
its comparative generality and flexibilityÑto interconnecting host com-
puters of different kinds of networks based on different technologies. The
InternetÕs principal forerunner, the ARPANET, developed while alterna-
tive solutions were being worked on or were already available. They in-
cluded the efforts of computer vendors such as the PARC XNS protocol
from Xerox and the Unix-to-Unix copy protocol (UUCP), originally devel-
oped in the Bell Labs of AT&T and licensed out at very low cost. These
efforts reflected a perceived need among researchers to interconnect the
technically diverse networks that had already come into existence, at least
in the United States.31An intentional expansion of networking into the research commu-nityÑa broadening of interconnectionÑwas enabled by NSFÕs mid-1980s
launch of NSFNET, a network that connected six research supercomputer
centers and became a backbone (along with networks established by the
Department of Energy and the National Aeronautics and Space Adminis-
tration) for the larger network of networks.32 A crucial early decision
of NSF, after intense internal negotiations, was to base NSFNET on
TCP/IP.33 Another important decision led NSF to foster development of
regional networks, which aggregated traffic from and provided technical
support to smaller networks such as campuses.34These regional networks evolved in the second half of the 1980s, andmany of them were cosponsored by business organizations that, within
certain limits, were allowed to use the networks for commercial purposes.
Thus, a new type of hybrid network appeared on the landscape of data
networks, and with a very different set of users. Some of the regional31Katie Hafner and Matthew Lyon, 1996, Where Wizards Stay Up Late: The Origins of theInternet, New York: Simon & Schuster; John S. Quarterman, 1990, The Matrix. Computer Net-works and Conferencing Systems Worldwide, Bedford, MA: Digital Press; Peter H. Salus, 1995,Casting the Net. From ARPANET to INTERNET and Beyond, Reading, MA/ Menlo Park, CA:Addison-Wesley.32See Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, 1988,Toward a National Research Network. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.33Juan D. Rogers. 1998. ÒInternetworking and the Politics of Science: NSFNET in InternetHistory,Ó The Information Society 14:213-228.34See CSTB, Realizing the Information Future, 1994.
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESnetworks spun off commercial networksÑfor example, NYSERNET in theNew York area produced PSIÑbut most of the original regional networks
faded away after the removal of NSF support (prompted by the commer-
cialization of the backbone), the decommissioning of NSFNET in 1995,
and the rise of commercial ISPs. During their heyday, however, these re-
gional networks and their local tributariesÑbased on local area network
(LAN) technology, X.25, SNA, DECNET, and other systemsÑwere het-
erogeneous both socially and technically.Interconnection was only one dimension; just as important was themotivation behind it. This included not only the need for communication
per se but the sharing of information and computational resources. These
factors were illustratedÑand exploredÑin the expansion of LANs. As
the number of workstations and personal computers in businesses and
universities began to grow, vendors began to develop network technol-
ogy to interconnect the computers and make it possible for users to share
information and move files.35Many organizations adopted Ethernet, token ring, or token bus tech-nology and built their own (isolated) networks, which were used for in-
ternal purposes and initially not designed for connection to external net-
works. But in the second half of the 1980s, more and more LANs, including
many campus networks, were linked to the Internet, while corporate
LANs were linked to private wide-area networks. These developments,
and their influence on how and where people did their work, stimulated
business executives to rethink strategies of vertical integration. They be-
gan to consider technology-based alternativesÑsuch as decentralization,
outsourcing via inter-organizational networks, and the creation of the net-
worked firmÑto the traditional model of the corporation.As networks evolved outside the business domain, the interplay ofvalues and technology was even more apparent. Most of the noncommer-
cial networks interconnected universities, governmental and non-govern-
mental organizations, and eventually private households, self-help
groups, and the like. These noncommercial networks grew up among user
communities with similar interestsÑinitially, people who were active us-
ers of particular computer systems or software and who wanted to com-
municate with kindred spirits. Such systems could be called Òcooperative
networks,Ó because users or user organizations were involved in setting
up the network and coordinating its functions, even though a traditional
network provider sometimes operated it.35Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council. 1999.Funding a Revolution: Government Support for Computing Research. Washington D.C.: NationalAcademy Press, pp. 169-183.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE EVOLUTION OF GLOBAL NETWORKS39Notable cooperative networks that evolved in the research and edu-cation communities were the Computer Science Network (CSNET) and
BITNET. E-mail communication, which unexpectedly had proved to be
the most popular application of ARPANET, was the dominant service in
CSNET and BITNET as well.  Supported with limited funds from the Na-

tional Science Foundation, CSNET connected computer science depart-
ments that had no access to the ARPANET and therefore lacked sophisti-
cated facilities to communicate, collaborate, and share ideas.Early on, computer scientists formed a kind of community, initiallybuilt around the time-shared computer and later around programming
languages, operating systems, and computer networks.36 Their sense of
being pioneers in a revolutionary change of information-processing
shaped the spirit of collaboration, informality, and even social responsi-
bility behind the values and rules that guided these researchersÕ use of
networks in the late 1970s and early 1980s.37 However, by the late 1980s,
the increase in NSF support for networking by other kinds of scientists
led to concern among computer scientists that their own support could be
eroded. Here, sharing collided with competition for resources.38BITNET was an extragovernmental effort. Based on IBM technology,this completely decentralized network was set up by universities and re-
search centers to facilitate information exchange between faculty, stu-
dents, and administrative staff. BITNET extended the computer-commu-
nications infrastructure beyond CSNET, both in terms of the number and
kind of people connectedÑthat is, it involved a much wider range of re-
searchers than computer scientists alone. BITNET was associated with
EDUCOM, a nonprofit consortium of higher-education institutions that
facilitated access to information resources in teaching, learning, scholar-
ship, and research.All the early academic and research networks fostered e-mail discus-sion vehicles. Most remarkable was the UUCP-based USENET, a system
of newsgroups (bulletin boards) that was originally designed as a forum
in which UNIX users could discuss their problems and assist each other.
Very soon, USENET grew into a platform for a broad variety of
newsgroups, including anti-authoritarian student groups and hacker com-36Arthur L. Norberg and Judy E. OÕNeill. 1996. Transforming Computer Technology. Infor-
mation Processing for the Pentagon, 1962-1986. Baltimore:  Johns Hopkins University Press. See
also CSTB, Funding a Revolution, 1999.
37Volker Leib and Raymund Werle. 1998. ÒComputemetze als Infrastrukturen undKommunikationsmedien der Wissenschaft,Ó Rundfunk and Fernsehen 
46(2-3):254-273.38See CSTB,  Funding a Revolution, 1999.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESmunities.39 USENET relied on self-organization and also on self-restraint.
Many of its rules and norms gave rise to an informal code of conduct for
Internet usersÑsuch as Ònever disturb the flow of informationÓ and Òev-
ery user has the right to say anything and to ignore anythingÓÑthat is
sometimes referred to as Netiquette. This code was viewed by those who
adopted it as a natural extension of the fundamental values of American
society, such as freedom of speech.As the complex of research and education networks grew, federal pro-gram managers became concerned about the ways in which government-
funded infrastructure would be used. The result was an effort, at least by
the program managers, to limit usage of the early Internet components,
and notably of NSFNET, by means of an Òacceptable use policyÓ (AUP).
In practice, enforcing an AUP was difficult; it depended on an honor sys-
tem. And it effected a distinction between those with legitimate access
and thoseÑtypically, parties seeking commercial gainÑwithout it.Practically, though, the more people experienced the communicationscapability and information access afforded by the Internet, the more they
wanted to use it; differentiating sanctioned research and education activi-
ties from other uses seemed increasingly arbitrary and artificial. Avoiding
the effect of the AUP, in fact, was one reason for the commercialization of
the Internet backbone and the decommissioning of NSFNET in 1995. To
enable that transition, NSF provided seed funding for publicÑas opposed
to the intragovernmentalÑnetwork-traffic exchange points (network ac-
cess points), at which multiple providers of private backbones could in-
terconnect. This step promoted interconnection and the prospect of mul-
tiple ISPs; commercial ISPs, meanwhile, had banded together to
underwrite their own exchange facilities, the Commercial Internet Ex-
change (CIX).40In contrast to the multifaceted growth of computer networks in theUnited States, progress was slower overseas. Although both the CSNET
and BITNET networks, as well as the ARPANET,41 had links to Europe,
the long-lasting European aversion to TCP/IP appears to have been a cru-
cial reason why research and education networks developed slowly there39Michael Hauben and Ronda Hauben. 1997.  Netizens. On the History and Impact of Usenet
and the Internet. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society Press.40See CSTB, Realizing the Information Future, 1994. Also see Juan D. Rogers, 1998, Inter-networking and the Politics of Science: NSFNET in Internet History, The Information Society14:213-222; Carl Malamud, 1993, Exploring the Internet. A Technical Travelogue, EnglewoodCliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.41The Joint Academic Network (JANET) was set-up in Britain and used by universities,the Ministry of Defense, and research organizations. See Malamud, Exploring the Internet. ATechnical Travelogue, 1993.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE EVOLUTION OF GLOBAL NETWORKS41and never transformed themselves into commercially viable networks. Ittook TCP/IP and its supporters another half decade to achieve acceptance
in continental Europe.42 The German example may be the best illustration
of policy failure in this respect; industrial policy goals, a commitment to
Òopen standards,Ó and the conviction that it could catch up with the tech-
nology leader by a solo effort more or less ensured this failure.IBMÕs initiative to launch and sponsor the European Academic andResearch Network (EARN, an extension of BITNET) in the early 1980s
was welcomed by the research community. Within 6 months after EARN
started operation, 75 mainframes had been interconnected in Germany.
By the mid-1980s, more than 500 computers in the research organizations
of 19 countries were linked to EARN. This system required permission
from the European telecommunications monopolies, which up to that time
had never agreed to allow data to be transmitted across national borders
through private lines. The EARN board of directors had to struggle hard
to get that permission. There were also problems with governments. They
were concerned that EARN might be part of IBMÕs strategy to expand
market dominanceÑnot least because initially only IBM mainframes and
Digital EquipmentÕs VAXes could be linked via EARN. Although some
governments had no objection to the project, others, among them the Ger-
mans, were only willing to give the green light on the condition that EARN
evolve into an OSI-based system. This was agreed to, but it never actually
materialized.The German government reacted to EARN by initiating theWissenschaftsnetz (Science Network). This was consistent with govern-
ment programs to support the German computer industry and its most
prominent corporation, Siemens. Technical standards played a significant
role in this strategy. In a concerted action, most European governments
had declared support for open, nonproprietary standards based on the
OSI frame of reference. Germany thus insisted that the Wissenschaftsnetz
be based on OSI standards as well. It was managed by the Verein
Deutsches Forschungsnetz (German Research Network Association),
whose members were drawn mainly from universities and large nonaca-
demic research institutions.In contrast with the United States or the United Kingdom, where dedi-cated organizations were charged with operating the network, in Ger-
many the PTTÑthe Bundespost (Telekom)Ñwas regarded as the Ònatu-
ralÓ candidate to provide this service. The Bundespost had the monopoly
right for networks but extremely little experience with packet-switched42Malamud, Exploring the Internet. A Technical Travelogue, 1993.
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESdata communications.43 Like practically all of its European partners, the
Bundespost was committed to OSI. Thus the Wissenschaftsnetz was em-
bedded in an institutional structure controlled by people who were not
only not open to alternatives to OSI but rigorously rejected applications
from computer scientists and software engineers to support TCP/IP-
related R&D.AlthoughÑor becauseÑOSI was shielded from competition, it tookyears until products based on OSI standards were available that had any
appeal for users  X.400-based e-mail software, for instance, did not appear

on the market until TCP/IP-based products were well established.44 That
lack of competition, together with its reliance on an official and rather
slow OSI standardization process and its failure to involve users in the
development of products and services, greatly limited the German re-

search and education networkÕs evolutionary dynamics. Thus the
Wissenschaftsnetz did not attract many users.Today, Internet service providers, telephone companies, cable-televi-sion companies, wireless device and service companies, computer hard-
ware and software vendors, media companies, and all kinds of firms en-
gaged in e-commerce use the Internet as an infrastructure and a business
channel. This has again changed the character of the Internet, but it has
not done away with its fundamental characteristics: decentralization, user
involvement, openness, and self-organization (by which is meant a net-
work infrastructure designed to allow groups to organize themselves to
use it).  It would be misleading, however, to infer that todayÕs Òcommu-

nityÓ of Internet users is homogeneous, cohesive, collegial, or has values,
objectives, and skills similar to those of the early Internet pioneers. But
this only means that, from a culture and values perspective, the Internet
has become even more heterogeneous than it was a decade ago.2.4GLOBAL NETWORKS AND CHANGING VALUES: TOWARD
CONVERGENCE OR DIVERGENCE?What has been emphasized in the preceding sections of this chapter ishow the characteristics of the Internet derive from its development path,
how users have influenced that path of development, and how the result-
ing network has and will continue to influence the users. An important
further question to consider is how a system with these technical and social43Raymund Werle. 2000. ÒThe Impact of Information Networks on the Structure of Politi-cal Systems,Ó  Understanding the Impact of Global Networks on Local Social, Political and CulturalValues, Christoph Engel and Kenneth H. Keller, eds., 167-192, Baden-Baden: Nomos.44Schmidt and Werle, Coordinating Technology, 1998, pp. 230-243.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE EVOLUTION OF GLOBAL NETWORKS43characteristics can be Òcoordinated.Ó Depending on who is addressing theissue, that word may mean managed, governed, or regulated. But each of
those terms is value-laden and can generate significant resistance, espe-
cially among those most closely associated with the InternetÕs origins.45It remains to be seen whether the anti-hierarchical culture of informa-tion freedom that is so much a part of the InternetÕs history will survive
and continue to animate resistance to local regulation. This history feeds
the perception, in some quarters, of the Internet as socio-technologically
so distinct from other communication systems that it should be treated as
a special caseÑthat it should not
 be brought into the established frame-
work by which sovereign states and local political entities have long
sought to control or regulate access to information.A source of countervailing economic and political pressureÑindeed,a countervailing ÒcultureÓÑhas been created by the policy decision to
promote this technology as the communications infrastructure for inter-
active electronic commerce. In many countries, the Internet is seen as a
positive force for economic development, generating acceptance despite
concerns about some of the content that may be communicated or uses
that may be supported. As a consequence, the efforts of technologists,
entrepreneurs, and international-business-law specialists to facilitate

greater use of the Internet for conducting public business are being widely
hailed today as socially beneficial innovations.Among the likely consequences of these developments is reinforce-ment of the dual trend toward, on the one hand, adapting the Internet for
more secure and private point-to-point communications, and, on the
other, using it as a medium for mass broadcasting of video, music, and
text. The alignment of business interests with the first of these would seem
to favor technologies that weaken the abilities of government to monitor
and control content in interactive communications, an area that sovereign
states have traditionally been less disposed to regulate.46 Still, business
organizations have long ago learned to accommodate themselves to the
greater sensitivities of governments regarding unregulated broadcasts
that might carry unwelcome news or disruptive messages.Meanwhile, at the international level, the ITU (like other nongovern-mental organizations) has been assessing how it could respond to the up-
heaval in telecommunications and related activities, from standards set-45See Blumenthal, ÒArchitecture and Expectations: Networks of the World-Unite!,Ó  2000.
46Ithiel de Sola Pool. 1990. Technologies Without Boundaries: On Telecommunications in aGlobal Age.  Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, Chapter 7.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESting to broader policymaking, associated with the Internet. The failure ofOSI to achieve commercial success and the success of TCP/IP commer-
cially sent clear signals about process problems. An indication of the po-
tential for change, or at least a willingness to consider different ap-
proaches, is a 1998 ITU document that observes:  ÒCompetition in

telecommunications is rapidly becoming a true market force whose evo-
lution cannot be planned by policymakers, a force which increasingly is
seen as best regulated on the basis of principles that are not specific to
telecommunications but derived from a broader economic, social and cul-
tural perspective.Ó47Some of the concerns posed by the Internet relate to its technologiesfor distributing information, which affect private parties with property
interest in certain content as well as governments interested not only in
protecting those private-property rights but also in meeting their own mis-
sion needs (which may be expressed in differing degrees of support for
distribution of different kinds of content to different segments of the popu-
lation). The Internet presents Òthe culture of sovereign controlÓ with tech-
nical challenges that are not present when information comes embodied
in conventional, tangible media such as newspapers, books, films, phono-
graph records, and audiocassette tapes or when signals are transmitted
through physical channels, as is the case with telegraph, telex, and tele-
phone messages. Even with regard to the broadcast media, domestic regu-

lations and international conventions that restrict broadcasters to particu-
lar frequencies also serve to make it more feasible to identify, and interfere
with, transmission and reception of particular sources of radio and TV
messages.Nevertheless, increasing commercial use of the Internet is drivingboth technical changes and consideration of nontechnical interventions.
As Lessig has put it, the Òchanges that make commerce possible will also
be changes that will make regulation easy.Ó48 For example, company in-
terests in understanding customer behavior have driven the design of
mechanisms for collecting personal information; this has led to increased
privacy concerns, and to experimentation with technologies to permit

anonymous interactions. Large organizations that use the Internet have
developed firewalls, which can limit traffic coming into and going out of
the organizationÕs network, as well as softwareÑe.g., e-mail filtersÑto
monitor the kinds of communications that network users send. Mean-47International Telecommunications Union, Draft Strategic Plan for the Union 1999-2003,dated 1998. Available online at <http://www.itu.int/newsroom/press/PP98/Documents/StratPlan9903.html>.48Lawrence Lessig. 1999. Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace. New York: Basic Books, p. 30.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE EVOLUTION OF GLOBAL NETWORKS4549See David D. Clark and Marjory S. Blumenthal, 2000, ÒRethinking the Design of theInternet: The End to End Arguments vs. the Brave New World,Ó presented at TPRC, Sep-tember 24; available online at <http://www.tprc.org/AgendaOO.htm>.while, governments are contemplating use of the Internet for criminalpurposes and the feasibility of eavesdropping or otherwise intervening in
communications. All of these developments raise questions about whether
the fundamental Internet architecture principles can be preserved.49Do these developments pose a threat to local values?  The analysis inthis chapter suggests that the increasing dominance of a commercial cul-
ture on the Internet will be likely to produce a situation in which local
jurisdictions will have considerable autonomy as well as greater technical
capabilities to restrict local consumption of Internet content, at least as
long as they do not use that power in blatant efforts to protect local com-
mercial enterprises from the competition of politically powerful interna-
tional media organizations. The implication is that the variations in local
cultural norms are unlikely to be swept aside by the future spread and
penetration of Internet-based services.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.463Understanding Local Values and How
They Are Affected by Global Networks
3.1INTRODUCTION
Some value judgments, like the objection to child pornography, areessentially universal.  But even nations as culturally close as the United

States and Germany are divided on many value issues.  For example, in

the light of its history, Germany has actually banned right-wing publica-
tions that would be allowed, even if not admired, in the United States.  On

the other hand, Americans in large numbers deem certain materials por-
nographic that most Germans would find inoffensive (see Box 3.1 for these
and other examples).  These kinds of contrasts would seem to lead to the

stark and simplistic assertion that global networks threaten local values.
But the reality is much more complex.  The purpose of this background

chapter is to lay the conceptual foundation for understanding what val-
ues are, so that the interaction of global networks with the particular
value-driven issues addressed in later chapters can be better understood.There is no universal agreement on what the term ÔÒvalueÓÕ means.The dictionary definition (Òa principle, standard, or quality considered
worthwhile or desirableÓ1) has a question-begging quality to it.  Although
almost all behavioral and social scientists deal with values in one way or
another, they tend to avoid the term and replace it with more specific
concepts.  Economists, for example, typically focus on behavioral re-

sponses to incentives, with the assumption that they are a measure of1The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language
, Third Edition.  New York:
Houghton Mifflin Company.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.UNDERSTANDING LOCAL VALUES AND HOW THEY ARE AFFECTED47BOX 3.1  Public Views of Internet Risks
A study commissioned by the Bertelsmann Foundation1 posed two ques-
tions to people 18 years and older in the two countries.  The first question
concerned risks that they associate with the Internet.  Each interviewee could
name as many risks as he or she wished.  The responses were as follows:
RiskUSAGermany
Data protection22%24%
Pornography13%17%
Protection of minorsa21%6%
Fraud, Manipulation8%3%

Presentation of violence2%3%
aThe distinction between pornography and protection of minors is one of percep-tion, not necessarily of substance, by the persons who responded to the interviewers
of the Bertelsmann Foundation.  The same caveat applies to the distinction between
pornography and nudity in the second table.The second question addressed attitudes toward censorship.  Each inter-
viewee was allowed to name the kinds of content that he or she would liketo see banned from the Internet.  This yielded the following:
Content TypeUSAGermany
Racist speech63%79%
Violence39%61%

Pornography59%60%

Politically radical speech26%58%
Nudity43%13%
These responses are striking in number of aspects.  First, although simi-lar percentages of respondents in the two countries felt that risks were asso-ciated with Internet content, German respondents were much more likelyto endorse banning such content.  Second, the distinctions made between

pornography and nudity suggest very different perceptions in the two coun-tries of what constitutes pornography.  Third, the similar percentages of
people judging pornography to be a risk, compared to the divergence
among those judging possible injury to minors to be a risk, also suggest adifference in perception.  Finally, the wide range of reactions to different
kinds of objectionable speech in the United States compared with Ger-
many appears noteworthy.1Bertelsmann Foundation, ed., 2000, ÒRisk Assessment and Opinions Concerning the Control ofMisuse on the Internet.  Results of representative surveys conducted in the United States, Austra-

lia and the Federal Republic of Germany.Ó  A project by the Bertelsmann Foundation, Germany,

in conjunction with the Australian Broadcasting Authority (ABA), Allensbach archives, IfD-sur-
vey 3296, available online at <http://www.stiftung.bertelsmann.de/internetcontent/english/
frameset. htm content/c2000.htm> (30.03.00); printed version in Jens Waltermann and Marcel
Machill, eds., Protecting Our Children on the Internet: Towards a New Culture of Responsibility,Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUES(and do not themselves affect) values.  Nevertheless, analysis of values
has increasedÑand improved in qualityÑwith the recognition that val-
ues can change; they can be affected by public policy, and they influence
how people respond to public policy.2This study aims specifically at understanding the influence of globalnetworks on local values, and the public unease to which it gives rise, in
order to provide advice to political actors on howÑand whetherÑto take
action.  Under the circumstances, it is difficult to avoid the general ques-

tion of what values are, what function they have for the individual, soci-
ety, and government, and what makes them local.  The following sections

take up these issues and their implications.3.2ARE VALUES ALWAYS THE ISSUE?
Although public concern with the impact of global networks is oftencast in terms of the effect on local values, in some instances the perceived
threat to a value is a proxy for a more tangible threat.  Thus, if people ask

to be shielded from inadvertent access to depictions of brutal violence,
they may well be driven by a fear of the traumaÑthat is, the mental in-
juryÑthat exposure to such scenes might produce rather than a principled
objection to the exposure itself.  Some forms of crude pornography might

fall into the same category.  Thus, the objection could be based both on a

normative conviction concerning graphic violence and a self-preserving
concern for oneÕs mental health.There is a subtle, but real, difference here.  Measures aimed at pro-
moting a normative conviction, or value, are intended to encourage con-
formity among those who might not be inclined to accept it, though a
single violation would not challenge its validity or lead to any great harm.
A trauma, on the other hand, hits those whose normative conviction may
be quite firm.  And a single exposure can be enough to cause unacceptable

harm.3In fact, although there are some differences in how they are mani-fested in the United States and Germany, arguments to limit access to
pornography or portrayals of violence are frequently justified in terms of
the need to protect minors rather than as a question of morality.  To some

extent, the approach may be disingenuous in that adults who object to
depictions of nudity might simply find it more convenient and effective2Henry J. Aaron et al., eds. 1994. Values and Public Policy. Washington, D.C.: BrookingsInstitution.3J. Douglas Bremner and Charles R.  Marmar, eds. 1998. 
Trauma, Memory, and Dissociation.Washington, D.C.: American Psychiatric Press.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.UNDERSTANDING LOCAL VALUES AND HOW THEY ARE AFFECTED49to use the child-protection argument than to have to defend the value inthe abstract.  Of course, this strategy could lead policymakers and design-

ers to develop legal tools and technical approaches specifically directed at
minors, which would do little to deal with the actual concerns that
prompted the outcry.4The German treatment of Nazi speech illustrates still another distinc-tion (Box 3.2).  The use of Nazi symbols, open adherence to Nazi ideology,

or the distribution of Nazi publications without a strong disclaimer is a
tabooÑa very strong form of protecting and enforcing a value judgement.
Anyone openly breaking the taboo, even once, is alienated from the com-
munity.  Yet, the violation does not necessarily threaten the taboo.  In fact,

occasional breaches can even help a society enforce the tabooed value; it
can be argued that the common and visible defense of the taboo can serve
as a powerful social bond.  At the limit, a society may even define itself by

its shared taboos.5  To some extent, these same arguments might also
apply to values that are part of what has been called political correctness.Finally, there are the circumstances in which the potential harm is notthe content itself, but its use in the outside, non-virtual world.  The most

obvious case is the publication of bomb-building instructions.  The con-

cern in that instance does not arise because the communication challenges
the principle that it is wrong to kill people.  The value itself is not in dan-
ger, though peopleÕs lives might be.In these examples, the issue is less a threat to a local value than it is abroader social or political problem.  But there are also instances in which

global networks may serve to promote local values that have been under-
mined by political considerations.  For example, global networks give

German citizens access to environmental information that the German
government holds but has been hesitant to release, despite its legal obli-
gation to do so.  And the very fact that information of that kind is made

available in other countries through the Internet may pressure German
administrators to move toward more open policies.6Compared to the situation in Germany, the issue of government open-ness has been less problematic in the United States.  Moreover, global

networks serve to multiply sources of information there at a time when
consolidation in other media has raised concern that the diversity of view-
points made available to the publicÑalso a clear local valueÑmight be
reduced.4See Chapter 5 (ÒFree Speech and the InternetÓ) for more discussion.5Horst Reimann. 1989. ÒTabu,Ò Staatslexikon
.  Freiburg: Recht Wirtschaft Gesellschaft, 420.
6See Chapter 6 (ÒPrivacy and Freedom of InformationÓ) for more discussion.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESBOX 3.2  The Nazi Taboo: Germany Versus Amazon.com
In the summer of 1999, German Minister of Justice Dr. Herta D−ubler-Gmelin called on amazon.com and barnesandnoble.com to stop selling
and distributing the English translation of HitlerÕs book Mein Kampf to
Germany.  D−ubler-Gmelin also urged German media giant Bertelsmann
to influence barnesandnoble.com, in which it has a 40 percent interest.
Furthermore, a speaker of the German Ministry of Justice suggested that itwas possible to prosecute managers of barnesandnoble.com andamazon.com when traveling in Germany.  In initial discussions, the com-
panies were resistant; a spokeswoman from amazon.com said: ÒWe are a
U.S. store.  We view this as though a German was on vacation here and
went into a physical bookstore and bought the books.Ó  But amazon.com
and barnesandnoble.com later decided to stop shipping 
Mein Kampf to
customers located in Germany.The issue came up when a German-based researcher for the WiesenthalCenter ordered Mein Kampf and other books from the two online booksell-
ers.  The researcher who ordered the Hitler book from amazon.com re-
ceived an e-mail suggesting that he might also be interested in WhitePower, by the American Nazi leader George Lincoln Rockwell.  In 1999,
the numbers of orders of Mein Kampf reached a Top Ten list for German
buyers, a fact that the company displayed on its Web site.  However, as the
displayed statistics showed, many of the German buyers bought the booksnot for racial motives but for historical and academic interests.  They also

bought inoffensive biographies of Hitler, historical studies, and even booksby Karl Marx.It is illegal in Germany to distribute writings like Mein Kampf, designedto incite racial hatred, at least in the German language (Para 86 and 130German Penal Code).  Foreign exporters to Germany must heed these pro-
hibitions, although the case with respect to English translations is not un-equivocal.  In 1995, German authorities successfully prosecuted and jailed
an American citizen, Gary Lauck, for distributing illegal propaganda andfor encouraging racial hatred.  He served a four-year sentence.
In most countries the publication of Mein Kampf can be prevented by
refusing to license the copyright, which is held by the state of Bavaria asthe legal successor to HitlerÕs publisher.  That is not possible, however, in
the United States and in the United Kingdom.  The rights to publish 
MeinKampf in these countries were sold in 1933.SOURCES:  John Burgess, ÒAmazon Reverses on Hitler Book,Ó 
Washington Post,November 18, 1999; Michael Hanfeld, ÒHitler lesen,Ó Frankfurter AllgemeineZeitung, August 11, 1999.Amy Harmon, ÒTechnology: Internet Sale of Nazi Books in Germany Is Assailed,ÓNew York Times, August 9, 1999.Stefan Ulrich, ÒMachtlos gegen Mein Kampf,Ó  August 11,
1999.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.UNDERSTANDING LOCAL VALUES AND HOW THEY ARE AFFECTED513.3THE FUNCTION OF VALUES
To understand a concept as complex as that of values, one needs to beable to interpret and apply it.  For purposes of the present study, that can

best be achieved by delineating their function for the individual, for soci-
ety, and for government.  In this way, one neednÕt be wedded to a particu-

lar set of values.  In fact, by being clear about the functions that values

serve, their Òevolutionary potentialÓ becomes clear as well.3.3.1Understanding Is Interpreting
Although philosophers have put considerable effort into makingsense out of the question, ÒWhat is a chair?Ó, most of us are satisfied that
we know one when we see one.  For the semantically identical question,

ÒWhat is a local value?Ó, the common-sense answer does not work as well.
What a value is depends on how we look at it, and the framework for
analyzing the question is not neutral.  The way the problem is framed is

inherently normative, and it inevitably has an impact on whatever an-
swer is given.Nearly all the behavioral and social sciences have their own view ofwhat values are.  Ethics is obviously about values, but philosophers also

rely on values when they insist that understanding is interpreting.  They

argue that reality cannot be understood without some attempt to inter-
pret what its purpose is and what it does.7 Some philosophers go even
further.  They conceive of humans as social animals and see normativity

(or values) as the precondition for passing from the isolated individual to
a society.8Rational-choice analysis starts from the premise that each individualmaximizes his or her own utility.  Rationality, rather than a morality of

group obligation, guides decisions.  This view is predominant in econom-

ics, but also has its adherents in political science and sociology.  The dis-

tinction between preferences and restrictions is fundamental in rational-
choice models.  Values become institutions that restrict choice.  Bad

conscience is considered to be a psychic cost.  Commonly shared values

are modeled as social norms.  These restrictions are interpreted as tools

that facilitate the coordination of behavior and, in that sense, as goods not
provided by the market.97Hans Albert. 1978. 
8Norm, Person, Gesellschaft. Berlin: Duncker & Humblot.
9Gary S. Becker. 1976. The Economic Approach to Human Behavior.  Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESOn the other hand, second-generation models of rationality incorpo-rate values into a more nuanced understanding of preferences.  In this

perspective, preferences are no longer taken for granted; values are key to
the formation of preference.10  A third view starts from the observation
that two or more persons may share a given value.  This is a way of add-

ing context, or history, and leads to rational choices and behaviors that
optimize values involving more than one individual.11Sociology is concerned with the society-building function of values.Integration theory views values as a sort of a social glue.  In the approach

of systems theory, each subsystemÑfor example, the economy, the law,
or politicsÑis held together by its particular formal code, such as price,
legality, or power.  The formality of the code opens subsystems up to

flexible principles, or values, that may differ from society to society.12Sociology also provides a way to interpret or measure how more general
descriptions of a societyÑsuch as its closed or open natureÑmanifest
themselves in particular value sets.13In psychology, which is concerned with explaining behavior, valuesarise in at least three different ways.  They help the individual understand

the social environment to which he or she reacts.  They manifest them-

selves as attitudes that help the individual choose between competing
courses of action.  And they 
motivate behavior, inducing the individual to
translate attitude into action.14The study and practice of law are about formal institutions.  The in-
terpretation of statutes or the identification of analogous cases in law is
inevitably shaped by values.15  In legal methodology, this is called teleo-
10Elinor Ostrom. 1998. ÒA Behavioral Approach to the Rational Choice Theory of Collec-tive Action,Ó  Presidential Address of the American Political Science Association 1997, in

American Political Science Review 92(1; March) 1-22.
11Mark Granovetter. 1995. ÒEconomic Action and Social Structure: The Problem ofEmbeddedness,Ó American Journal of Sociology 91(3; November): 481-510.12Dirk Baecker. 2000. ÒNetworking the Web,Ó in Christoph Engel and Kenneth H. Keller,eds., Understanding the Impact of Global Networks on Local Social, Political and Cultural Values,Law and Economics of International Telecommunications, Vol. 42, 93-111, Baden-Baden:
Nomos.13Gabriel A. Almond and Sidney Verba. 1965. The Civic Culture: Political Attitudes andDemocracy in Five Nations: An Analytic Study. Boston: Little.
14John Robert Anderson, 1999, ÒCognitive Psychology and Its Implications,Ó New York: Freeman;
Nicola Dıring, 1999,  
Kommunikationsprozesse, Identit−ten, soziale Beziehungen und Gruppen, Gıttingen: Hogrefe; Sara
Kiesler, Jane Siegel, and Timothy W. McGuire, 1984, ÒSocial Psychological Aspects of Computer-Mediated Communication,Ó American Psychologist 39:1123-1134; Sherry Turkle, 1996, ÒConstruc-tions and Reconstructions of Self in Virtual Reality: Playing in the MUDÕs,Ó  The American Pros-pect 24 (Winter), available online at <http://www.prospect.org/archives/24/24turk.html>.
15Josef Esser.  1970. 
Vorverst−ndnis und Methodenwahl in der Rechtsfindung. Frankfurt:
Athen−um.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.UNDERSTANDING LOCAL VALUES AND HOW THEY ARE AFFECTED53logical construction.  In the modern world, where neither history nor di-
vine authority establishes law, the legitimacy of the legal code is, itself, a
normative question.  In other words, laws need to be legitimated by val-

ues.16  And the law adds a helpful methodological distinction between
rules and principles.  Rules can be expressed in conditional terms: If A,

then B.  Principles are characterized by their finality.  Those bound by a

principle seek to realize it in each situation to which it might apply.17Values are more like principles than rules.Finally, cultural theory adds relativity to the picture.  In this perspec-
tive, value A is not only liable to be replaced by value B over a period of
time.  They might command attention at the same time, even though they

may promote entirely different perspectives or even be somewhat contra-
dictory.  Cultural theory deliberately foregoes intellectual neatness and,

on the contrary, investigates how societies manage to balance different
solidarities, or value orientations.  It thereby also helps us understand

why and how values change.18This rapid tour is obviously not meant to be an exhaustive discussionof the meaning of the term Òvalues.Ó19 Indeed, our understanding of what
values are, and what makes them Òlocal,Ó will always be tenuous and
subject to change.  However, the framework is useful in reminding

policymakers of the many dimensions of the issue that must be consid-
ered when examining the influences of global networks.  Policymakers

must also be aware of the functions that values serve as they consider
where and when action is called for.  The following sections address that

question.16It should be noted that a number of legal scholars, particularly in the United States,would argue that law and values are not quite as separable and values are not quite asarbitrary as is suggested in this paragraph.  And Americans would not necessarily link law
and formal institutions in the ways that Germans would.  However, this formulation allows

both German and American systems to be placed in the same framework and still allows forarguments that societal laws should conform to or reflect natural lawÑwhich, in a sense, isan argument for how the legal code is legitimized.17Robert Alexy. 1996. Theorie der Grundrechte. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
18Michael Thompson. 2000. ÒGlobal Networks and Local Cultures; What Are the Mis-matches and What Can Be Done about Them?Ó Understanding the Impact of Global Networks onLocal Social, Political and Cultural Values (Law and Economics of International Telecommunica-tions 42), Christoph Engel and Kenneth H. Keller, eds., Baden-Baden: Nomos, 113-129.
19Further material elucidating the function of values for individuals, society, and govern-ment is to be found in Elkhart Scilicet, 1998, On Custom in the Economy,  Oxford, England:
Clarendon Press; and Bruno S. Frey, 1999, Economics as a Science of Human Behaviour, Boston:Kluwer Academic Publications.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUES3.3.2Function for the Individual
Values endow the individual with yardsticksÑa normative languagethat allows him or her to distinguish.  They provide guidance on whether

certain behaviors are desirable or not, and to what extent.  They provide a

basis for deciding on oneÕs own behavior.  But understanding, judging,

and deciding are normally a balancing exercise, with several values com-
ing into play, and not all of oneÕs actions are actually guided by such a
deliberate decision process.20 Nevertheless, it provides both comfort and
assurance to have a set of values, and the capacity to apply them in a
deliberate process of decision making, when faced with new circum-

stances.The normative grammar of personal values also helps to form hy-potheses of what the behavior of other individuals means.  And it helps

predict how others are likely to react to a personÕs actions.  In both ways,
values serve as a cognitive tool to guide social behavior.Finally, an individual needs values for self-evaluation.  Human be-
ings require self-esteem, which comes from a sense of achievement.  Per-

sonal values tell the individual which achievements are worthy of self-
esteem.  Indeed, one can argue that values are a key to consciousness

itself; many argue that consciousness presupposes the ability to look at
oneself from the outside, and values are an instrument for doing so.  By

adopting a set of values, the individual effectively gains access to an ex-
ternal reference that, in effect, provides the independent point of observa-
tion that is necessary for consciousness.213.3.3Function for Society
From a practical point of view, individuals are always part of somesociety.  They may move from one society or social grouping to another

throughout their lives, but each one contributes to shaping a personÕs val-
ues and, in turn, displays values shaped by the individuals who comprise
it.  Some argue that the very notion of reality is socially constructed, and

that individual values are socially pre-formed.22  Others go further, argu-
20For greater detail see Gird Gigerenzer and Peter M. Todd, eds., 1997, Simple HeuristicsThat Make Us Smart, Oxford: Oxford University Press.21Wolfgang Kersting, 2000, ÒGlobal Networks and Local Values.  Some Philosophical Re-
marks from an Individualist Point of View,Ó in Christoph Engel and Kenneth H. Keller, eds.,Understanding the Impact of Global Networks on Local Social, Political and Cultural Values, 9-27,
Baden-Baden: Nomos; Dıring (supra note 14).22Gebhardt Rusch and Siegfried Schmidt, eds. 1992. Konstruktivismus. Geschichte undAnwendung. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.UNDERSTANDING LOCAL VALUES AND HOW THEY ARE AFFECTED55ing that only by defining himself or herself as a member of a normativelyconstructed society can an individual become a person, conscious and
distinct from other animal species.23Nevertheless, it makes sense to distinguish between the role that val-ues play for the individual and the related but distinct role that values
play for society.  Unlike the state, society is not a clear-cut concept and

does not have precise boundaries.  Each social interaction, from the most

transient to the most permanent, from two individuals in a business trans-
action to the citizens who make up a nation, is a manifestation of some
form of society.  Individuals may be part of a narrowly defined social

group, such as a profession.  They may view themselves as being part of a

much more loosely knit network like the community of workers.  The

only link may be a territorial one, as for the inhabitants of a region.  Or the

social nexus may be the factual overlay of a legal condition, such as citi-
zenship.  The voluntary and virtual community of the Internet and its

many epistemic (specialized) subgroups are, in this respect, merely a
somewhat modified societal form.From the viewpoint of society, values basically serve three purposes.They convey information, they facilitate coordination, and they give the
group an identity.  Society is first and foremost an informational commu-

nity.  Precisely because they share values, members can interpret the be-

havior of other members and establish expectations about it.  This is par-

ticularly important in judging the credibility of what one person says to
another about his or her intentions or commitmentsÑthat is, the
individualÕs behavior in the future.  The greater the extent to which the

intended or promised behavior conforms to a common value, the more
credible is the transmitted information.The communication of information is key to the coordination of be-havior, as game theory shows.  If two individuals canÕt talk to each other

before they act and share no common values, neither has a basis for mak-
ing an educated guess as to how the other will behave.  And if they talk to

each other but do not understand each otherÕs values, neither can predict
whether the other will keep any promises made.Finally, some common value acceptance is the bedrock of group iden-tity.  All members of the group must actually adhere to the value, and all
members want to be sure that all others do so as well.  Normative values

form a cognitive framework for allowing individuals to understand social
reality.  Moreover, society organizes itself around shared values.  Thus

the function of society is to help individuals by guaranteeing values, and
the function of these same values is to give cohesion and identity to the23Jakobs (supra note 8).Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESsociety.  Common values, in other words, are a key ingredient in societal
integration.24 And integration reflects how society and the state are tied
together.If a single local value is challenged or eroded, social cohesion andintegration are unlikely to be deeply affected.  Indeed, a societyÕs set of

values has never been totally stable over time.  Traditional values have

been challenged whenever a sufficiently large stratum of society has been
exposed to different cultures.  But society is an adaptive organism; it ad-

justs to the new values, rebalances the old ones, and usually bends with-
out breaking.  However, all societies have certain values that are funda-

mental for the self-definition of the group and that weaken group cohesion
if challenged.  When several such values are challenged simultaneously,

rapid adaptation can be highly threatening.These, then, become important analytical benchmarks against whichto judge the effects of global networks.  But it is not easy to isolate the

influence of global networksÑand in particular the InternetÑfrom other
factors that affect local values.  For example, in both Europe and the

United States, post-World War II affluence and the application of many
kinds of technology have promoted similar patterns of changes in val-
uesÑalbeit with differing trajectories.25 By altering peopleÕs perceptions
of their nationÕs well-being and of their own well-being, affluence can
indirectly alter local values and, across nations similarly situated, pro-
mote some convergence of values.  That convergence may either

strengthen or weaken efforts to preserve remaining differences, as is evi-
dent in the conflicts within the United States over multiculturalism and
the implications of an increasingly heterogeneous, pluralistic society
within with a single nation.263.3.4Function for Government and Formal Institutions
Legal formality distinguishes state and society.  The state is what it is
because its constitution defines it to be so.  But such a formally constructed

state can take almost any form.  At one extreme, it is little more than a

fictionÑthe assertion, for example, of an exile group that controls no ter-24Klaus G. Grunert. 1994. ÒCognition and Economic Psychology,Ó in HermannEssays on Economic Psychology, 91-108.25Daniel Yankelovich. 1994. ÒHow Changes in the Economy Are Reshaping AmericanValues,Ó in Henry J. Aaron et al., eds., Values and Public Policy. Washington, D.C.: Brookings
Institution.26See Yankelovich, ibid; also Nathan Glaser, 1994, ÒMulticulturalism and Public Policy,Ó in
Henry J. Aaron et al., eds., Values and Public Policy, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.UNDERSTANDING LOCAL VALUES AND HOW THEY ARE AFFECTED57ritory, provides no services, and has earned no recognition.  At the other
extreme, it may exist as an absolute dictatorship, with great power but no
legitimacy.  In neither case is there a need for values.  Real-world states

fall in-between.  They are connected with their citizenry and related to

their society by shared values.  These values serve three purposes.  They

provide a basis for the development of statutes to which people are in-
clined to adhere.  Conversely, they give legitimacy to a government whose

actions and laws conform to the shared values.  And finally, commonly

shared and protected values are as important an instrument for building
a national identity as they are for building a social identity.3.3.5The Dynamics of Values
It is important to remember that time itself alters the relations be-tween individuals, society, and the state.  Individual life has a defined

beginning and an equally defined end.  Since no one is born with a set of

values, each person has to learn them.  States can also begin and end.  A

new state is founded by secession, unification, or revolution.  And in the

same way, an old state can perish.  Such events change values over time

for people and the states of which they are a part.27  This is equally true of
societies or social groups.  Local values may have their origins in a blurred

past that is seldom completely abandoned.  However, the set of values

evolves over time, triggered by events in the world, a changed composi-
tion of the population, or fresh ideas.  Indeed, one may argue that this is a

healthy dynamic, responsive to changing circumstances, producing more
open societies, and recognizing the fundamental relativity of values.The evolutionary perspective draws attention to the salutary effectsof a value system that can adapt to change over time.  This is analogous to

the value of biodiversity in providing a gene pool that, through selection,
can adapt life on the planet to changed conditions.  Anthropologists have

long drawn a parallel between genes and memes (characteristics of a cul-
ture that allow it to develop and change).28 The parallel suggests that
cultural diversity and the maintenance of marginal cultures is more than
the nostalgic protection of a living museum.2927States do not always recognize this reality.  Uncovering old statutes, still on the books,
that reflect the sexual mores of a previous era is a favorite pastime of the U.S. media, and
British courts are still willing to rely on cases or statutes from the Middle Ages.28Robert Boyd and Peter J. Richerson. 1994. ÒThe Evolution of Norms.  An Anthropologi-cal View,Ó Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics 150:72-87.29Paul A. David. 2000. ÒThe Internet and the Economics of Network Technology Evolu-tion,Ó Understanding the Impact of Global Networks on Local Social, Political and Cultural Values,Christoph Engel and Kenneth H. Keller, eds., Baden-Baden: Nomos, 39-71.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUES3.4THE LOCALITY OF VALUES
Some values are essentially universal, such as the revulsion to childpornography, while other values are nearly so, stretching over large parts
of the world.  The developed world, for example, is such a community,

sharing a commitment to concepts such as human rights.  Still other val-

ues are connected with language zones, for language can provide a com-
mon understanding of a concept or, alternatively, can reflect the existence
of such an understanding.  Consider the English word Òreasonable.Ó

There is no accurate German equivalent.  And, indeed, Germans, in gen-

eral, value reasonableness less highly than, say, the English.Many values do not spread beyond national borders.  However, this
does not mean that local values are merely those that underlie a given
legal order.  It is true that governing is easier when constituencies share

values, but in democratic states it is at least debatable whether govern-
ment has a mandate to form the values of its citizens.  Many lawyers go

even further.  They argue that government may only 
ask its citizens to
obey the law, not to believe that statutes are morally binding.  Conse-

quently, penal law may protect the prevailing values only insofar as their
violation yields socially destructive results.  It is the action that is penal-

ized, not the intention.  If government oversteps the borderline between

legal and moral obligation, it risks becoming totalitarian.30The appropriate link between locality and values is thus not govern-ment, but society.  For the last hundred years or so, there was little practi-

cal difference between the two; in the era of the nation-state, the territorial
reaches of government and society were more or less the same.  But

whether culture and state will continue to be so closely linked is by no
means assured; many ask whether globalization will leave cultural bound-
aries unaffected.  After all, the connection between the national economy

and the national state already appears to be fading.31Historically, culture has not always been linked to territory; it hasfrequently been more closely connected to ethnic groups.  That is equally
true today, particularly as global networks have made it rather easy to
maintain close connections across long distances, and as significant mi-
grations have brought new diversity to the ethnic makeup of many coun-
tries.  It may therefore be more appropriate to define the locality of values

by their link to a specific culture.3230A classic on totalitarianism is Frank Neumann, 1983, Behemoth:The Structure and Practiceof National Socialism, 1933-1944, New York: Octagon Books.31See Fritz W. Scharpf. 1999. Governing in Europe: Effective and Democratic? Oxford: Oxford
University Press.32Anthony Giddens. 1984. The Constitution of Society: Outline of the Theory of Structuration.Cambridge: Polity Press.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.UNDERSTANDING LOCAL VALUES AND HOW THEY ARE AFFECTED59Finally, not all values spread homogeneously over an entire nation.Regional differences are often quite robust, having been recognized and
preserved by well-entrenched regional cultures.  In this respect, too, the

connection of values to culture is apparent.In describing the locality of values, one needs to distinguish a valuethat is locally practiced from one that is locally embedded.  Since no value

is adhered to without exception, embeddedness seems to be the more ap-
propriate measure.  It is also analytically easier to handle.  Embeddedness

is achieved through institutions, both formal and informal, and institu-
tions are easier to discern than mere practice or belief.  Even more impor-

tantly, institutions can be more easily connected to a social or legal entity.
That allows us to determine how far the value reaches and to identify
locality, even where more than one institution protects the same substan-
tive value.At first blush, this ambiguity looks like an analytical drawback, notan advantage.  But locality is more related to a value 
system than to a
particular value.  Because modern societies do not really live in accor-

dance with a hierarchical, rigid, and totally coherent order of values, there
will be overlaps and even inconsistencies among the values promoted by
various institutions.  What makes one society distinct from another is the
specific balance of values.3.5THE LEGITIMACY OF VALUES
Although we cannot do without values, this doesnÕt mean that theprotection of values should be treated as the highest obligation of a soci-
ety.  Too many values, the wrong values, or an improper balance of them

can even be dysfunctional.  Even if a set of values served well in the past,
it may be a mistake to maintain it as the social environment changes.The link between values and institutions is instructive in this respect.Institutions provide the means for dealing practically with social dilem-
mas, but there is almost always more than one institution that can do the
job.  The choice between the options is normally not exclusively guided

by the expected efficacy of the institution or the costs associated with it,
but also by group interest.  To do something that serves the common good

has always been a much easier way to extract rents from others than by
openly asking for the redistribution of wealth.33  For example, Thomas
Jefferson, in pressing for the creation of publicly supported universities,
argued that they were necessary Óto avail the state of those talents, sown33Jack Knight. 1994. Institutions and Social Conflict. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESequally among the poor as the rich, which perish without use if not soughtfor and cultivated.ÓThe legitimacy of a set of values depends on the function they have tofulfill.  For family life, or for behavior toward old friends, different values

are appropriate than for buying a book from an Internet bookseller.  Al-

though the result thus depends on the context, the categories can be gen-
eralized.  A first distinction is the one between formal and substantive

values.34  The archetypal formal value is tolerance.  It deliberately leaves
open which substantive values another person may adopt, and asks us to
respect that decision.Other formal values are, for example, the moral obligation to keeponeÕs promises, to abide by legitimate statutes, or to pay taxes.  Obvi-

ously, a person needs greater specificity than that.  To make decisions

about behavior or to understand the social environment, he or she re-
quires substantive values.  But formal values provide the means for lead-
ing a fairly consistent life.  The distinction between the formal and the
34See, for example, Kersting (supra note 21).  The formal/substantive distinction made
here and in other parts of this report is not intended as a legal description, but as a brief
recapitulation of a philosophical taxonomy.  Formal values are, to a first approximation,
those associated with social processesÑrules of behavior that facilitate discourse and, in-deed, can be a key element in making a community possibleÑwhile substantive values come
closer to moral convictions or beliefs.  We recognize, as many political philosophers have,
that the distinction is not crisp.  Nevertheless, we believe it is useful.  An important question
is the relationship of these values to the legal system, a question made difficult for two
reasons: first, the terms themselves cause confusion because, although they are familiar inthe European context, they are not used as commonly in the U.S.; and, second, the relation-ship between values and law is viewed differently in Anglo-American and European juris-
prudential thought.  With respect to the first issue, in legal terms, the formal-substantive
distinction maps roughly onto distinctions drawn in American jurisprudence regarding neu-trality and non-neutrality of law.  In the context of First Amendment law, for example, it

corresponds to the difference between content-neutral regulation and content-based regula-tion.  More generally, the European concept of formal values in the legal system would
appear to correspond to the liberal rule of law, which is often said to rest upon the stateÕs
commitment to neutrality or neutral principles, such as equality before the law and theavoidance of preference for one value choice over another.  With respect to the second issue,
the idea that there are clearly distinguishable non-neutral and neutral choices in law and
that neutrality is a key element in a liberal rule of law seems to be more controversial inAnglo-American jurisprudential and political thought than the formal/substantive distinc-tion is in European thought.  Some liberal thinkers deny that neutrality is a principle of

liberalism; see, e.g., Donald Herzog, 1989, Happy Slaves, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.  Furthermore, there is significant school of thought denying that neutrality is either
analytically coherent or possible in practice.  In this view, liberalism involves particular

values that the state prefers over other particular values; see, e.g., Joseph Raz, 1986, TheMorality of Freedom, Oxford University Press.  The latter view is supported in part by the
influential writings of John Dewey in the early twentieth century; see, e.g., Liberalism andSocial Action, Prometheus Books, 1935.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.UNDERSTANDING LOCAL VALUES AND HOW THEY ARE AFFECTED61substantive is analogous to that of government and society.  In public
education, for example, there is a continuing debate as to whether the
value content of the curriculum should be limited to the formal, or
whether the government should use the institution to instill more sub-
stantive values.  Many believe that governments and society alike should

stay away from actively promoting substantive values.  But as a practical

matter, it is hard to imagine how any societal cohesion could be maintained
without actively promoting at least some commonly shared values.A useful way to promote societal cohesion without imposing exces-sive rigidity might be to emphasize sets of values rather than any single
value.  As suggested above, such a local set of values is more than the

juxtaposition of a number of values and less than a strict hierarchical or-
der.  It is a web of values, with knots of greater and lesser importance for
the network.  Some may be untied or loosened, on the basis of individual
preference.  Others need to be strongly fixed and could be challenged

only by a broad and long-term movement originating in a significant stra-
tum of society.The notion of a web of values sheds light on a related phenomenon.The isolated individual is not only a member of society at large, but also
of smaller social groups.  The more coherent these groups, the stronger

they are tied by substantive, rather than formal, values.  They form

epistemic communities,35 a phenomenon made both easier and more
widespread by the advent of global networks.  If society at large is not to

disintegrate into a constellation of such epistemic communities, substan-
tive group values must be outweighed by equally strong formal values at
the level of society at large.  This places a heavy burden on the institutions

that protect these formal values.3.6THE IMPACT OF GLOBAL NETWORKS ON VALUES
3.6.1Caveats
As the discussion in this chapter should make clear, casting light onthe impact of global networks on local values is not a straightforward
task.  The complexities of values and value setsÑthe different functions

they serve for different levels of social aggregation, as well as their dy-
namic changeÑmean that well-defined cause-and-effect relationships
may not exist.Global networks are themselves a moving target and thus provide an35On epistemic communities see Peter M. Haas, 1992, ÒIntroduction: Epistemic Commu-nities and International Policy Coordination,Ó International Organization 46(1):1-35.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESuncertain starting point for the analysis.  The degree of technical stan-
dardization has been consciously kept to a minimum.  The Internet, as a

network of networks, is open to new networks and to qualitative change.
The rapid commercialization of the Internet introduces further uncertain-
tiesÑfor example, how much will e-commerce change the traditional
egalitarian Internet culture? Equally uncertain is the extent to which glo-
bal networks will be split into language and culture zones.36Furthermore, global networks are not the only challenge to local val-ues.  An older and no less powerful challenge stems from transnational

broadcasting.  Migration and tourism bring people from different cultural

backgrounds together.  Even international trade in goods is not always

value-neutral.  How goods are designed and marketed is influenced by

the culture at their place of origin.Finally, the impact of global networks on local values is not one ofstrict cause and effect.  Technology does not determine social develop-

ment.  At most, it impedes traditional paths for the development of local

values, and opens up new paths.  More often, it does no more than change

relative costs and opportunities among alternatives.  Therefore, the rela-

tionship between global networks and local values is not unidirectional.
Global networks may have the potential to change the evolution of the
local set of values, but the process can also work the other way round.
Local values can alter the development path of global networks.  An obvi-

ous example is the demand to design Internet portals in a way that distin-
guishes between the physical locations of users.  If this became reality,

global networks would be effectively renationalized, in order to limit the
incursion of foreign values.The effect of global networks on local values and their balance is likelyto be indirect.  Faced with new opportunities and risks, the individual is

likely to reshape his or her preferences in a way that better fits the changed
environment.37 This is often done unconsciously.
38 Sociologists point out
that restrictions and, more specifically, institutions tend to reshape pref-
erences.  In practical terms, global networks can thus affect local values by

changing social and political structures (see Chapter 4), or ways of doing
business (see Chapter 7).What followsÑan attempt to identify specific ways in which globalnetworks have the potential to alter local valuesÑis thus only one cut
through a very complex relationship.36On the technological background and its development, see Chapter 2.37Michael Domjan. 1998. The Principles of Learning and Behaviour, Pacific Grove.38See, for example, Leon Festinger, 1962,  A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance, Stanford, CA.:Stanford University Press.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.UNDERSTANDING LOCAL VALUES AND HOW THEY ARE AFFECTED633.6.2The Effect of Global Networks on Value Orientations
Although some advocates of cyber-culture argue otherwise, globalnetworks do not themselves represent an entirely new form of society or a
new state.  At most, they give birth to new transnational social groups.

Normally, they are no more than a new communication medium for per-
sons who remain members of social groups that are rooted in real life.
Global networks do sometimes make it easier to ÒleaveÓ an original social
group, or even a state, and become a member of a new group, society, or
state.  But the individual can not help but remain a member of his or her

original group and state.  The question, however, is whether the regular

contact with global networks changes the relationship between the mem-
ber and that original group or state.  More specifically: does the use of

global networks potentially change the individualÕs set of values in a way
that alienates him or her more profoundly than before from the set of
values embedded in local institutions?39The answer to that question depends on how global networks affectvalue orientations.  One can envision four possibilities: global networks

are potentially globalizers, pluralizers, convergers, or de-contextualizers.That global networks potentially are globalizers sounds much like atruism.  But with respect to values, it can mean two different things.  The

first interpretation is closely related to what economists call systems com-
petition.40  An individual, who dislikes a specific value in the local set, or
the composition of that set more generally, uses global networks to exit
from the local environment.  This could occur if and when global networks

actually allow a person to leave the social group entirely.  More likely, glo-
bal networks might allow a person to split his or her activities in such a way
that the activities viewed unfavorably by the local value system are out of
the reach of those local institutions that enforce the system.41In contrast to this rather passive role of global networks, one can alsoenvision circumstances in which the networks serve to globalize a value.
For example, Western societies, to a greater or lesser degree, endorse open
and wide political discourse in which people can participate regardless of39Globale Dynamik, lokale Lebenswelten.  Der schwierige
Weg in die Weltgesellschaft, Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp; Ronald Robertson, 1992, Globaliza-tion, London: Sage; Benno Werlen, 1993, Society, Action and Space:  An Alternative Human
Geography, London: Routledge.40Competition Among Institutions. Basingstole: Macmillan.
41Christoph Engel. 2000. ÒThe Internet and the Nation State,Ó in Christoph Engel andKenneth H. Keller, eds., Understanding the Impact of Global Networks on Local Social, Politicaland Cultural Values (Law and Economics of International Telecommunications 42). Baden-Baden:Nomos, 201-260.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESgender or class.  Networks promote a globalization of that value, which
can lead to conflict with some traditional local values.  Even in this in-

stance, the global value may not replace the local one.  It may only reach a

segment of the local society or it may govern Internet activities alone while
other local life is still governed by the traditional values.  Or the new

global value may simply offer an alternativeÑanother option from which
members of the local society may choose (though not without risk).Although the globalization of values is not very frequent, the pluraliz-ing effect of global networks is ubiquitous.  Through global networks, an

individual comes easily and frequently into contact with entirely unknown
foreign values or with differently balanced sets of values.  In that way, glo-

bal networks force the individual to confront the fact that value systems are
fundamentally relative, and that one lives in a pluralistic world.42  In later
chapters, this is illustrated by the very different views that Germans and
Americans have about such issues as nudity, privacy, and the balance be-
tween the right of free speech and protection against libel.On the other hand, there are those who fear that global networks,rather than exhibiting and celebrating pluralism, may actually promote
an unhealthy convergence of values.43 Those who hold this view point to
the fact that most global networks, and the Internet in particular, origi-
nated in the United States.  Even today, more than two-thirds of Internet

traffic links American users and suppliers.  Because of this history, these

critics charge, most global networks are deeply influenced by U.S. value
systems.  The predominance of English, the preoccupation of most pro-

viders with the U.S. political climate, and, above all, the democratic vital-
ity of the traditional egalitarian Internet culture all contribute to what
some outside observers characterize as U.S. cultural hegemony.44Some convergence of values, of course, may be a necessary precondi-tion for truly global networks, or at least might facilitate their functioning.
To the extent that it promotes formal values (and not just a set of conven-
tions, such as the national agreement to drive on the right or the left side
of the street), Netiquette is a case in point.4542William Alton Kelso, 1978, American Democratic Theory: Pluralism and Its Critics, Westport,Conn.:  Greenwood Press; Roman Herzog, 1987,  ÒPluralismus, pluralistische Gesellschaft,Ó
Evangelisches Staatslexikon, Vol. 2, Roman Herzog et al., eds., 2539-2547, Stuttgart: Kreuz-Verlag.43Benjamin B. Barber. 1998. ÒPangloss, Pandora or Jefferson? Three Scenarios for the Fu-ture of Technology and Democracy,Ó in Raymond Plant, Frank Gregory, and Alan Brier,eds., Information Technology: The Public Issues, Manchester, England: Manchester University
Press, 177-191.44See Chapter 4.45Its contents are repeated by Sally Hambridge, ÒNetiquette Guidelines,Ó available onlineat <http://www.cybernothing.org/cno/docs/rfc1855.html> (31.03.00).Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.UNDERSTANDING LOCAL VALUES AND HOW THEY ARE AFFECTED65Finally, global networks are de-contextualizers.46  Global networks
promote social interaction, but these interactions are more context-free
than any known before.  The typical use of global networks is to retrieve

information.  There is no direct social contact between the person offering

the content and the person accessing it; in most cases, the content pro-
vider does little more than count the number of hits.  In mailing lists,

news groups, or chat rooms, the user has the option to respond, but the
response is in writing, and only chat rooms allow real-time exchange.
Meanwhile, the social exchange that occurs in global networks is largely
unnoticed by third parties.  If the individuals in communication are con-

cerned about privacy, they can even encrypt the message.  If they seek

anonymity, they can use pseudonyms or remailers.  But even if they take

none of these precautions, the sheer amount of communication over glo-
bal networks makes it impractical to control or even observe it.All this may threaten local values, as they must be embedded in andprotected by formal and informal institutions.  And insofar as these insti-

tutions rely on third-party scrutiny and enforcement, it is hard to apply
them within global networks.  Even where local values have been im-

planted in the conscience of the individual, they are not Internet-proof.
For example, psychological research indicates that people pay less atten-
tion to social mores and conventions when they communicate electroni-
cally than in communicating face-to-face.  Other work suggests that the

more the situation isolates someone from the individuals that he or she
affects, the more the person is comfortable in seeking a short-term advan-
tage.473.6.3Potential Impacts on the Local Set of Values
The foregoing discussion provides a starting point for assessing howreal the danger is that global networks will erode current local values. If
the globalization of a value actually occurs, it obviously replaces a local
value that differs from it.  For example, it is likely that the proscription of

all forms of child pornography will, over time, extend to all societies.  If

value-pluralizing influences are at work, the legal and social institutions
protecting local values will be subject to competitive pressures, which may
also result in forcing change.  For example, the European commitment to
46Starr Roxanne Hiltz and Murray Turoff, 1993, The Network Nation: Human Communica-tion via Computer, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press; Kiesler, Siegel and McGuire (supra note  14);Turkle (supra note 14).47Joachim Weiman, 1997, ÒIndividual Behavior in a Free Riding Experiment,Ó Journal ofPublic Economics 54:185-200; Iris Bohnet, 1997, 
Kooperation und KommunikationMohr.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESprotecting individualsÕ private information from corporate misuse is put-ting pressure on U.S. institutions to conform.  In both instances, if an in-

fluential part of the population no longer believes that the traditional set
of values should be upheld, a political process can be triggered that leads
to their abolition or change.The privacy example above illustrates two forces at work in effectingchange.  Making the U.S. population, or influential segments of it, aware

of the greater protection for individual privacy provided in Europe can
lead people to press for similar protections in the United States.  At the

same time, U.S. commercial interests may be moved to encourage the pre-
scribed institutional change in order to open European markets to Ameri-
can e-commerce.Assessing the local consequences of homogenizationÑthe conver-
gence of Internet values that is driven by the historical and hegemonic
influence of the United States on its structureÑis somewhat more diffi-
cult because it is hard to separate transient influences from longer-term
change.  In the short run, Internet language and content may be domi-

nated by U.S. interests, and it is certainly conceivable that local patterns of
communication and business practices will be affected accordingly.  In

the long run, however, it is entirely possible that the deeper penetration
of global networks into local societies may allow for local adaptation that
will enable the preservation of local institutions, and indeed, perhaps even
increase their effectiveness.The erosion of the value orientation of individuals is much more likelythan the erosion of institutions.  The former depends less on globalization

than on pluralization, homogenization, and, above all, decon-
textualization.  These phenomena tend to make a personÕs value orienta-

tion less firm.  The individual begins to doubt the legitimacy of a tradi-

tional value, and if the alternative value encourages actions that are
consistent with personal interest, it might appear more attractive and even
guide the personÕs behavior.  But behavior in very specific circumstances
is only loosely tied to attitude,48 and this kind of ÒtransgressionÓ may
only occur when the person is protected by the anonymity of the Internet.However, it is also possible that the network influence will be muchstronger.  The values of an individual are the result of a learning process.

His or her contact with different value systems encountered in using global48Icek Ajzen and Martin Fishbein, 1977, ÒAttitude-Behavior Relations: A TheoreticalAnalysis and Review of Empirical Research,Ó Psychological Bulletin 84:888-918; Icek Ajzenand Thomas J.  Madden, ÒPrediction of Goal Directed Behavior: Attitudes, Intentions, and
Perceived Behavioral Control,Ó Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 22:453-474.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.UNDERSTANDING LOCAL VALUES AND HOW THEY ARE AFFECTED67networks may start a new learning process, at the end of which the tradi-tional value is strongly diminished in the individualÕs own value system.Global networks can also have the opposite effectÑstrengthening
oneÕs original values.  This is obvious where global networks allow terri-

torially scattered groups to maintain social ties.  Community without pro-

pinquity becomes a viable option.49 And global networks are not only
pluralizers and de-contextualizers; they also give individuals new options
for participation in social life and political decisionmaking.50Advocacycoalitions have never before been so easy to build, and global networks
make it much easier for the average citizen to gain access to government
information.51  All this helps create a greater sense of responsibility.
The impact of global networks on local values need not be reduced tothe simple dichotomy of erosion or corroboration.  The use of these net-

works can also lead to the modification of values or to the rebalancing of
the set of values.  Although this involves a complicated process of un-

learning and relearning, it is an attractive possibility from a political point
of view in that it can provide an evolutionary path to a more appropriate
or legitimate set.The problem, of course, is that there is no guarantee that the new setof substantive values will be either more appropriate or more legitimate.
During their histories, both U.S. and German society and state have man-
aged to promote coexistence and cooperation within their societies with a
small set of substantial values and a highly developed set of formal val-
ues.  Unlike traditional societies that rely on strong ties among their mem-

bers, modern societies such as these two achieve cohesion among a large
number of persons with ties that are deliberately weak rather than
strong.52  In such societies, one does not expect an occasional business
partner to help if oneÕs family is in distressÑit is enough if the person
pays his or her bills.  Strong ties are limited to very small groupings: the
49Saskia Sassen, 2000, ÒThe Impact of the Internet on Sovereignty: Unfounded and RealWorries,Ó in Christoph Engel and Kenneth H. Keller eds., Understanding the Impact of GlobalNetworks on Local Social, Political and Cultural Values, Baden-Baden: Nomos, pp. 197-200;
Thompson (supra note 18).50Anthony Downs, 1991, ÒSocial Values and Democracy,Ó in Kristen R. Monroe, ed., TheEconomic Approach to Politics: A Critical Reassesment of the Theory of Rational Action, New York:Harper Collins, pp. 143-170;  Miles Kahler, 2000, ÒInformation Networks and Global Poli-
tics,Ó in Christoph Engel and Kenneth H. Keller eds., Understanding the Impact of Global Net-works on Local Social, Political and Cultural Values, Baden-Baden: Nomos, pp. 141-157.
51See Chapter 4.52Siegwart Lindenberg. 1988. ÒContractual Relations and Weak Solidarity,Ó Journal of Insti-tutional and Theoretical Economics 144:39-58.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUEScore family, oneÕs closest friends, sometimes oneÕs closest colleagues atwork.Precisely because global networks confront a person with the relativ-ity of value systems, and the disconcerting effects of de-contextualization,
there is a danger that individuals will react by seeking the comfort of a
more structured, if simplistic, value system.  They might be lured into

replacing apparently eroded and weak ties with ones that are newly built
and strong, although often unidimensional.  The danger is all the more

real if it is linked to institutions that typically redistribute wealth or power.

Political opportunists might well exploit the situation by denouncing as a
vacuum in values what is actually no more than a characteristic of mod-
ern life.3.6.4Types of Contact with Foreign Sets of Values
The pluralizing and homogenizing effects of global networks dependon the nature of the contact between individual and foreign sets of values.
In principle, global networks are weaker in this respect than the tradi-
tional media.  Because the technology of global networks (e.g., search en-
gines) allows users to specify the information they want to retrieve, there
is less likelihood they will be exposed to information that does not fit the
specification.  Although it is true that todayÕs users may be exposed to

information (and hence to values) they did not seek when they follow a
link, subscribe to a mailing list, or participate in a news group, technologi-
cal trends toward greater specificity and precision in information retrieval
suggest that inadvertent exposure will be less likely as time goes on.  Thus,

such exposure will be sporadic rather than systematic.Furthermore, Internet users need not be passive.  If they dislike whatthey see, they are not only theoretically free to turn away but probably
inclined to do so.  Technically, an information provider may be able to use

ÒpushÓ technologies to force messages onto a subscriberÕs screen, but there
is still a long way to go before global networks are transformed into pro-
paganda machines.Still, the exposure to other values does have effects.  For example,
exposure to a different set of values can be significant for someone whose
commitment to traditional values has been weakened.  In this case, the

different set may be attractive simply as a replacement.  In such circum-

stances, the Internet becomes the medium for a conscious learning pro-
cess.  Global networks also help that process gain social momentum, as

they make it easy and inexpensive to spread information challenging tra-
ditional values among others who are doubtful.There is another situation in which the impact of exposure to unfamil-iar ideas is subtler: A person may not realize the extent to which the les-Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.UNDERSTANDING LOCAL VALUES AND HOW THEY ARE AFFECTED69sons of a different value system have been absorbed.  Only later will the
individual come to recognize the contradictions between the implicit net-
work value system and his or her traditional system.  Such learning with-

out attention is typical if values are embedded in apparently neutral con-
tentsÑsuch as in the goods and services shaped by foreign value systems.For instance, the cookies set by amazon.com to trace customer pur-chasing patterns give rise to a convenient service through which custom-
ers logging onto the site are made aware of new books that might interest
them.  It was certainly easier for a service based on this technology to

develop in the United States, where the protection of privacy is not as
high a priority as it is in Germany.  However, once they have enjoyed the

convenience of the service, people in societies that may be more conscious
of privacy as an important value may nevertheless view it in less absolute
terms and come to believe that it is a tradable right, well worth relinquish-
ing in particular circumstances.Although the possibility of eroding traditional values should not beoverstated, learning a new value system does not lead inexorably to the
replacement of traditional values.  The real change brought about by glo-
bal networks may be the realization that modern life encourages, and of-
ten requires, living with multiple value systems.3.6.5Three Illustrative Examples
Three examples may serve to illustrate the points made in this chap-ter.  The first is consumer protection.  In general, the German legislature

and courts have been more active in protecting consumers against unethi-
cal entrepreneurs than their U.S. counterparts.  A consumer has a week to

withdraw from a contract that has not been concluded in the premises of
the provider or that the consumer has not solicited, and standard terms
come under the close scrutiny of the courts.  Marketing material is illegal
if even a small fraction of those exposed to it are misled by its statements.
These rules are an attempt to balance freedom of contract with protection
of naŁve consumersÑto balance autonomy and paternalism.  But in a glo-

balized Internet-based market, when German customers buy goods and
services over the Internet they can no longer be sure that a German court
will be able or willing to protect them in the same way.A second example relates to the limitations of copyright protection.As long as hard copies were the only meaningful way to distribute intel-
lectual or artistic works, a compromise between the interests of the author
and of the public could be achieved: once a hard copy was sold, its owner
was generally free to use it and to hand it over to third parties, and Òfair
useÓ exceptions allowed individuals to make copies or quote lengthy pas-
sages of works.  As more works begin to appear in electronic form, the
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESBOX 3.3  Bavaria Versus CompuServe
In November 1995, the Bavarian criminal-investigation authorities in-formed Felix Somm, head of CompuServe Germany GmbH, that five
newsgroups with child-pornography content were being carried on theservers of CompuServe Inc.  A month later, the prosecuting authorities de-livered a list of another 282 newsgroups that, the state contended, dis-
played sexually oriented content on the Internet that was morally harmfulto youth.  Somm informed the parent company, which reacted promptly
and blocked all the identified newsgroups immediately.While the child-pornography newsgroups remained permanentlyblocked, the newsgroups containing ÒsoftÓ sexual content were deblockedafter CompuServe Inc.  and CompuServe Germany GmbH provided their

members with Òchild safeguard softwareÓ that enabled parents to blocksuch content.  In the months following, however, the investigating authori-
ties retrieved individual news articles with hard-pornographic content from
the news servers of CompuServe Inc.In May 1998, a Munich Municipal Court sentenced Felix Somm to 2yearsÕ probation and fined him DM 100,000 ($56,000) for distributing por-

nographic materialsÑpursuant to sect. 184 para. 3 of the German PenalCodeÑon the Internet.  Despite expert testimony during the trial that it was
not feasible technically to screen Internet material, the judge ruled that
CompuServe should have deleted material known to be offensive.The prosecutors who originally filed the charges later reversed themselves
and argued for acquittal.  A state court overturned the conviction in Novem-

ber 1999 after both the defense and the prosecution argued that the originalcourtÕs verdict was flawed.  In the meantime, the ÒSomm CaseÓ was cited in
the U.S. State DepartmentÕs 1998 human rights report, provoking a national
uproar.  In San Francisco, demonstrations were organized during which par-
ticipants poured out German beer to show their displeasure.SOURCES:  (1) Gunnar Bender. 1998.  ÒBavaria vs. Felix Somm: The Pornography
Conviction of the Former CompuServe Manager,Ó case note in International Journalof Communications Law and Policy 1: 1-4.  Available online at <http://www.digital-
law.net/papers/index.html>.(2) The CompuServe Judgement of the Local Court Munich dated May 28, 1998:
Summary of the facts of the judgement, MultiMedia und Recht 8: 430, available
online at <http://www.jura.uni-wuerzburg.de/sieber/article/article.htm>.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.UNDERSTANDING LOCAL VALUES AND HOW THEY ARE AFFECTED71technical limitations that made the old compromise workable disappear.On one hand, a single digital copy can be multiplied and distributed at
will, without any loss in quality, thus making practical almost any level of
copyright violation.  On the other hand, the ease of tracing or limiting the

use of electronically published material at the source makes it practical to
drastically reduce the scope of public use of the work.  Thus technical

changes are forcing legal institutions to forge a new balance between the
rights of author and public.53A third example is provided by new technologies that offer a strongermeans of enforcement for local values.  Take the desire of many Ameri-

cans to ban nudity and sexually explicit material from the Internet, or the
desire of many Germans to do the same with the portrayal of violence.  At

first glance, from a local viewpoint, there appears to be no rebalancing of
interests at issue.  Social norms already strongly limit broadcasting of

nudity and sexually explicit material in the United States and of violence
in Germany.  To a considerable extent, these norms are even embedded in

civil and criminal codes.  Internet technology makes access to foreign sites

with the locally restricted content easy, but there are some tools that can
help localities deny or restrict access; hosts and Internet Service Providers
can be compelled to prevent their customers from accessing sites with the
locally banned content.Box 3.3 and Box 3.4 provide examples of governments seeking to regu-late content of foreign origin. Box 3.5 describes some of the tools that might
be used to do so.But a closer look suggests that, as a practical matter, there has been areal change.  In the past, practical limitations on enforcing the majorityÕs

norms provided a certain latitude for local minoritiesÑthose who chose
not to conform to the normsÑto evade detection.  This led, de facto, to a

balance between majority and minority rights that was not necessarily
provided for de jure.  The new technologies tend to reduce that leeway

because they allow for more effective monitoring and control.  Given that

the balance between majority and minority rights was not explicit to be-
gin with, it is not easy to restore when technological advances upset it.
We have yet to see whether a networked world can find acceptable ways
of achieving such a balance without appearing to compromise the values
that gave rise to the original norms and legal structures.53See for example, Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National ResearchCouncil, 2000, The Digital Dilemma: Intellectual Property in the Information Age,  Washington,D.C.: National Academy Press.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESBOX 3.4  Transnational Jurisdictional Issues in Cyberspace
In December 2000, the German Supreme Court upheld the convictionof a German-born Australian citizen, Frederick Toben, who had been found
guilty of denying the existence of the Holocaust on a Web site that heoperated in Australia.  The court held further that German law can apply to
foreigners who post Web content in other countries if that content can be
accessed in Germany.  However, while Toben could face extradition to
Germany, to date it has not made such a request.1An Italian prosecutor sought criminal action for libel and defamation
against an unknown person for postings on a Web site based in Israel.Following an Italian divorce involving a couple with two children, themother moved to Israel with their daughters (without the fatherÕs consent)
and married another man.  The daughters were eventually located and
returned to Italy, after which statements and images related to the incidentbegan appearing on a Web site in Israel.  In the words of the court, this

Web site contained Òextremely negative opinions on [the father]Õs charac-ter and actions (as well as on the work of the Italian judicial authorities)and were accompanied by messages inviting Jews to ÔfreeÕ the two under-
age girls, Ôheld captiveÕ by their father, who prevented them from profess-
ing Judaism.ÓWhile a lower court dismissed the prosecutionÕs case on the groundsthat it lacked jurisdiction because of the extraterritorial publication of thematerial in question, a higher court disagreed, reasoning that defamation isan event in which there exists an action (the posting of the comments) and
an outcome (somebody reading them).  Since the outcome in this case
(viewing the Web site) occurred in Italy, the court concluded that there wassufficient jurisdiction to hear the prosecutorÕs case.1See <http://www.wired.com/news/politics/0,1283,40669,00.html>.SOURCE:  Matt Gallaway, ÒInternational Jurisdiction Soup,Ó February 27, 2001.  Avail-
able online at <http://www.ecompany.com/articles/web/print/0,1650,9579,FF.html>.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.UNDERSTANDING LOCAL VALUES AND HOW THEY ARE AFFECTED73BOX 3.5  Automated Tools to Deny Access to Forbidden
Internet ContentSoftware systems commonly known as filters are designed to block useraccess to particular Internet material while allowing all other material topass.  In general, filters can employ any of a number of techniques, singly
or in combination.One technique is to block material-specific domain names (e.g., every-thing that might otherwise be accessible from the domain Òexample.comÓ)
or selected pages within a given domain but not other pages within that
domain.  Lists of inappropriate sites and Web pages are pre-compiled.  A
filter checks a request for a certain Web page against such a list, and if therequested page is on the list, it is blocked.  In addition, sites to which a

suspect site links may also be blocked.A second technique is for a filter to examine the content of material thathas been requested in real time (Òon-the-flyÓ) for judgments of inappropri-
ateness.  If that content is deemed inappropriate by the program that ana-
lyzes it, its display is blocked.  The content may be examined for certain
keywords that are deemed inappropriate (e.g., if the requested page con-
tains the word Òbomb-makingÓ), or an image can be processed by an im-age-recognition program that checks for naked people or for Nazi swasti-
kas.  (A related variant of this technique is to block the use of certain terms

in search engines.)A third technique is to accept or reject material based on the content ofa ÒtagÓ that is associated with a given Web page.  Such a tag is analogous

to the rating on a TV show that indicates if it contains sexual activity, nu-
dity, or violence. Depending on the setting on the filter, the viewer may ormay not gain access to material that is tagged in certain ways.Note that the effectiveness of this technique depends on a large volumeof Internet content being labeled.  If a large volume of Internet material is
untagged, and the filter is set to pass all untagged material, the user will see
a great deal of objectionable material, and hence the filter is relativelyuseless.  If the filter is set to block all untagged material, the user will be
blocked from a great deal of unobjectionable material, and hence the filter

is overly restrictive.The vast majority of filters act to block access to specific Web sites(though these sites may be specified as a class).  In addition, some filters

provide the capability to block the access of an individual (e.g., a minor) toother common Internet services, such as interactive services (e.g., e-mail,chat rooms), newsgroups, file downloading, or even e-commerce with
credit card usage.For a more detailed discussion of filters, see CSTB, National ResearchCouncil, Youth, Pornography, and the Internet: Can We Provide Sound
Choices for a Safe Environment?, forthcoming.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.744Democracy and Political Institutions4.1DEMOCRACY, POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS, AND POWER
For those worried about the impact of global networks on local val-ues, political institutions are a tool for coping with the problem.  But the

existing political institutions are themselves affected by the networks.
Understanding how and why this is so is the aim of this chapter.Some definitions are useful as a starting point.  Power is the ability to
impose a solution on others.  It applies both within and outside existing

political institutions, with or without a legitimate basis and balanced or
not by the power of other actors or interests.  By contrast, a political insti-

tution is an instrumental notion.  The creation of political institutions pre-

sumes that there are problems to be solved by a consciously created gov-
ernmentÑa polityÑrather than by social institutions or processes.  And it

further presumes that the institutions act as agents for a collective entity
with defined geographical and subject-matter jurisdiction.  In this con-

text, democracy comprises a specific set of publicly determined political
institutions, in contrast to technocratic government or despotism.Democracy can also be understood as a normative indicator of thepolitical legitimacy of a system or process.  But legitimacy is a complex

concept that requires a balance between effectiveness and openness of
governance.  This balance depends on the size and shape of the polity and

on the character of the political problems to be solved.1  Because any given
1Seyla Benhabib, ed. 1996. ÒToward a Deliberative Model of Democratic Legitimacy,ÓDemocracy and Difference.  Contesting the Boundaries of the Political,
 68-94, 69. Princeton, N.J.
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DEMOCRACY AND POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS75arrangement of political institutions has implications for power and de-mocracy, this chapter addresses the three notions jointly.4.2THE IMPACT OF THE INTERNET ON DEMOCRACY,
POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS, AND POWERThe impact of the Internet on democracy, political institutions, andpower is complex.  Moreover, it is a work in progress.  Clearly, global

networks have the potential to change political arenas, the actors within
them, the processes of politics, and the tools of governance.  They may

even change the character of political conflicts and the cognitive frame-
works or normative beliefs that drive those conflicts.  To be sure, not all

institutions, actors, and processes are equally affected, but that fact in it-
self is a motivation for examining the nature of these impacts in some
detail.4.2.1Complexity and Uncertainty
As discussed in Chapter 2, global networks are themselves still in astate of continual development.  In addition, a variety of organizations

are experimenting with different ways of interacting through networks
and exploring a variety of (as yet unproven) business models.  Many

Internet services are still struggling to achieve profitable status, so their
future is uncertain.  The optimal technical and economic strategies for

broadband transmissions at the local levelÑthe so-called Òlast mileÓ prob-
lemÑare also unsettled.2  Such dynamism and uncertainty make large-
scale outcomes difficult to predict.  For example, how completely will the

Internet penetrate each society?  At what points will e-commerce activi-

ties saturate their U.S. markets?  How quickly will Germany catch up to

the United States?  These factors, in turn, will affect how political institu-

tions and power relationships evolve.There are larger issues and conflicts as well, as evidenced by the con-tinuing battle between those who believe the Internet should be priva-
tized and those who believe it should be managed in an open and egali-
tarian manner.  Furthermore, it is hard to predict whether the attempts to

re-nationalize the InternetÑthat is, to reverse the globalizing trend using
technical or legal tools in order to serve national cultural, social, and eco-
nomic needsÑwill succeed in some or any countries.  It is reasonable to

expect, however, that political actors will try to influence Internet devel-
opmentÑprecisely because political institutions are affected by it.2See for example, Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National ResearchCouncil, 2002, Broadband: Bringing Home the Bits, in press.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESThese reciprocal influences are clearly very important, as pointed outin Chapter 1.  Global networks create and constrain opportunities for

policymakers, who respond by trying to shape the changes to their ad-
vantage.  In the United States and Germany, the historical and technologi-

cal starting points are very different, so global networks can easily trigger
very different structural change in each of the two countries.  An analysis

is useful here not so much as a way of predicting the outcome in either
country but as a way of describing the potential of global networks to
change the political process in any polity (while acknowledging the unique
characteristics of the United States and Germany).4.2.2Political Arenas
The term Òpolitical arenaÓ refers to a set of formal and informal institu-tions that serves as a framework for policymaking and to which both public
and private actors have access.  The traditional political arena is the nation

state, which can be affected by many characteristics of the Internet.  Because

the Internet is global in reach, it can bring citizens of many nations into
contact with one another.  Because the costs of Internet access are low (and
getting lower over time), more people within each nation have access to it.
Because its architecture supports a myriad of applications, there are strong
incentives for many parties to access it.  Because its management is decen-

tralized, operational control from a central organization is essentially im-
possible to achieve.  And because of technical advances, Internet communi-

cations can be conducted in ways that are more secure, secret, and
anonymous than other communications have been in the past.Individually and jointly, these characteristics challenge some of thetraditional roles and powers of the nation state.  Global networks are a

medium for and a factor in globalization.  They induce change in the po-

litical arena, and can bring it about as well.If the changes render a particular political arenaÑa locality, region,or even a nation-stateÑless able to deal with some issues, policymakers
may choose to transfer those issues to another political arena that seems
better adapted to the task.  The development of public international law is

an early example of this kind of globalization of the political arena.  Sov-

ereign states react to a new challenge by negotiating an international treaty
or setting up an international organization, thereby creatingÑat least for
the issues at handÑa global political arena.3 In fact, there are a number of
3Klaus W. Grewlich. 2000. ÒConflict and Good Governance in ÔCyberspace,ÕÓ in ChristophEngel and Kenneth Keller, eds., Governance of Global Networks in the Light of Differing LocalValues, Law and Economics of International Telecommunications, Vol. 43. Baden-Baden:Nomos, 237-264, 239.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DEMOCRACY AND POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS77examples of global institutions created in the past, under somewhat dif-ferent stimuli, that can be adapted to address some of the current prob-
lems arising from global networks.  As early as 1910, for example, a treaty

was concluded to combat the distribution of Òillicit papers, drawings, pic-
tures or objects that have an international characterÓ;4 today the treaty
applies to electronic dissemination as well.International treaties have not generally been so readily adapted,
however.  The World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), for ex-

ample, found it necessary in 1996 to propose a new treaty that would
address the special problems of protecting copyright on the Internet.  In-

terestingly, this was a case in which the instruments provided in the inter-
national political arena effectively finessed the national political process.
Those interested in extended copyright protection lost the battle in the
U.S. Congress.  But they basically succeeded in the WIPO, and Congress

ratified the outcome when it was presented to that body in the form of an
international treaty.But international political arenas encompass more than public inter-national law.  Government agencies (e.g., the U.S. Trade Representative)

promote international trade.  The United Nations (UN) provides a forum
for high-level international discussions and the application of political
pressure.  And non-public entities play important roles as well.  For ex-

ample, industry associations from many industrialized countries have ne-
gotiated an international uniform commercial code for electronic trade.  A

second example is the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and

Numbers (ICANN), whose role is to make decisions about top-level do-
main names; this entity may become a nucleus for Internet regulation at a
much broader scale in the future.5Global networks not only spur the development of global politicalarenas but simultaneously give local political arenas more leverage.  Local
community networks, such as the Cleveland Free-Net and the Amsterdam

City Web, were the forerunners of digital communities that serve local
(physical) communities (Box 4.1).4Treaty of 04.05.1910, RGBl. 1911, 209, as well as protocol of 04.05.1949, UNTS 30, 3 con-solidated edition UNTS 47, 159.  The Federal Republic has not yet signed the changed treaty,
however.5For details, see Klaus W. Grewlich, 1999, ÒGovernance in Cyberspace.  Access and Public
Interest in Global Communications,Ó Law and Electronic Commerce 9: 193-216, The Hague;and, critically, Milton Mueller, 1999, ÒICANN and Internet Governance.  Sorting Through

the Debris of Self-Regulation,Ó Info 1:497-520; and Laurence R. Helfer and Graeme B.
Dinwoodie, 2001, ÒDesigning Non-National Systems: The Case of the Uniform DomainName Dispute Resolution Policy,Ó William & Mary Law Review 43, October.
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESBOX 4.1  Participation in the Local CommunityÑ
The Cleveland Free-Net, Boulder Community Network, andDigital City AmsterdamAs the Internet has become more widely used by private households inthe United States and elsewhere in the world, community information sys-
tems based in cities and regions have been established to serve them.  Such
ÒFree-NetsÓ are typically text-oriented and use a limited low-tech approachfor individualsÕ free access from home.
The first such system was the Cleveland Free-Net, which went online on
July 16, 1986.  It was rooted in the Case Western Reserve University«s
Faculty of Medicine, where doctors, students, and patients successfullyexperimented with electronic bulletin boards that gave them the opportu-
nity to enter into a continuing dialogue on issues of health.  As the date
indicates, the Free-Net was launched long before the World Wide Webtook over after 1991, turning the Internet into an easy accessible informa-tion and entertainment tool.Free-Nets were, in the American tradition of community organizing, afirst ambitious attempt to bring networks to the public; they are open com-puter systems that give free access to community news and information, aswell as basic entry to the Internet.  They have elements of an Òelectronic
town,Ó as they usually sport post offices for e-mail, libraries for research,and bulletin boards for community events, all set up in cooperation withcity administrations, community counsels, private interest groups,churches, and others.  Free-Nets have not always lived up to their envi-
sioned character as new public spaces, however.  Contrary to the hopes of
many community activists, discussion groups all too often do not deal withlocal affairs but are centered on private interests such as computers andhobbies.  In addition, technical problems such as inadequate bandwidth
and storage capacity have led many interest groups to leave the Free-Netsand sign up with commercial online services.With the advent of the World Wide Web, networks like the BoulderCommunity Network and the Digital City Amsterdam (De DegetaleStedeling) have emerged.  Their aim is not to provide basic access to a
network but to select and aggregate local information for people who arealready connected to the Internet.  Typically, they contain job offers or
information on spare-time activities and upcoming social events.  Addi-
tionally, they feature links to institutions that promote civic participationÑe.g., nonprofit groupsÑand such institutions are actively encouraged topost relevant information on the local network site.Usually, these newer forms of city nets do not provide the means forindividuals to communicate via newsgroups.  That is seen by many as a
major obstacle to their active promotion of community spirit.  Thus, at least
at present, no more than about 1 percent of the U.S. population seems tobe reached by community nets.  More and more, commercial services like
America Online (AOL) have taken over the task of managing city nets byincorporating local windows into their content.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DEMOCRACY AND POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS79Moreover, the easy and inexpensive price of entry into the Internetallows community without propinquity.6  It has become easier to create
political groupingsÑpolitical arenasÑalong substantive rather than geo-
graphical lines.  What has generally been available for professional groups

is now spreading into other kinds of affinity groups based on particular
political issues, ethnic identities, avocations, and casual interests or hob-
bies.  USENET newsgroups were the first manifestation of this trend, and

the proliferation of such groups continues unabated.This trend raises some concerns, however: if these groups isolate them-selves from the larger community, the domain of traditional politics might
shrink drastically; or, if the groups become dominant actors in the national
political arena, the political process could be reduced to little more than a
battle of single interests.  A further concern is that these groups, by their

reach and technical capacity to gather, organize, and use information, may
create de facto challenges to government by assuming some roles that are
usually associated with government actors.  For example, organizations like

the Cyber Angels function as a kind of private attorney general.  Credit-

card organizations replace legal consumer protection through their com-
mercial charge-back systems.  Credit-rating agencies assume de facto regu-

latory power over the management of credit risk.Sometimes the nation-state has found it wise to ignore these develop-
ments or, more to the point, has allowed them to take over the roles they
have assumed by not challenging them.  Yet typically these groups do not

entirely replace existing institutions.  Together they create a fractionated

system that provides neither equal protection nor efficient service; in some
instances, when several such groups emerge simultaneously, they present
competitive structures whose authority and responsibility are not well de-
fined.  A challenge for the future will be to sort out these relationships in

much the same way as the member states of the European Community, and
the state and federal governments in the United States, have had to do.4.2.3Political Actors
Political arenas are populated by political actors who may function inseveral arenas at the same time,7 and global networks have made such
multiple opportunities increasingly possible.  But the networks have also
expanded the opportunities for new political actors.  They have made it
6Michael Thompson. 2000. ÒGlobal Networks and Local Cultures: What Are the Mis-matches and What Can Be Done about Them?,Ó in Christoph Engel and Kenneth H. Keller,eds., Understanding the Impact of Global Networks on Local Social, Political and Cultural Values,2000, 113-129, 123.7Fritz W. Scharpf. 1997.  ÒGames Real Actors Play
.Ó  Actor-Centered Institutionalism in Policy
Research 51.
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESmore productive for organizationsÑsuch as the currently ubiquitousÒnongovernmental organizationsÓÑto participate as well.  Thus, the term

ÒactorsÓ encompasses both individualsÑcitizens, members of organiza-
tions, ad hoc participants in movementsÑand organizations that promote
an agenda or participate in a political process as a coherent entity.  Like

Russian matryoshka dolls-within-dolls, these organizational actors canfunction as whole entities or as a collection of constituentsÑindividual
actorsÑeach potentially acting as they see fit.These organizationsÑpolitical parties, trade unions, and more looselytied collectives such as issue-based movementsÑmust now deal with indi-
vidual-member actors who are increasingly empowered by technology.

Since it is technically and economically so easy, constituencies of various
organizations can insist on being better and more quickly informed, and
then use that information to increase their influence in the management of
the organization.  On the other hand, the very same information technolo-

gies that increase the effective power of an organizationÕs membership also
make it easier for members to leave the organization and re-form around
more narrowly defined issues and interests; ironically, however, the more
credible the threat to exit, the more influential oneÕs voice may become
within the organization.8 Individuals, whether members or not, can alsorefocus the strength of the large group by forming ad hoc coalitions or
loosely knit networks of actors.  (See, for example, Box 4.2.)
Of course, the leaders of either traditional organizations or the newerInternet-spawned groups (whether part of formal management structures
or an informal leadership hierarchy) need not be passive either.  The new

technologies give them more ways to respond to their constituencies by
allowing voices to be heard and to earn credibility with their constituen-
cies through better communication of their positions and ideas.  How

these factors ultimately play out, and whether they lead to a strengthen-
ing or weakening of established organizations, is likely to be determined
on a case-by-case basis.  For example, established organizations tend to

have easier access to power and money.  On the other hand, they are

frequently less flexible in addressing new challenges.  Which of these two

factors dominates will vary from one situation to another.The number of organizations that count as new political actors is alsogrowing.9 Once global networks spread over a country, the transaction
costs for setting up any new group fall dramatically.  A mailing list is
8Albert O. Hirschman.  1970.  
Exit, Voice, and Loyalty.  Responses to Decline in Firms, Orga-
nizations, and States. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.9Klaus W. Grewlich. 2000. ÒConflict and Good Governance in ÔCyberspace,Ó in ChristophEngel and Kenneth Keller, eds., Governance of Global Networks in the Light of Differing LocalValues, Baden-Baden: Nomos, 237-264, 251.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DEMOCRACY AND POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS81BOX 4.2  The Multilateral Agreement on Investment
Struck DownIn 1995, the members of the Organization for Economic Cooperationand Development (OECD), together with eight nonmember states, began
negotiating the Multilateral Agreement on Investment (MAI).  They were
driven by the expectation that adherence to international rules would al-low for greater efficiency and more stable investment flows.
The MAI was meant to go beyond the scope of the existing World TradeOrganization rules and be open to nonmembers as a stand-alone agree-ment.  It would eliminate barriers to international investment-related trade
by opening most economic sectors and natural resources to foreign owner-ship on a nondiscriminatory basis.  It also contained a uniform set of rights
by which individual firms could sue foreign governments before an inter-
national mediation panel in order to protect their investments from volatil-
ity or widely defined Òexpropriation.Ó In addition, no exemption for gov-
ernmental procurement policies or provincial jurisdiction was conceived.Over the course of the negotiations a number of concerns emerged inpublic debate, put forward by nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) suchas Friends of the Earth International, PeoplesÕ Global Action, Public Citizen
Trade Watch, World Economy, the Ecology and Development Association,and the World Wide Fund for Nature International.  They argued that by
acknowledging the right of firms to sue over expropriation, the MAI put
serious constraints on state and local governmentsÕ ability to enforce envi-ronmental laws.  In the same vein, countries would be pressured to reduce
protection of natural resources in order to attract capital in globalized
markets, resulting in a Òrace to the bottomÓ with respect to environmental
standards.This international coalition of environment, development, and consumergroups took advantage of the political instability of the situation while thefinal outcome of the negotiations was still open and exploited the speed ofonline communication to wage a global campaign against the MAI.  It was

largely carried out over the Internet, although it was coupled with influen-tial traditional mass-media coverage.  Seminal newspaper articles appeared
in Le Monde and 
Le Monde Diplomatique as well as in the 
Tageszeitung in
Germany.  Web sites opposed to MAI and regularly looked at by journal-
ists, were established.  They listed trustworthy NGOs and provided in-
depth (though partisan) coverage of the progress of the negotiations as well
as suggestionsÑcomplete with samples of letters to send to elected offi-cials or newspaper editorsÑon how to effectively express opposition.The coalition met with OECD negotiators to present them with resolu-
tions to abandon the MAI, which the government representatives initiallyrejected.  This resulted in even greater organized resistance, backed by
worldwide support over the Internet.  After a three-year period, the nego-

tiations stalled in 1998 and were no longer pursued by the OECD.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESenough for a start, and a quite-professional home page can be preparedon a personal computer.  The political effectiveness of even the most mod-

est effort can be impressive, as evidenced by the successful International
Campaign to Ban Landmines, a project organized almost entirely through
the Internet and spearheaded by an individual without a power base in
established organizations.Until relatively recent times, the difference between political actors andthe public in representative democracies has been fairly well understood
and accepted.  Political actors made decisions for the general public.  Gov-

ernment officials or members of parliament were, of course, directly or in-
directly elected by the public.  However, between elections these officials

relied, for the most part, on intermediariesÑthe media, political organiza-
tions, even spokespersons and publicistsÑto keep in touch with the public.In an information age, global networks have the potential to reduce(or at least change) the role of intermediaries in the political arena.10Broadcasting is being supplemented and sometimes replaced by
narrowcasting.  Networks make it easier to access information directly

and can also make available tailor-made tools for selecting and interpret-
ing information.  Thus, with respect to both the provision and the inter-

pretation of information, the trend appears to be one in which traditional
intermediaries are becoming less important.11  As a result, people will beless willing to pay for their services, with the consequence that they will
be less visible and used still less.On the other hand, networks also facilitate the creation of new inter-mediaries to help people find and evaluate information or express politi-
cal preferences.  Therefore, at the same time, technology creates the po-

tential for direct action (plebiscites) and for new brokers or new political
intermediaries (and the bypassing of old ones) in the political arena.In a world of enormous information surplus, finding reliable infor-mation that is directly related to oneÕs interests presents huge difficulties
for an individual.  TodayÕs search engines (e.g., Google, Yahoo!) are one

obvious manifestation of new intermediaries that help people find infor-
mation.  But there is every reason to expect that more sophisticated search

engines and other intermediary services will help people identify the
kinds of information they need and to evaluate the quality of information10Christoph Engel. 2000. ÒThe Internet and the Nation State,Ó in Christoph Engel andKenneth H. Keller, eds., Understanding the Impact of Global Networks on Local Social, Politicaland Cultural Values, 201-260, 222.  Note also that the situation is quite different in e-com-
merce, where the Internet, and information technology more generally, are increasing theopportunities for intermediation.  See Chapter 7 of this volume.
11Stephen Coleman. 1999. ÒCutting Out the Middle Man: From Virtual Representation toDirect Deliberation,Ó in Barry N. Hague and Brian D. Loader, eds., Digital Democracy, 195-210.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DEMOCRACY AND POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS83that they receive.  This should not be surprising, given that these editorial
functions are being performed today by the editors of newspapers and
magazines and books.  (Of course, new information intermediaries have

an important commercial dimension as well, and to the extent that new
intermediaries are used to support political activity, politics and com-
merce are not mutually exclusive.)The emergence of powerful nongovernmental organizations (NGOs)has been aided in large part by the presence of global networks.  NGOs

too can be viewed as a new kind of intermediary, and networks have
increased their power relative to that of governments.  First, networks

enable NGOs to rapidly assemble large political constituencies that can
bring significant pressure to bear on elected governments.  And second,

networks provide NGOs with rapid access to enormous amounts of rel-
evant information, much of which was previously in the hands of govern-
ments alone.  (Some have noted that networks similarly enhance the

power of governments to assemble and analyze information.  But since

governments had most of the power prior to the wide availability of glo-
bal networks, the result is that the relative powers of governments and
NGOs have shifted in favor of the latter.)As these changes occur, the public has the opportunity to becomemuch more active, either as individuals or through NGOs.  Moreover, the

value of delegating authority to elected representatives or ÒexpertsÓ is
neither as clear nor as accepted.  The technical feasibility of receiving in-

formation from a seemingly unlimited variety of sources in real time, and
being able to express oneÕs view on any issue, also in real time, leads an
increasing number of people to believe that they can understand virtually
any public-policy issue and that direct, popular decisionmaking is a real
option.  Whether this confidence is in fact justified is a different matter

entirely, but such perceptions have a strong effect on the legitimacy
granted by the public to the Òexperts.ÓChanges of this magnitude can affect not only constitutional struc-tures for policymaking; they can also alter the more subtle and informal
structures that are part of a nuanced and unwritten balance in society.
The boundaries become blurred between public and private roles, be-
tween policymaking and the accountability for policy decisions, between
political and social structures.  In Germany, the informal but strong cor-

poratist structure of politics might certainly be affected, as has the cohe-
sion of party politics in the United States.The question, difficult to answer at this time, is whether the disap-pearance of traditional intermediaries will lead to the kind of populist, or
direct, democracy described above, or whether it will instead give rise to
different kinds of intermediation more appropriate to a networked world.
One vision of the future is described in Box 4.3.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESBOX 4.3  Noopolitik and Policy in the Noosphere
With a vast and growing global information infrastructureÑincludingnot only the Internet, but also cable systems, direct broadcast satellites,
cellular phones, and so onÑand a proliferation of organizations that focuson information and communications issues, the new concept ofÒnoopolitikÓ has arisen.  Noopolitik is foreign policy for an Information
Age.  It emphasizes the primacy of ideas, values, norms, laws, and ethics
that would be implemented through ÒsoftÓ rather than 
ÒhardÓ power.
Those who promote noopolitik say it is guided by the conviction thatright makes might, rather than the reverse.  It would take into account both
state and non-state actors and the need for them to work together, but it
would not be state-centric.  Although national interests would be recog-

nized in noopolitik, they would be defined as one aspect of the trans-nationally networked ÒfabricÓ in which all individuals and groups are em-
bedded.  While realpolitik tends to empower states, noopolitik will likely

empower networks of state and non-state actors.  Realpolitik pits one stateagainst another, but noopolitik would encourage states to cooperate incoalitions and other mutually beneficial frameworks.Few believe that noopolitik will supplant the realpolitik paradigm in the
near future.  Rather, the two forms are likely to coexist in some rough, edgy
balance that, given the uneven penetration of information technologies
around the world, will vary by region.Noopolitik will be pertinent where technologically advanced societiespredominate, and less so where societies remain state-centric and hierar-
chical.  Noopolitik will be most effective where the prevalence of all man-
ner of media allow many voices to be heard, where nongovernmental or-
ganizations (NGOs) have the capacity to call attention to issues, where the
issues themselves go beyond the limited spheres of national economic,political, and military policy, and where government-NGO relations arecordial.SOURCE:  Adapted (primarily) from the Executive Summary of John Arquilla and
David F.  Ronfeldt, 1999, 
The Emergence of Noopolitik: Toward an American Infor-mation Strategy, RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, California.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DEMOCRACY AND POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS8512Raymund Werle. 2000. ÒThe Impact of Information Networks on the Structure of Politi-cal Systems,Ó in Christoph Engel and Kenneth H. Keller, eds., Understanding the Impact ofGlobal Networks on Local Social, Political and Cultural Values, 159-185, 174.
13Albert O. Hirschman.  1970.  
Exit, Voice, and Loyalty: Responses to Decline in Firms, Orga-nizations, and States.4.2.4Political Process
The global networks that affect political actors also have the potentialto change the political process.  Reduced transaction costs mean that more

voices can make themselves heard before a political decision is taken.12But having voices heard is not the same thing as engaging in dialogue.  At

its worst, the former can result in the empowering of narrower and nar-
rower interests, which then makes it increasingly difficult to reach com-
promises that settle a number of political issues simultaneously.On the other hand, global networks do make it easier for politicalissues to surface.  Traditional political actorsÑand those who have tradi-
tionally controlled the mediaÑare much less able to control the public
agenda when effective, low-cost means of communication are available to
all people.  Ad hoc groups can quickly unveil an issue, putting govern-

ment officials and others into a reactive stance (see Box 4.4 as one ex-
ample).  The Seattle WTO protests also illustrated this point, as did the

campaign undertaken against CNN by veterans when the network erro-
neously reported that the nerve gas sarin had been used during the Viet-
nam War (Box 4.5).  Easier access to information and easier access to po-

litical arenas thus reinforce each other.Global networks not only give the governed new opportunities to beheard; they also make it easier to switch political arenas (a phenomenon
that Hirschman describes as ÒexitÓ).13 Political actors are mobile and can
choose the political arena in which to press their case.  Nongovernmental

organizations promote the protection of Amazon forests by transmitting
aerial photographs of burning forests to their offices in the United States,
which then distribute the information around the world and encourage
other governments to apply pressure on Brazil.  Money can be moved

across national boundaries to markets and venues with more favorable
tax structures.  Businesses can cut the value chain into smaller and smaller

pieces, coordinating their activities through information networks and
optimizing the geographical location of each part.  Nation-states find

themselves negotiating with multinational corporations rather than regu-
lating them.Even individuals gain new exit options.  Physically moving to an-
other country or changing nationality may be as difficult and costly as
before, but Òvirtual migrationÓ is now possible.  Individuals can cut many
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESBOX 4.4  Internet and Rebellion: The Case of Chiapas, Mexico
The Internet has played a decisive role in the ongoing fight in ChiapasÑa state in southern Mexico close to the Guatemalan borderÑbetween asmall number of rebels and the Mexican government.  Chiapas is one of
the poorest regions of the country, with an underdeveloped economic andeducational infrastructure; it is inhabited mainly by indigenous Mayan In-
dians.In an uprising against the poor living conditions and a host of social,economic, and political issuesÑincluding the perceived ÒneoliberalismÓof the 1994 North American Free Trade AgreementÑthe small ZapatistaArmy of National Liberation (EZLN) occupied several cities in Chiapas.
However, what began as a traditional revolt soon turned into what com-
mentators called a ÒnetwarÓÑthe formation of vast transnational network-mediated coalitions capable of waging an informational war against theMexican government and in support of the rebelsÕ cause.
When the rebellion started, the Mexican government tried to find a mili-tary solution and to block information transfer to the outside world.  Be-
cause Mexico is a country with a closely controlled public-television sys-
tem, limiting media coverage was relatively easy to do.  Foreign mainstream
media, such as American television stations, soon lost interest in what ap-peared to be a dwindling local conflict after the initial shootings were over.
However, for some years before the rebellion and continually over itscourse, the ZapatistasÑwho themselves had no direct connection to theInternetÑmade material available to independent journalists and sympa-thetic individuals and groups; they did this through interviews, letters, and,most particularly, large numbers of faxes.  From there, the information was
uploaded to the Internet and rapidly circulated among newsgroups and
other forums for informal discussion or professional assessment.All this outreach finally led to a mass mobilization in support of theEZLN, both on the Internet and in the form of demonstrations in Mexico

City and other major cities around the world.  Faced with international
attention and expressions of solidarity, the Mexican government was forcedto abandon its military approach and undertake negotiations with the
Zapatistas under the scrutiny of the ÒInternet eye.ÓThe conflict is still not settled, though the new Mexican government
appears to be committed to finding a solution.  Today, thousands of Web

sites are devoted to the EZLN«s struggle and to the larger issues of nonvio-lence, minority rights, and self-government.  Interestingly, the online cam-paign has stimulated the Mexican government to establish a Web presence
to offer its own perspective on the conflict.  Various institutions
Ñinclud-ing, for example, the University of TexasÑregularly gather and distributesuch information.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DEMOCRACY AND POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS87of their social ties in the physical environment and replace them with vir-tual connections to epistemic and affinity groups all over the world.  Many

commentators have pointed out how this disengagement is taking its toll
on civil society and the sense of community.144.2.5Governance Tools
Those in power often learn to use new technologies quickly.  This is
likely to be true with the Internet as well, and indeed there are already
signs of it.  Driven by initiatives and directives such as the National Per-

formance Review, the Government Performance and Results Act, and
OMB Circular A-130 (concerning the management of federal informationBOX 4.5  The Marzullo Incident: The Power of One
In 1998 the Cable News Network (CNN), owned by Time Warner Corp.,aired a news-magazine show titled 
ÒNewsstand.Ó In one particular pro-
gram, Newsstand charged that in 1970, during the Vietnam War, the U.S.
Army undertook Operation Tailwind to deliberately drop sarin, a nerve
gas, in Laos to kill American defectors.Tom Marzullo, a former member of U.S. Special Operations Forces in
Vietnam, had learned of CNNÕs interest in Operation Tailwind even beforethe program went on the air.  Having been outraged by earlier CNN stories

about the work of the Special Forces in Vietnam, he independently re-searched Operation Tailwind.  Using little more than his personal com-
puter and online databases, Marzullo scoured official archives and ques-
tioned Special Forces veterans whom he reached via e-mail.  Within days
of the broadcast, he was on the Internet with a full and telling rebuttal.A flurry of e-mails and Internet postings persuasively established thatthe CNN story was highly inaccurate, the product of shoddy research.Within a month, MarzulloÕs Internet campaign succeeded in humbling aworldwide news organization and Time Warner publicly retracted the story
and apologized to the veterans.Retired Major-General Perry M. Smith, a military adviser to CNN who
had not been consulted prior to the showÕs airing, credited his ÒInternetadvisersÓ with persuading him to resign his position at CNN to protest the
showÕs inaccuracy.  Smith
Õs resignation helped further spread this ÒInternetuprisingÓ of Special Forces veterans.
14See, for example, Robert Putnam, 2001, Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of Ameri-can Community, New York: Touchstone Books.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESresources), almost every department of the U.S. government has movedvigorously to develop data banks, mailing lists, and Web pages to facili-
tate communicating with the public.  These efforts, which have generated

a great deal of freely available information, build on the tradition of open-
ness in U.S. society.  But they also serve to create direct links to the public

that effectively bypass the traditional media.Some have argued that if this direct communication with the publicdisplaces or reduces the role of the traditional media, which often serve as
watchdog, it may actually reduce government accountability.  On the

other hand, others argue that media mergers have so concentrated power,
and commercial considerations have so limited in-depth reporting and
analysis, that the print and broadcast media may themselves have be-
come part of the problem.  In any case, it is highly unlikely that the public

would endorse or accept a strategy that consciously limited the right of
the government to communicate directly with its constituents.Obviously, government can also use technologies to learn much moreabout its citizens and their activities, and to try to exercise influence and
control over those activities.  As an example of the latter, broadcast media

have provided a powerful tool for many totalitarian regimes.  Networks,

by contrast, have thus far proven much more resistant to government ef-
forts to bring them under control.The factors underlying such resistance are multiple.  One is the ab-
sence of limitations on signal transmission imposed by distance.  Because

the range of traditional broadcast media is power-constrained, the num-
ber of nodes that must be regulated is limited to those that service a given
geographical area; beyond that area, the laws of physics attenuate the sig-
nal to negligible levels and hence there is no need for regulation.A second factor is the many-to-many character of the Internet.  In an
environment in which the number of suppliers of information can be essen-
tially as large as the number of recipients, suppressing all possible suppli-
ers of a given piece of information is very difficult.  Government has thus

lost, for all practical purposes, the tool of Òpre-publicationÓ censorship.  It

does retain the power to sanction the transmission of information, but such
a power is rather blunt, and its use entails great costs to a government whose
polity is sensitive to the rights of individuals.  (See also Box 4.6.)
The altered role of government in a networked world should not im-ply the demise of governments so much as it does the need for new strat-
egies.  Unilateral state actions need to give way to strategies of negotia-

tion with various social actors.15 Sovereign power does not disappear,
but it becomes more useful in providing leverage than in conferring abso-15Scharpf (supra note 7) 200.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DEMOCRACY AND POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS89lute authority.  In this networked society, governance often involves rec-
ognizing and nudging certain network-related social and economic struc-
tures.  Even in settling political questions, central government is likely to

rely more on self-governance by technical, commercial, or societal bodies
than on detailed regulatory prescriptions.  This is now commonly called

Òhybrid governanceÓ or Òhybrid regulation.Ó16The American system of governance, because it is less hierarchical,already relies on hybrid governance to some extent.  However, German

authorities tend to see major changes, resulting in an altered and more
subsidiary role for government (Gew−hrleistungsverantwortung) in whichit no longer is responsible for the direct provision of all public goods.
Instead, it ensures that autonomous social systems act to provide those
goods.  This changed emphasis can be expected to affect the political pro-

cess and political culture as much as the regulatory framework, but it is
an example of a value shift that may be salutary.These comments should not be seen as implying that governmentsÕreactions to the Internet will necessarily be benign or constructive.  It is

not beyond belief that they may employ traditional command-and-con-BOX 4.6  Publius: A Censorship-proof Internet Publishing System
Publius is a Web publishing system, developed by researchers at AT&Tand New York University, that is highly resistant to censorship and pro-
vides publishers with a high degree of anonymity.  In essence, Publius
encrypts digital content (say, a document), fragments the result, and distrib-utes it among a number of Web servers in such a way that the content can
be reconstructed as long as a certain fraction of the fragments are available.For example, the fragments might be distributed to 100 servers and a per-son able to recover 35 fragments (any 35) would be able to reconstruct the
document.  However, if 34 or fewer fragments were recovered, the content
of the original document could not be determined.The cooperating Web servers in this system are totally passive and can-
not, by themselves, reconstruct the original document.  Therefore any en-
tity that provides publicly accessible storage online for any purpose can beused as a cooperating Web server.  But because multiple servers are needed

to recreate the document, Publius breaks the one-to-one correspondencebetween a Web document and a server.16More on hybrid governance is contained in Chapter 8.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUEStrol regulation, well-suited to the Internet environment or not, to deal withwhat they may see as Internet-related problems.  If and when such actions

occur, they may not serve democratic and freedom-preserving interests.17For example, the U.S. Congress sought to protect minors from exposure to
sexually explicit material on the Internet by passing the Communications
Decency Act of 1996, a statute that was subsequently overturned on Consti-
tutional grounds.  (See Chapter 5 for a more detailed discussion.) In a na-

tion without judicial review of legislative actions, such a law might have
stoodÑdespite its infringements on the free-speech rights of the populace.4.2.6Conflicts
Because global networks reduce many of the constraints of distance,different ideas, attitudes, political convictions, customs, and cultures can
mix in entirely unexpected ways.  The richness and value of this mix is

obvious, but so too is the increased opportunity for conflict.  Conflict, of

course, is possible in any society, but a shared national history and a po-
litical system shaped by debates and compromises over hundreds of years
help to narrow differences and provide incentives for accommodation.
Reopening a debate in an international context, where one nationÕs hard-
won resolution is pitted against anotherÕs, is likely to prove difficult, be-
cause the representatives from each nation who may be charged with re-
solving the conflict are necessarily closely tied to the consensus-building
process within their own national societies.18Adding to the problems of international conflict-resolution that de-rive from the historical and cultural baggage of the interested partiesÑ
that is, the nation-statesÑare the shortcomings of international political
institutions.  First, the administrators and professionals who run interna-
tional organizations, from UN agencies to the WTO, can make no claim to
the legitimacy that comes with election to office; the personnel of such
organizations are appointed to their positions.  There are no truly interna-

tional parliaments, and as long as no supranational or even international
identity emerges, constitutional reform is not likely to change this state of
affairs.  The German public, for example, would hardly be willing to ac-

cept a European Union political decision just because a majority of depu-
ties from other member states agreed to it.17For more discussion on this point, see, for example, part III of A. Michael Froomkin,1998, ÒThe Empire Strikes BackÓ (ÒThe Great Looming Internet IronyÓ), Chi-Kent L. Rev.73:1101.18Miles Kahler. 2000. ÒInformation Networks and Global Politics,Ó in Christoph Engeland Kenneth H. Keller, eds., Understanding the Impact of Global Networks on Local Social, Politi-cal and Cultural Values, 141-157, 146 and 147.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DEMOCRACY AND POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS91Second, the European Union notwithstanding, no international bodyhas the power to actually legislate.  If an international conflict is to be

dealt with by legal rules, these rules must be implemented through each
of the sovereign member states, whose parliaments are usually unwilling
or constitutionally unable to delegate any part of their jurisdiction to an
international body.  But the step from international decision to national

implementation is a precarious one, as much a matter of politics as legal
linkage.A third weakness of the international political arena is the Balkanizednature of its institutions.  The jurisdiction of each rulemaking body is very

narrow, and coordination among them is, for all practical purposes, inef-
fectual.  Therefore the possibilities for linking issues in the give-and-take

of packaging political compromises is difficult to achieve.  For example,

Balkanization of authority means that it is hard to link trade and nontrade
issues, environment and technology transfer, or programming restrictions
and intellectual-property protection.  Furthermore, such powers as com-

pensatory tax relief, commonplace within the nation-state, are also un-
available to international bodies.Finally, it is important to consider the class of conflicts that can arisewhen old values and traditions are challenged by new ideas.19 This is the
pluralizing, or modernizing, effect of global networks.20 The user of glo-
bal networks can be exposed to very different cultures, not merely as an
objective abstraction but as an inherent component of the broad range of
activities and information exchanges that occur through the Net.  To a

great extent, the foreign cultures are experienced rather than merely ob-
served.  One does not need to accept these new values or outlooks in their

entirety, but it becomes more difficult to reject them entirely; thus abso-
lute conviction may give way to a more nuanced and relative perspective.In turn, relativism may present a challenge to oneÕs personal (or group)system of control and accountability.  It is conceivable, and often suggested,

that a response to this challenge will be to force people into narrowly de-
fined epistemic communities, aided by the technology of networks.  Indi-

viduals, for example, might customize their own electronic newspapers to
receive only information of specific interest to them, avoiding serendipi-
tous exposure to information that might challenge their beliefs.Such a response may be feasible from a technical point of view, but itis difficult to conceive of it as a successful coping strategy for the future.19Sherry Turkle.  1995.  
Life on the Screen: Identity in the Age of the Internet, New York: Simon
and Schuster.20Wolfgang Kersting. 2000. ÒGlobal Networks and Local Values.  Some Philosophical Re-marks from an Individualist Point of View,Ó in Christoph Engel and Kenneth H. Keller, eds.,Understanding the Impact of Global Networks on Local Social, Political and Cultural Values, 9-27,14 and 21.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESIn a world in which the separation of the local from the global is increas-ingly difficult, and the commingling of values and cultures is becoming
increasingly evident in the most local of activities, a successful coping
strategy necessarily puts a much higher premium on tolerance.  This

would be not so much because tolerance is a normative value (although it
would clearly qualify as one), but because it is a practical strategy for
coping politically and even economically with the challenges of a modern
world.  Managing the transition to this new ÒmodernityÓ in societies with

vastly different structures may become one of the greatest challenges to
political systems.4.2.7Cognitive Frameworks, Normative Beliefs, and Integration
Normative values allow individuals to give meaning to social reality.Moreover, society organizes itself around shared values.  Common val-

ues, in other words, are a key ingredient in integration.21 And integration
reflects how society and the state are tied together.Social cohesion and integration are unlikely to be deeply affected if asingle local value is challenged or eroded, since a societyÕs set of values
has never been totally stable over time.  Traditional values have been chal-

lenged whenever a sufficiently large stratum of society has been exposed
to different cultures.  But society is an adaptive organism; it adjusts to the

new values, rebalances the old ones, and bends without breaking.But global networks can challenge the adaptive capacity of the sys-tem.  All societies have certain values that are so fundamental for their

self-definition that, if challenged, they can weaken group cohesion.  And

when several such values are challenged simultaneously, the rapid adap-
tation thus required can be highly threatening.  This provides an analyti-

cal yardstick against which to measure the threat that global networks
might present to a given society.Global networks also affect social and political integration becausethey introduce virtual communities and global market opportunities that
can compete with nation-states or local communities for the attention and
loyalty of individuals.  As a result, the nation stateÕs tools for problem

solving become more limited and its power to redistribute wealth dimin-
ishes.  It no longer has a monopoly on its audienceÕs attention, either psy-

chologically or economically.2221Klaus G. Gruner. 1994. ÒCognition and Economic Psychology,Óin Hermann Brandst−tterEssays on Economic Psychology, 91-108.
22Kahler (supra note 18) 147.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DEMOCRACY AND POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS93Given this weakened identification with the state, those who are calledon to pay the bills to provide a social safety net may not be as easily con-
vinced that it is their moral obligation to do so.  Moreover, the legitimacy

of formal political institutions within the nation-state is subject to greater
skepticism as competing loyalties arise.  On the other hand, it is possible

that the easier sharing of information and opportunities for participation
in governance may strengthen the nation-state in time.  And government
can avail itself of the new technological possibilities and try to use them to
reach, even to manipulate, the citizenry.  As with so many other questions

concerning the effects of global networks, the possibilities are clearer than
the actual outcome.4.2.8Global Networks as a Cohesive Force
Global networks do not always threaten values.  Indeed, they can re-
inforce them by providing links to like-minded people who are widely
dispersedÑcommunity without propinquity.  Networks can also provide

a mechanism for highly local or specialized groups to organize around
highly non-global values.23 Consider, for example, a neighborhood asso-
ciation that organizes itself via the Internet to block the establishment of a
solid-waste incinerator.  Not only are political conflicts easier to handle in

a local setting, under the umbrella of well-established political structures,
but the networks empower local constituencies by putting global voices
and global information resources at their disposal.In such a case, global networks may well strengthen local values tothe point that they challenge national values, an ironic reversal in the as-
sumption usually made about the threat of global networks.  Box 4.1 and

Box 4.7 provide illustrations of how global networks are promoting and
building a geographical community.4.2.9Pressures for Change
Because political systems differ, the pressure on any given politicalsystem to adapt in the face of issues raised by global networks differs
greatly from one system to another.  This is obvious if one compares to-

talitarian regimes or fundamentalist states with modern democracies, but
it also holds true among industrialized and democratic countries.  In par-

ticular, Germany has a tradition of fencing political decisions off from
public control and influence to a much greater extent than is the case in
the United States.23Saskia Sassen.  1998.  
Globalization and Its Discontents.  Essays on the New Mobility of Peopleand Money.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESFor example, Germany ordinarily makes little effort to provide free-dom of access to government information, apart from information relat-
ing to environmental issues.  The German political process affords very

few opportunities for public referenda.  And in developing new policies,

the German government negotiates with only a small number of stronglyBOX 4.7  Project Bosnia and Operation Kosovo
Over the last 5 years several dozen law students, engineering students,
law professors, and practicing lawyers in the United States and Europe

have used the Internet to promote human rights, advance the rule of law,facilitate freedom of the press and open media, and encourage economic
development in the Balkans.  Launched at Villanova University School of

Law in January 1996, the project continues under the direction of Dean
Henry H.  Perritt, Jr., Assistant Dean Charles S.  Rudnick, and Director of
Special Projects Harry E. Ashton IV of Chicago-Kent College of Law at the

Illinois Institute of Technology in Chicago.  Students and others associated
with Project Bosnia have connected the Bosnian Constitutional Court andOmbudsman to the Internet, developed a prototype database system for

the Bosnian Ministry of Justice, and established an independent media cen-ter connected to the Internet in Banja Luka in Bosnia.Chicago-KentÕs Operation Kosovo established an Internet-connected da-tabase system for registering refugees and tracking refugee relief before and
during the NATO bombing of Yugoslavia.  It has now extended the data-
base to keep track of war-crimes evidence provided by refugees in inter-

views, making use of digital audio recording, encryption, and geographicinformation modeling technologies.  Operation Kosovo participants have
used distance-learning technologies to make lectures on judicial proce-
dure available to law students, law professors, and judges in Kosovo.  Most
recently, Operation Kosovo participants worked with the Interim Govern-
ment of Kosovo to use Web-based and e-commerce technologies to facili-
tate foreign investment in start-up enterprises in Kosovo.  The project illus-
trates the power of the Internet to promote democracy, develop commerce,and improve the transparency of legal institutions, while also protecting
individualsÕ privacy.
The low cost of the technologies involved made it possible for a handful
of committed people, with only modest funding, to make a difference in a
daunting international crisis.  And they have been working on their own,
albeit in consultation with formal international institutions such as theUnited Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
and the World Bank.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DEMOCRACY AND POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS95organized private actors.  All of these German political practices have
come under pressure from global networks.  By contrast, the United States

has a much stronger tradition of freedom of information, makes more
extensive use of public referenda, and negotiates policy with a wide vari-
ety of interest groups.  Thus the pressures on the U.S. political system for
change are, in this respect, considerably less.The willingness of nations to respond to pressures created by increas-ing internationalization also varies.  Germany, under these kinds of pres-
sures, has had some success in moving beyond its traditional command-
and-control regulation.  The United States, on the other hand, is more

resistant to international pressures generally; its unwillingness to adapt
to global standards when, for example, its social and religious values are
involved may prove to be problematical.  The dispute between the United

States and the European Union over privacy regulations, now resolved in
principle, is a case in point.  (See Chapter 6 in this report for more detailed

discussion.)All democracies balance individualism, hierarchy, and egalitarian
beliefs in some fashion.24 Normally, political actors take these compro-
mises as a given; indeed, they are embedded in political institutions that
restrict the strategy space for political action.  The stronger these institu-

tions are, the more difficult it is to challenge the underlying compromises.
When global networks do challenge them, the reaction is a confrontational
rather than an adaptive process.How fast change occurs depends on how well the political system isprepared to accommodate it.  Neither the United States nor Germany has

a formal parliamentary system.  In the United States, the President and

his administration, and in Germany, the ministerial administration (as

well as powerful social actors like the unions), have either de jure or de
facto veto power.  This makes it somewhat more difficult to coalesce

around a strategy for change.On the other hand, both are federations (Germany, in fact, has threelevels of governance, if one includes the European Union), which has
given them some experience in coordinating governance across political
arenas.  Both countries also have powerful and independent constitutional

courts, which can enable change by preventing a tyranny of the majority
and protecting diverse views and life styles.  The courts can also break

political deadlocks in which a legislative body is unwilling or unable to
act when action is needed.24Michael Thompson, Richard Ellis, and Aaron Wildavsky.  1990.  
Basic Cultural Theory.Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUES4.2.10Degree of International Conflict Over Democratic Values
The significant differences in the structure of democracy among coun-tries may lead to differences in the reactions of these nations to the pres-
sures for change posed by global networks.  For example, nations have

different perspectives on how best to ensure order and propriety on the
Internet (Box 4.8).  However, in contrast to the reaction where issues such

as pornography, hate speech, or religious tolerance are concerned,25 the
different forms that democracy takes are not, in themselves, a source of
conflict as long as there is little or no overlap in political constituencies.BOX 4.8  Trust in Politics: Who Should Control the Internet?
The assessment of who can best control misuse of the Internet displaysstrikingly different national perspectives.  Americans clearly look to the

users themselves, followed by the online service providers and organiza-tions specializing in child protection or with a special moral authority ofsome other kind.In contrast, the German population places trust in politics and law-en-forcement authorities to a noticeably greater extent, while it only gives asmall amount of responsibility and latitude to the Internet users themselves.
Whereas 36 percent of the American population consider the individualInternet user as the best guarantor of an effective control of inappropriatecontent, barely one-fifth of the German population shares this opinion.  In
contrast, 28 percent of the German population places trust in politicians,but only 2 percent of the American population does so.SOURCE:  Bertelsmann Foundation: Risk Assessment and Opinions Concerning theControl of Misuse on the Internet.  Results of representative surveys conducted in the

United States, Australia, and the Federal Republic of Germany.  A project by the
Bertelsmann Foundation, Germany, in conjunction with the Australian BroadcastingAuthority (ABA), Allensbach archives, IfD-survey 3296.  Available online at

<http://www.stiftung.bertelsmann.de/internetcontent/english/frameset.htm?content/c2000.htm>.25Grewlich (supra note 9) 241-246.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DEMOCRACY AND POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS97Those differences result from the fact that nation-states are sovereignand therefore free to choose their own political institutions; inevitably,
they will make different choices in implementing democratic values.  Be-

cause there is little or no overlap in political constituencies, most people
do not find their own form of democracy threatened merely because it
differs from that of another nation-state.Transnational political arenas would seem to represent a very differ-ent case.  Here there is very clearly an overlap of constituencies and a

possibility for conflict among competing political systems.  Fortunately,

at least for the issues of concern here, international institutions and gover-
nance structures are generally so weak, and so limited in their capacity to
compel actions in the member states, that confrontation between national
systems seldom occurs.More serious conflicts arise, however, when political systems becomeÒmissionary.Ó For example, those concerned about human rights want to
see human rights protected everywhere.  In order to join the Council of

Europe or the European Community, Eastern European countries have to
prove that their constitutions conform to democratic standards in protect-
ing individual rights.  For many nations, such an evangelical perspective

raises the concern that hegemonic intentions rather than humanitarian
considerations may be the real driving force.  Some observers question,

for instance, the U.S. governmentÕs position that the Internet should not
be regulated.  They wonder whether it is less a manifestation of a First

Amendment principle than it is covert industrial policy, aimed at ensur-
ing unconditional access by American e-business to other countries.26This leads to a final concern.  Although different national concepts of
democracy can, in principle, coexist relatively easily in the era of the
Internet, the Internet itself is a global phenomenon.  Thus if one nation-

state attempts to protect or foster its particular national form of democ-
racy by attempting to shape the Internet in a certain way, the normative
differences between states may give rise to a significant international con-
flict over policy regarding the Internet.  Box 4.9 provides an illustration.
4.3CONSTITUTIONAL POLICY
Global networks have great potential to induce change.  They can en-
hance the effectiveness of some political arenas to the detriment of others,
give some political actors power and take it away from others, and26Jacques Arlandis. 2000. ÒThe Clerk, the Merchant and the Politician,Ó in Christoph Engeland Kenneth Keller, eds., Governance of Global Networks in the Light of Differing Local Values,105-117, 109.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESBOX 4.9  The French Yahoo! Case
On November 20th, 2000, in 
LICRA & French Union of Jewish Students
v. Yahoo! Inc., the County Court of Paris ordered Yahoo! to comply within3 months of notification with a May 22 order under which Yahoo! wasrequired to (1) take all necessary measures to Òmake impossibleÓ access to
Nazi merchandise or any other site or service that may be construed Òas(apologizing) for Nazism or contesting the reality of Nazi crimes
Ó; (2) warnall Internet surfers before they proceed with searches on yahoo.com of the
risks involved in continuing to view such sites; and (3) submit, for delibera-

tion by all the interested parties, the measures it proposes to take to Òput anend to the trouble and damage suffered and to prevent any further trouble.ÓIf Yahoo! failed to comply, it would be subject to a penalty of 100,000
francs per day of delay following the expiration of the 3-month period.Furthermore, Yahoo! was ordered to make payment of 10,000 francs toeach of the plaintiffs.The court reasoned that even though the ÒYahoo! AuctionsÓ site that
brought this issue before the court generally targets surfers based in theUnited States, auctions involving symbols of Nazi ideology Òmay be ofinterest to any person.Ó Furthermore, Yahoo!
Õs claim in the litigation that it
was technologically infeasible to identify French users of its site was under-cut by its practice of identifying such users so that it could present them
with French-language advertising banners.  This practice is a clear example
of Òtargeting,Ó which itself is emerging as an acceptable object of trans-
national jurisdiction.The court stated that the act of displaying objects of Nazi ideology inFrance is a violation of Article R645-1 of the Penal Code and thus is aÒthreat to internal public order.Ó The court also stated that the technical
measures and the initiatives at its disposal give Yahoo! an opportunity tosatisfy the injunctions of the May 22 order.  The two technical procedures
identified by the courtÑgeographical identification and user declaration ofnationalityÑwould allow Yahoo! to filter out French IP addresses at a suc-
cess rate of 90 percent.In December 2000, Yahoo! filed a declaratory relief action in the UnitedStates District Court for the Northern District of California (San Jose), seek-ing to block enforcement of the French order on the grounds that the Frenchcourt lacked jurisdiction.  On November 7, 2001, the Court granted

Yahoo!Õs request for summary judgment  (
Yahoo!, Inc. v. La Ligue ContreLe Racisme et LÕAntisemitisme, F.Supp.2d, 2001 WL 1381157 (N.D. Cal.
2001)), finding that French enforcement of French laws in the United States
would chill YahooÕs First Amendment rights in the United States.The court decision can be found at <http://www.cdt.org/jurisdiction/011107judgement.pdf>.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DEMOCRACY AND POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS99strengthen some governance tools and weaken others.  They can alter po-
litical processes, the character of political conflicts, or cognitive frame-
works and normative beliefs.  They can even change the relationship be-

tween the society and the state.  It would be naive to expect those who

currently hold political power to just let all this happen.  This sets the

stage for the debates, conflicts, and structural adjustments that are part of
the evolution of what might be called Òconstitutional policy,Ó to which we
now turn our attention.4.3.1Accommodating Constitutional Policy to Global Networks
Political actors are likely to try to encourage or block a particular ef-fect of global networks on political structures, depending on their assess-
ment of its consequences.  But as a practical matter it is really quite diffi-

cult to anticipate either the precise way in which the networks will affect
each part of the system or all of the consequences that may result from
trying to intervene.  Given the complex interactions that occur between

political and social subsystems,27 any interventionÑwhether in the form
of new regulations, political co-optation of networks, or even changes in
the structure of political institutionsÑcan lead to reactions by each sub-
group to preserve the status quo or to maintain the momentum of change.This seems particularly likely when players from the first-generation
Internet communities, who tend to blend egalitarian with anarchic ele-
ments, are involved.Although it is beyond the scope of this study to deal with the questionof whether there is any compelling reason to encourage one form of de-
mocracy over another, the question of how a constitutional change can
come about under the influence of global networks is quite appropriate.
Democracies deliberately make such change difficult in order to reduce
the likelihood that well-organized political interest groups can effect fun-
damental structural alterations merely to suit their agendas.The U.S. Supreme Court and the German Constitutional Court playkey roles in guarding their respective constitutions against such political
manipulation.  But global networks can, in a de facto sense, alter constitu-

tional protections or frustrate constitutional goals even without any for-
mal change in the constitution.  Given that possibility, a failure to modify

the written constitution, or a failure to adjust the informal mechanisms
and interpretations that supplement the written provisions of the consti-27For the Internet as a subsystem the argument is made in Dirk Baecker, 2000, ÒNetwork-
ing the Web,Ó in Christoph Engel and Kenneth H. Keller, eds., Understanding the Impact ofGlobal Networks on Local Social, Political and Cultural Values, 93-111, 96.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUEStution, may sometimes lead to undesirable changes in a nationÕs funda-mental political structure.The German constitution might be somewhat better prepared to parrysuch a challenge.  Both countries have constitutionally protected funda-

mental freedoms, and both empower their respective constitutional courts
to interpret them.  But the United StatesÕs interpretation relies on rights

that are explicitly mentioned in or at least implied by the U.S. Constitu-
tion, and the U.S. Supreme Court tends to narrow the constitutional is-
sues before it as much as possible, at least by comparison to the German
Constitutional Court.  The German Constitutional court, on the other

hand, has greater leeway for adaptation, thus allowing it to act on the
basis of broader considerations.  For example, although German Basic Law

requires that any governmental interference with freedom or property
needs a justification, almost any reasonable policy is accepted as a justifi-
cation, provided that the proposed restrictions can be shown to be neces-
sary to achieve the desired end.4.3.2Internet Policy
Given the reluctance of policymakers to undertake constitutionalchanges to adjust to the new circumstances presented by global networks,
they are likely to focus on policy instruments that would allow control,
regulation, or even exclusion of the Internet for the purpose of dealing
with the tensions it generates.  But none of those approaches is easy to

implement.  Only two countries in the world have opted for a policy of

completely forbidding access to the Internet: North Korea and Myanmar.
Singapore and Vietnam have tried to force all Internet traffic in and out of
their countries through a few tightly controlled conduits, but they pay a
high price for such control: access by their citizens to worldwide informa-
tion sources is sharply reduced.  For countries such as the United States or

Germany, such Draconian action has never been proposed.Short of actually blocking access to the Internet, countries find them-selves with options of widely different effectiveness, as illustrated by Ger-
many and the United States.  Because of U.S. dominance in the global

information technology industry and among large-scale Internet service
providers, U.S. policy actions that force change in the Internet-related
products and services offered by U.S. companies are likely to affect the
development path of the Internet globally.  On the other hand, even

though German authorities may occasionally sanction a global network
(as they did in the CompuServe cases), their influence is limited and can
hardly be expected to have a significant effect on the shape of the Internet.Because of the interconnectedness of the Internet infrastructure (e.g.,standards and protocols), if one nation actually effects some change in theGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DEMOCRACY AND POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS101structure or operation of the Internet, that change will affect operationseverywhereÑbut not necessarily in the same way or with the same conse-
quences.  For example, if the United States forced a technological change

to implement its national policy of limiting the distribution of undesirable
material, it might well build into the system the technical means for an
authoritarian regime to extend its censorship control (a point discussed
further in Chapter 5).It would be simplistic to view Internet policy as entirely a question ofregulation or control aimed at preserving traditional political structures,
given that global networks offer a new tool for achieving important and
very broad political goals.  Both the United States and Germany are com-
mitted to a political structure that can provide for a range of views to be
heard and considered and, at the same time, encourage integration of
those views and the people who hold them into a coherent society.To satisfy the first goal, ideological, political, and ethnic minoritiesneed to have access to the public forum, providing for a kind of cultural
biodiversity that introduces fresh insights and makes political innovation
possible.  This goal has not been easy to meet through traditional elec-

tronic media.  The radio-frequency spectrum is limited and crowded, and

cable channels are expensive, as are broadcasting facilities of significant
power.  Constitutional courts have tried to overcome these inherent limi-
tations by instituting fairness doctrines, with mixed results.28 By contrast,
the Internet and its related technologies make the goal of access much
easier to attain.  The spectrum is virtually unlimited, the costs are low,

and public policies can easily be put in place to promote Internet literacy,
wide availability of terminals in schools and libraries, and help for any
group interested in setting up a Web page.The situation is reversed with respect to the goal of societal integra-tion.  With traditional electronic media, the small number of program

originators, the high set-up cost, the one-to-many nature of broadcasting,
and the typically passive role of the message recipients are all conducive
to societal integration.  Moreover, the small number of programmers also

makes it easy to impose and enforce policy.The Internet makes societal integration harder to achieve because in-dividuals have much greater autonomy both as transmitters and recipi-
ents of messages.  Indeed, the technology allows societal atomization to

an unprecedented degree.  Some technical approaches have been pro-

posed to promote integration in the Internet contextÑfor example, ÒpushÓ
technologies that force users to open a publicly designed or prescribed
window before they can get access to any other site.  But there are obvious
28For an account, see Cass Sunstein, 1995, Democracy and the Problem of Free Speech, TheFree Press.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESobjections to such an imposition on personal freedom.  For the time being,
therefore, it appears more feasible to depend on network-based technolo-
gies to serve the goals of access and diversity, and more traditional broad-
cast media to promote social and political integration.It should be noted, however, that technological convergence may re-quire a reconsideration in the future of how best to achieve a balance of
diversity and integration.  Technological developments are gradually

blurring the distinctions between various communication media.  DSL

technology can increase the bandwidth of telephone lines so that they can
support motion-picture transmission or other kinds of broadcasting;
cable-television lines can now support Internet communication and real-
time voice communications; and various kinds of compression technolo-
gies are increasing broadcast-channel availability, thus allowing more
customized programming.  In time this may alter the view of broadcast

media as passive and integrative, and Internet media as active and di-
verse, but for the near and mid-term future the distinction remains useful.4.3.3Networks and Representative Versus Direct Democracy
Democracy theorists have been attracted by one feature of global net-works in particular: the fact that it is now technically and economically
possible to let people decide political issues directly.  This reopens the

debate over representative versus direct democracy and the desirability
of a shift of law-making jurisdiction from a legislature to the electorate.29Different countries have had different experiences with plebiscites.  In
Switzerland, plebiscites seem to work reasonably well.  But many analysts

believe that the demise of GermanyÕs Weimar Republic was accelerated by
an overly broad use of that instrument.  The Òelectronic town hallÓ would

appear to increase input legitimacy, because it increases participation.  On

the other hand, it is more difficult to ensure that voters are as fully informed
about complex issues as one might hope legislators are, and so output le-
gitimacy may suffer.  Voters may be lured into the illusion that access to

information through global networks is tantamount to complete under-
standing.  Moreover, legislation by referendum usually requires that the

issue at hand be reduced to a simply phrased question.  Experience has

shown that the outcome of a referendum depends strongly on how the ques-
tion is phrased,30 and most experts agree that it is all but impossible to keep
a question simple and, at the same time, capture important nuances.29See Jeffrey Abramson. 2000. ÒDemocracy and Global Communications,Ó in ChristophEngel and Kenneth Keller, eds., Governance of Global Networks in the Light of Differing LocalValues, 119-130.30See, for example, R. Nisbett and L. Ross, 1980, Human Inference, Prentice-Hall.
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DEMOCRACY AND POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS103Of course, legislative decisions may not be fully informed either, andthe traditional political process does not necessarily lead to the most de-
sirable outcome.  For example, political actors may be motivated by con-

cerns other than solving the policy problem at hand.31 The legislative
agenda can be shaped by the media, scandal, or a host of other factors
rather than by substantive priority, and logrolling or political influence
may determine outcomes as much as the needs of the polity.The fact is that neither popular nor legislative approaches to problemsolving are free from riskÑor without merit.  A larger role for direct de-

mocracy could serve three purposes.  It could increase the participation of

the public in decision making, resulting in a greater sense of ownership
and responsibility.  It might be an important tool in promoting societal

integration.  And it could make those in political power more accountable

to the public.  If the threat of plebiscites, formal or informal, exists, it is

more difficult to ignore the public will between elections.  In that respect,

some opportunities for direct democracy can be part of the system of

checks and balances in the political structure.It may well be that the most important contribution of networks willnot be to replace representative democracies with referendum/plebiscite-
based direct democracies, but to offer a rich range of intermediate possi-
bilities.  Such options could enhance participation in governance, increase

the diversity of viewpoints in public debate, and place additional pres-
sure on public officials to be responsive and accountable.  The mere po-

tential of global networks to redistribute political power forces decision
makers to explain their actions more clearly and thoroughly.Referenda can be used to express public views without actually shift-ing formal decision-making power.  Even without formal referenda, the

ease of network communication makes it possible for many different

voices to be heard.  And with broader freedom-of-information policies,

the new technologies can allow the public to gain increased access to gov-
ernment files.32 
By shedding brighter light on the processes of govern-ment, the ability of the public to hold its elected officials accountable for
their actions may thus be enhanced.31Daniel A. Farber and Philip P. Frickey. 1991. Law and Public Choice, 22.32As discussed in Chapter 8, there are significant differences between the United Statesand Germany in this respect.  Freedom of information is already a much more broadly ap-
plied principle in the United States than in Germany.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUES4.3.4The Impact of Networks on the
Evolution of Political LandscapesPolitical structures need to be open to change over time, both becausenew technologies introduce new issues and because the value judgements
of those governed may change.  SocietyÕs formal institutions and political

culture need to be prepared for evolution, to be able to respond to fresh
ideas and be attentive to new challenges.  The healthy society develops

mechanisms to adapt in much the same way an ecosystem does, encour-
aging processes of variation and selection.  The analogy has limitations,

however.  Both variation and selection have dangers for a society.  The

former promotes fragmentation of the body politic, the latter encourages
single-issue politics.  Those are dangers that societies need to be aware of

but cannot easily avoid.Global networks affect variation and selection, but they do more for
the former than the latter.  They provide a means for giving people with

new ideas wide distribution and a means for people seeking ideas to find
them.  In doing so, they reshape political arenas, empower political ac-

tors, and reconfigure political processes.  Their effect on selection is less

clear.  Do they lead to a more thoughtful process of weighing and imple-

menting ideas, or do they provide an opportunity for special interests or
single-issue groups to promote changes that do not serve the broad polity
well?  If the latter is the case, one might view an appropriate regulatory

strategy for global networks as one that promotes globalization and plu-
ralization to increase the range of ideas available, but restricts the role of
the networks in the actual process of lawmaking.Central government policies undertaken to deal with social problemsalmost always have distributional consequences that affect one group dif-
ferently than another.  If a way cannot be found to compensate a constitu-

ency that is negatively affected, the government stands to alienate that
group.  In the modern world, networking technologies provide opportu-

nities for such groups to leave the polity, virtually or in reality.  For single-

issue constituencies, the opportunities for government to craft some kind
of compensation are quite limited.  Thus, the very network that increases
a groupÕs power to press its case also decreases its need or willingness to
accept a negative decision to serve the greater good.Although the issues discussed in this section are exacerbated by glo-bal networks, they are really part and parcel of the modern world.  Even if

a country was prepared to cut its population off from global networks, it
could not avoid many other forms of globalization.  The nation-state is

inexorably losing its traditional role as a monopolistic provider of a highly
aggregated bundle of public goods.  More and more, it is under competi-Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DEMOCRACY AND POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS105tive pressure from other providersÑother nation-states, and differentstructures of formal and informal political organization.33At the same time, national political systems continue to have signifi-cant power.  The roles and services that governments provide, as well as

their authority and effectiveness, may be attenuated, but they will remain
vital to their constituents.  In that sense, the nation-state may be altered,

but it is not threatened.  States will still provide social services, education,

physical protection, public health, and environmental stability and will
fulfill the host of functions that are associated with place and identity.
This will give a state the legitimacy and power to retain certain authority
and to negotiate with other nations to protect its rights and the rights of
its citizens.  Most international treaties are examples of the effectiveness

of national systems to organize a global order, even in the modern world.
One may view this as a practical and acceptable alternative to con-
stitutionalizing the world order,34 and one that is perhaps more impor-
tant than ever before precisely because of the advent of global networks.But given the ad hoc nature of this globalizing process, the future isquite open-ended, in both descriptive and prescriptive terms.  Nation-

states and their constitutional orders will certainly continue to come un-
der competitive pressure.  Those governed will have increasing leeway to

move away from a nation-stateÕs regulatory power and, clearly, the more
credible the threat to move, the more carefully nation-states will have to
listen to their demands.  But because one cannot accurately predict which

interest groups will mount the most credible threats at any particular time,
it is difficult to know what the nature of the competitive pressures is most
likely to be or how nations will respond.  Will democratic institutions be

harmonized?  If so, will we see Òa race to the bottom,Ó a Òrace to the top,Ó

or an entirely changed governance structure?  And if we do see the emer-

gence of a significantly changed structure, on what basis should we judge
it to be a good or a bad thing?33Jean-Marie Gu”henno. 1998. ÒFrom Territorial Communities to Communities of Choice:Implications for Democracy,Ó in Wolfgang Streeck, ed., Internationale Wirtschaft, Nationale
34Jochen A. Frowein. 2000. ÒKonstitutionalisierung des Vılkerrechts,Ó Berichte der39:427-448.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1065Free Speech and the Internet
5.1INTRODUCTION
The preceding chapters have sought to provide a framework for un-derstanding how global networks influence local values, political institu-
tions, and ways of doing business, as well as how those networks might
be governed.  This chapter and the next look more closely at some par-

ticular issuesÑnamely, those related to free speech and to the tensions
between privacy and freedom of information.To a certain extent, the selection of these topics is arbitrary.  In other
chapters, the report has touched on other topics that might reasonably be
examined more closely: consumer protection and copyright; the social
changes inherent in a networked world; and the shifting boundaries be-
tween public and private spaces and the blurring of the line between con-
sumer and producer.  Transnational issues could have been added as well:

tax policy, customs and tariffs for Internet traffic, and technical standard-
ization are obvious examples.But free speech and privacy stand out in two respects: they have at-tracted considerable public interest, and they are characterized by conflict
between the two nations that are the focus of this report.  Therefore, this

chapter and the next will address these issues.  The intention is to discuss

them as examples of the tensions and challenges that global networks in-
troduce in a societyÕs values, but these are issues with such strong legal
overtones that it is impractical to approach them without incorporating
legal considerations into the discussion as well.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FREE SPEECH AND THE INTERNET1075.2THE VALUES INVOLVED IN FREE SPEECH
For both the United States and Germany, freedom of speech is suchan important formal value that it is explicitly protected by the First
Amendment to the U.S. Constitution and by Article 5 of the German Basic
Law.  Because of this constitutional protection, legislatures have very little

latitude to pass laws that restrict speech.  If the legislature, or any other

governmental body, moves too far in that direction, individuals in each
country can seek relief in the highest court.This constitutional protection of free speech obligates both govern-ment and private parties to tolerate many kinds of expression, regardless
of how much it may clash with individual values or with the traditions of
the country.  Yet, restrictions on speech are common around the world,

with many instances of censorship and criminal prosecution for the criti-
cism of government policy.  Even in the United States and Germany,

policymakers have sought legislation from time to time that would place
restrictions on various kinds of speech.  Such legislation has usually been

struck down as unconstitutional, but the continual efforts made, and the
restrictions sometimes allowed, suggest that the right of free speech is not
absolute and that some substantive value is being explicitly or implicitly
applied to distinguish protected from unprotected speech.  This substan-

tive value (or these values) may well be in tension with the formal value
of free speech.Some of those competing values may also be formal ones.  For ex-
ample, the exercise of free speech might directly or almost directly cause
physical harmÑsuch as injuries and death resulting from the publication
of bomb-building instructions or the psychic trauma of children that might
occur as the result of exposure to certain kinds of sexually explicit mate-
rial.  Similarly, one cannot (falsely) shout ÒFire!Ó in a crowded theatre; as
Oliver Wendell Holmes noted, ÒYour freedom ends where my nose be-
gins.Ó Where the connections among formal values are relatively clear
and unambiguousÑthey are not always soÑit is relatively easy to make
judgments about which one should take precedence.  The situation is not
so straightforward when substantive values are involved.Generally speaking, formal values such as free speech establish rightsand procedures that enable a society to function effectively and, it is
hoped, fairly.  But it takes substantive values to provide the glue, the

shared outlook that makes a society more than a collection of individuals.
If the values under which a society operated were composed exclusively
of formal values, normative views of the world, such as the hierarchical,Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESthe egalitarian, or the fatalistic, which hold societies together and distin-guish them from one another, would be denied any status whatsoever.1In fact, substantive values do come into play.  For example, restric-
tions on free speech may be the result of seeking balanceÑthe formal
value of free speech weighed against the competing claims of certain sub-
stantive values.  Of course, the notion that a balance is involved suggests

that the mere existence of a conflicting substantive value is not a sufficient
reason to restrict free speech.  The critical question is whether the exercise

of free speech violates a substantive value to an unacceptable degree; an-
swering this question entails a value judgment that is not only conten-
tious but often rendered differently in different societies, even those as
similar as the United States and Germany.  The treatment of two such

issuesÑhate speech and protection of children and adolescentsÑis dis-
cussed in the following sections.5.3COMMON AND DIFFERENT TRADITIONS AND
THE INTERNETFree speech was an important right long before the advent of theInternet, but there were practical limitations on how well individuals
could exercise it to influence their societies.  People could find a soapbox

in Hyde Park or Union Square, send a letter to the editor, or distribute
leaflets.2 But if they wanted to have an impact on public policy or on
society at large, they had to go through intermediaries.  The Internet

brings society much closer to the ideal of a free market of ideas, in that
surfacing a wide range of ideas in a public forum, including those dispar-
aged as fringe, is easier than it has ever been before.  Nevertheless, limita-

tions clearly remain, and the availability of ideas on a Web site does not
assure that everyone will find them or require that everyone access them.5.3.1Hate Speech
Hate speech can be defined as the willful public expression of hatredtoward any segment of society distinguished by a characteristic such as1Michael Thompson, Richard Ellis, and Aaron Wildavsky, 1990, Cultural Theory, Boulder,Colo.: Westview Press; for an application to the topic of this report see Michael Thompson,2000, ÒGlobal Networks and Local Cultures: What Are the Mismatches and What Can be
Done About Them?,Ó in Christoph Engel and Kenneth H.  Keller, eds., 
Understanding theImpact of Global Networks on Local Social, Political and Cultural Values, Baden-Baden: Nomos
113-130.2Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council. 1994.Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked Communities. Washington, D.C.: Na-tional Academy Press.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FREE SPEECH AND THE INTERNET109color, race, religion, ethnic origin, or sexual orientation.  Hate speech can
be particularly debilitating to a society because it attacks an entire group.
Thus it threatens the peaceful coexistence of different groups within the
population and, ultimately, the stability of the community.Hate speech is more than merely hurtful; it creates a climate that canlead to depriving certain groups of their civil rights.  The danger need

not be concrete and immediate; sad experience has shown that the ver-
bal stigmatization of particular groups in a community can build up
negative attitudes in the population at large, which can lead to discrimi-
nation and may even erupt into violence against the group.  Despite the

near-universal revulsion to hate speech among civilized peoples, there
are significant differences between the United States and Germany in
how it is handled.Two cases, widely reported in the media and described here in Chap-ter 3, demonstrate the problems created by these differences: the online
sale of Mein Kampf (August 1999) and the CompuServe case (May 1998).
The first arose from differences in the laws of the two countries concern-
ing what can be distributed, and the second concerned the responsibility
of a service provider for the messages transferred through its network.
The CompuServe case attracted particular attention in the American press,
with headlines like ÒGermanyÕs Internet Angst,Ó ÒA Ôcyber-coupÕ for
GermanyÕs cyber-cops,Ó ÒGerman Net future questioned,Ó and ÒEfforts to
control the Net abuse liberty.ÓThe United StatesIn terms of value balance, the United States gives the formal value offree speech more weight than essentially any substantive value and al-
most all other formal values.  Therefore, attempts to proscribe hate speech

using legal remedies such as the criminal code or municipal regulations
have invariably been struck down by the Supreme Court, based on the
idea that such remedies violate the constitutional right to freedom of ex-
pression contained in the First Amendment.  Indeed, because Article 20 of

the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights3 required signa-
tory states to agree that Òany advocacy of national, racial or religious ha-
tred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence
shall be prohibited by law,Ó the United States refused to ratify that part of
the Covenant.  Furthermore, in ratifying the Genocide Convention, the
3The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights was adopted and opened forsignature, ratification, and accession through U.N. General Assembly resolution 2200A (XXI)of 16 December 1966.  It entered into force on 23 March 1976.
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.110GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESUnited States made specific reservations to prevent any impact of the Con-
vention on First Amendment rights in the United States.A measure of the primacy given to the right to freedom of expressionis that the First Amendment does not specify any exceptions, and the
Supreme Court has been very cautious in allowing any.  Over the years,

it has developed a strict set of criteria defining circumstances in which
some state abridgement of free speech might reasonably be allowed in
order to serve other constitutional goals, but the exceptions have been
very few.Proposed government restrictions that are based on the content of anexpression have to be capable of standing up to an intense examination
called Òstrict scrutiny.Ó Under this test, restrictions can be justified only if
the state is able to show a compelling public interest in doing so.  Even

then, it has to choose the least restrictive means for achieving the desired
aim.  Furthermore, if the proposed measures are too vague or too broad,

in all likelihood they will be rejected as unconstitutional.  In fact and in

practice, the strict scrutiny test is equivalent to the initial assumption that
any restriction on free speech is unconstitutional.Government measures aimed at preventing the purely abstract dan-gers of hate speech, which would certainly encompass most substantive-
value concerns, have always been struck down by the Supreme Court
because they have not passed the strict scrutiny test.  In 1952, the Court

did hold, in Beauharnais v. Illinois,4 that the defamation of a group should
not fall within the protection of the First Amendment.  But even that deci-

sion, though never officially reversed and overruled, has not guided sub-
sequent Court action, particularly following Collin v. Smith5 and 
R.A.V.  v.
City of St. Paul6 (Box 5.1).
In Brandenburg v. Ohio, 395 U.S. 444 (1969) (per curiam), the SupremeCourt held that the First Amendment even protects speech that encour-
ages others to commit violence, unless the speech is capable of Òproduc-
ing imminent lawless action.Ó Thus, arguing that Òif the First Amendment
protects speech advocating violence, then it must also protect speech that
does not advocate violence but still makes it more likely,Ó a three-judge
panel of the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals held that a Web site and posters
calling abortion doctors Òbaby butchersÓ and criminals were protected by
the First Amendment.  The court stated that Òpolitical speech may not be
4343 U.S. 250 (1952).5578 F.2d 1197 (7th Cir. 1978); cert. denied 439 U.S. 916 (1978).6505 U.S. 377 (1992).Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FREE SPEECH AND THE INTERNET111punished just because it makes it more likely that someone will be harmedat some unknown time in the future by an unrelated third party.Ó7BOX 5.1  Selected Decisions on Hate Speech
Collin v. Smith is based on the following facts: In 1977 the city of Skokie,
north of Chicago, had about 70,000 inhabitants; 40,000 of them were Jew-

ish, including some 5,000 who were survivors of the Holocaust.  In March
informed the municipal administration of Skokie that his party was plan-
ning to organize a walk through the city and that party members wereintending to wear Nazi uniforms.  City officials tried to prevent the wearing
of such uniforms and the distribution or display of material that could
Òcause or promote hatred against people of Jewish faith or Jewish origin.ÓThe Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit decided that the march andthe wearing of uniforms were protected expressions of opinionÑand the
necessary price of freedom in America.  ÒThe result,Ó it said, Òis dictated by
the fundamental proposition that if these civil rights are to remain vital forall, they must protect not only those that society deems acceptable, but
also those whose ideas it quite justifiably rejects and despises.Ó The Su-preme Court rejected the appeal of the city of Skokie and thus gave itspermission for the march.  (See 
Collin v. Smith, 578 F.2d 1197 (7th Cir.
1978), cert. denied sub. nom. Smith v. Collin, 439 U.S. 916 (1978).)
In R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul (505 U.S. 377 (1992)), the accused, RobertAllen Victoria (R.A.V.) had, together with others, burned a cross in the front
yard of a black family that had just moved to an all-white area.  Their
purpose was clearly and avowedly to intimidate the family.  Victoria was
found guilty according to a municipal criminal statute that penalized as
disorderly conduct Òthe placing on public or private grounds of a symbolor an object . . . including a burning cross . . . if one knows, or shouldknow, that this action causes anger, fright, or fear by making reference to
race, skin color, religion, or sex of other people.Ó The Supreme Court de-cided that the municipal statute was unconstitutional and therefore theverdict was overturned.  The statute was deemed contrary to the protection

of expression of opinion protected by the First Amendment, since Òpro-tected expressions were only penalized on the basis of the choice of thetarget group of the speech.Ó7244 F.3d 1007 (9th Cir. 2001); reh. en banc granted, 268 F.3d 908  (9th Cir, October 3, 2001).
The latter citation refers to an order from the court that the case be reheard by the en banccourt, with the three-judge panel opinion not being cited as precedent by or to this court orany district court of the Ninth Circuit, except to the extent adopted by the en banc court.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESOn the other hand, the Supreme Court has allowed exceptions to FirstAmendment protection when the expression could likely lead to a hate-
engendered crime.  In such cases, the Court has applied the ÒClear and

Present Danger Test.Ó Expressions that give rise to a clear and present
danger of criminal action, and thus infringe on the rights of some segment
of the population, can be forbidden.  This exception is called Òcommuni-

cations tending to incite lawlessnessÓ or Òadvocacy of unlawful action.ÓGermanyThe German legal system, in contrast to the American system, gener-ally penalizes hate speech.  Given the experience under National Social-

ism and the former German Democratic Republic, the Federal Republic
takes the position that a democracy has to be able to defend itself as a
political system.  There is a particularly strong feeling that it must be able

to stop any attempt to reestablish a National Socialist authority.  Interest-

ingly, in addition to the resolve of the post-war German generation to
resist National Socialism, other countries that fought the Nazi regime and
certain ethnic groups (such as those of Jewish descent, who were victim-
ized by the regime) expect this vigilance of Germany.  In addition to mea-

sures targeted against hate speech, there are also German laws that pro-
hibit the defamation of victims of National Socialist crimes, denial of the
Holocaust, wearing of the swastika, and distribution of National Socialist
propaganda.The compatibility of these laws with the constitution has never seri-ously been questioned, even though in Germany, as in the United States,
freedom of expression is an important value. The Bundesver-fassungs-
gericht (the German equivalent of the U.S. Supreme Court) says that free-
dom of expression is simply an inherent aspect of democracy.  However,

the constitutional right of freedom of expression, as granted in Article 5
Abs. 1 GG, is worded as follows:Anybody has the right to freely express his opinion in words, writtenmaterials, and pictures and to distribute it and to draw information from
generally accessible sources without any interference.  The freedom of
the press and the freedom of broadcasting and film are guaranteed.
There is no censorship.These rights will find their barriers in the provisions of the generallaws, the legal provisions for the protection of the youth and the right topersonal honor.The wording of this article is similar to guarantees in other WesternEuropean constitutions (for example, Article 10 of the European Conven-
tion on Human Rights).  There is a good deal of room for interpretation in
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FREE SPEECH AND THE INTERNET113the words and, particularly in view of the last sentence, a number of cir-cumstances in which this constitutional right can be restricted.  Thus the

prohibition against hate speech would fall under the category of a general
law.  Its provisions are viewed as Ònot directed against the expression of

an opinion as such, but that rather serve the protection of a worthy legalvalue, without consideration of any special opinion (italics added).Ó8 For-
bidding Holocaust denial has been justified by the Bundesver-
fassungsgericht as necessary to protect the personal honor of the
HolocaustÕs victims, who might otherwise be viewed as threatened and
compromised.9There are efforts, sometimes driven by actions and interpretations ofthe European Court of Human Rights, to limit the extent to which the
right of free speech can be abridged.  For example, the Bundesver-

fassungsgericht requires that the conflicting interests be balanced and that
there be a consideration of whether there are any less restrictive means
available in order to achieve the intended goal.  But, in the face of

GermanyÕs recent history, it is not surprising that the prohibition of hate
speech is regarded as legitimate and appropriate.The contrasts between Germany and the United States in regard to freespeech are relatively easy to understand.  The generally high tolerance in the

United States for free speech is generally regarded as critical in a highly het-
erogeneous societyÑone with a long history of absorbing wave after wave of
immigrant groupsÑto avoiding pressures that might otherwise arise to con-
form ideologically and culturally.  Indeed, guaranteed individual and politi-
cal liberties have always been one of the attractions of the United States to
those forced to leave their homeland for reasons of political repression.  Re-

cent history in Germany, on the other hand, has provided a sad lesson in how
fast political propaganda and incitement in a relatively homogeneous society
can lead to the separation and murder of whole segments of the population.
It has led to a broad consensus on the need to place limits on freedom of
expression in order to preserve freedom generally.This practical explanation raises the question of whether it is fair tocharacterize the American situation as one in which the formal value of
free speech dominates any consideration of substantive values or whether
the commitment to diversity, which free speech facilitates, is itself a sub-
stantive value.  In the latter case, societal cohesion and individual liberty

both support the idea of free speech, giving added weight to its protec-
tion.  In the German situation, there is warranted concern that the shared
substantive valuesÑprotection of the rights of minorities and the dignity8BVerfGE 7, 198, 209 f.9BVerfGE 90, 241, 252.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESof individualsÑmay be threatened by an unequivocal commitment to free
speech; so the balance between the two plays out differently.5.3.2The Protection of Children and Adolescents
Both the United States and the Federal Republic are deeply concernedwith protecting children and adolescents, and both have established laws
in that spirit.10 Those that deal with material in print, film, or electronic
media are of two basic kinds.  First, there are laws aimed at preventing

abuse and maltreatment, which make it illegal to distribute, purchase, or
possess written materials, videos, and other items that depict child por-
nography.  The argument is that such material is a stimulus to carrying

out the acts depicted, and that it leads producers to abuse children in the
course of its production.It is no surprise, then, that on both sides of the Atlantic, legislatureshave proscribed child pornography in every format and venue.  The dis-

tribution of child pornography through the Internet, as well as its posses-
sion, is a criminal offense.  Even images that have been created by com-

puter or drawn, where children are obviously not involved in production,
may be illegal.11In neither country have constitutional concerns been seriously raisedabout these laws.  In the United States, they meet the strict scrutiny test.

In Germany, although the contents of child pornography are, in principle,10In Germany it is even at the constitutional level; see Art. 6 Abs. 2 GG or Art. 5 Abs. 2 GG.But in the United States as well, the Supreme Court found, in the decision of Ginsberg v. NewYork (390 U.S. 629 (1968)), that the state had a legitimate interest in protecting the physical
and psychological well-being of minors.11In the United States, the Child Pornography Protection Act of 1996 (CPPA) expandedthe definition of child pornography to include any visual depictions of individuals that ap-pear to be minors, or visual depictions presented in a manner to convey the impression of aminor, engaging in sexually explicit conduct.  (As of this writing [November 2001], this

provision of the CPPA is pending before the Supreme Court.  It was held unconstitutional
by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit (Free Speech Coalition v. Reno, 222 F.3d 1113
(9th Cir. 2001)), but was upheld by the First, Fourth, Fifth, and Eleventh Circuits (UnitedStates v. Fox, 248 F.3d 394 (5th Cir. 2001)); United States v. Mento, 231 F.3d 912, (4th Cir.
2000); United States v. Acheson, 195 F. 3d 645 (11th Cir. 1999); United States v. Hilton, 167 F.3d61 (1st Cir. 1999), cert. denied, 528 U.S. 844, 120 S. Ct. 115, 145 L. Ed. 2d 98 (2000)).  Under the

U.S. criminal code, possession, distribution, and transportation of child pornography sodefined is a felony.  In Germany, Section 184 of the German Criminal Code prohibits the
distribution of both ÒrealÓ and ÒfictiveÓ child pornography (real with real persons involved;
fictive with drawings, computer-produced images, and even written or acoustic material).However, the German Criminal Code does not prohibit the possession of fictive child por-nography.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FREE SPEECH AND THE INTERNET115protected by the Constitution, child and adolescent protection has beenrecognized as a legitimate basis for outlawing it.The second area of law related to protecting minors aims at prevent-ing them from being exposed to material that might be psychologically
traumatic or might adversely affect their development.  This is the more

difficult area of the two.  Much of the material is itself not considered

innately harmful and, therefore, is not proscribed; the practical question
is how to specifically control only the inappropriate material, and how to
accomplish that without interfering with those who have a right to re-
ceive it.  Here the balancing of rights comes into play more directly, as

does the determination of the appropriate roles of government, the pri-
vate sector, and parents.  How, then, have the United States and Germany

dealt with this set of issues?The United StatesIn February 1996, the Congress adopted the Communications DecencyAct (CDA), a sweeping law that held content providers criminally liable if
a person under 18 years of age obtained Òobscene,Ó Òindecent,Ó or Òpa-
tently offensiveÓ material through any Òtelecommunications device.Ó
There was a so-called Òsafe harborÓ provision, which protected a pro-
vider who makes good-faith efforts to deny access to individuals under
18; such efforts would include the use of a credit card, a debit account, an
adult access code, or an adult personal-identification number.12 The Act
triggered immediate challenges and was quickly reviewed by the Su-
preme Court (Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union13).The Court found (as had the lower courts) that the so-called Section223 (47 USC 233) provisions of the CDA were too broad and too vaguely
formulated.  The vagueness of the expressions ÒindecentÓ and Òpatently

offensiveÓ allowed for such a wide range of interpretations that they could
not be reconciled with the CourtÕs strict criteria for allowing freedom of
speech to be abridged.  The chilling effect of the ambiguities in the law

would lead producers to be so cautious that it would inhibit legitimate12In order to be able to consider technological innovations in this area without a statutorychange, every method that is feasible will be treated in the same way.  The Federal Commu-

nications Commission would have had the task of choosing suitable systems and to qualifythem as such.  The safe harbor clause has as its aimÑsimilar to the age restriction on youth-
endangering publications or visits to establishments in red-light districtsÑthe denial of ac-
cess to online offers to adolescents only, and not to adults.  The complete criminalization ofthe contents is not intended with this so-called Zoning Approach.13521 U.S. 844 (1997).Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESfreedom of expression and restrict the availability of content that adultsmight quite legally want to obtain.Even the safe-harbor clause was regarded as inadequate.  It was not
clear that the access control systems available would be judged sufficient
to trigger the protections of the safe-harbor clause.  And even if effective,
installing the controls would entail substantial costs beyond the capacity
of most noncommercial providers.  Therefore the law would discriminate

against them.  Finally, much of the objectionable content came from

abroad, where American law could not easily be enforced.In response to the CourtÕs action, Congress took a different approach,passing the Child Online Protection Act (COPA) at the end of 1998.  COPA

had a narrower scope of application than CDA, but its intention was simi-
lar and it has often been referred to as ÒCDA II.Ó The intention of its spon-
sors was to deal with the Supreme CourtÕs objections by dropping unac-
ceptable terms like ÒobsceneÓ and ÒindecentÓ and substituting a narrower
Òharmful to minorsÓ standard.  Furthermore, COPA dealt only with the

commercial distribution of material and only on the World Wide Web.  It
did not try to regulate other Internet services such as newsgroups.  COPA

also included a safe-harbor provision that exempted from prosecution
parties that take good-faith measuresÑthrough any reasonable means fea-
sible under available technology (e.g., the use of a credit card)Ñto restrict
access by minors to material that is harmful to them.Still, many of the groups that objected to the CDA also found the newstatute to be objectionable, and the American Civil Liberties Union
(ACLU) and other groups challenged it in court.  The United States Dis-

trict Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania issued a preliminary
injunction against COPA, holding that the law was likely to be found in-
compatible with the First Amendment for many of the same reasons that
the CDA had been rejected.14 Content providers would be inhibited, by
fear of liability as well as by the costs associated with installing access-
control software, in what they produced, with the net effect of adults be-
ing less able to receive legal material that they might want.The District Court acknowledged that youth protection was a legiti-mate reason for restricting freedom of expression, but it argued not only
that less restrictive means were available but that the prescribed access-
control systems would be of limited effectiveness anyway; they would
not apply to foreign Web sites, noncommercial providers, or newsgroups.14American Civil Liberties Union v. Reno, 31 F. Supp.2d 473 (E.D.Pa. (1999). This decisioncan be seen online at <http://www.cdt.org/speech/copa/990201ACLUvsRENOdecision.shtml>.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FREE SPEECH AND THE INTERNET117Less restrictive means, such as filtering software (discussed in Chapter 3),might be simpler, cheaper, and no less effective.  On April 2, 2000,
 the U.S.Justice Department appealed the District CourtÕs decision, and on June
22, 2000, the Third Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the decision of the
District Court.  The U.S. Supreme Court has accepted a further appeal

from the U.S. Government for its 2000-2001 term and is expected to hear
this case in November 2001.Another attempt to protect youth was enacted on December 21, 2000Ñthe ChildrenÕs Internet Protection Act (CIPA).15 CIPA requires public
schools and public libraries that receive discounted service for Internet
access through federal funds (Òe-rateÓ) to enforce a policy of Internet
safety for minors.  Such public institutions must use Òtechnology protec-

tion measuresÓ that prevent access to visual depictions that are obscene,
Òharmful to minors,Ó or contain child pornography.  CIPA further defines

material that is Òharmful to minorsÓ as material that if Òtaken as a whole
and with respect to minors, appeals to a prurient interest in nudity, sex, or
excretion; depicts, describes or represents, in a patently offensive way with

respect to what is suitable for minors, an actual or simulated normal or
perverted sexual act, or a lewd exhibition of the genitals, and taken as a
whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value to mi-
nors.Ó16 The American Civil Liberties Union and the American Library
Association have announced their intention to challenge CIPA on First
Amendment grounds.17GermanyIn 1997, a comprehensive Internet-specific law for the protection ofminors was adopted in Germany that prohibits young people from re-
ceiving certain kinds of material.  As part of the lawÕs implementation, a

list was developed of materials that are inappropriate for minors and that
may not be distributed by electronic means or, for that matter, made ac-
cessible in any other way.  The list includes material that is Òimmoral,

[has] a brutalizing effect, [gives] incentive to violence, crimes, or racial
hatred . . . [or glorifies] the warÓÑcategories that clearly go beyond the
proposed laws in the United States.Like the U.S. legislation, the German law places responsibility forlimiting access primarily on the provider.  The law also has a safe-har-
15P.L. 106-554, ¤ 1(a)(4), 114 Stat. 2763.1647 U.S.C. ¤ 254(h)(7)(G).17Multnomah County Library v.  United States
;  No.  01-CV-1322;  <www.aclu.org/features/
fo02001a.html> (site visited April 26, 2001).Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESbor provision, insulating providers from prosecution if they have madea good-faith effort to prevent minors from accessing the inappropriate
material.  The law describes such an effort as making Òtechnical provi-

sions . . . to restrict the offer or its distribution within [Germany] to adult
users.Ó The kind and type of these Òtechnical provisionsÓ have not yet
been specified.Of course, either the provider or the user can do the actual restricting.The German law allows for user-initiated controls when it is the user who
initiates access to the inappropriate material.  Material is allowed to be

distributed this way only Òif devices are supplied by the provider or
other(s) that allow the user to block these offers.Ó This leaves to parents or
guardians the decision of whether or not to use the blocking device.
Again, in this case, the legislature didnÕt say anything about what kinds
of blocking devices would be suitableÑa not-unreasonable stance given
the dynamic nature of the technology.Although all the arguments used to challenge the CDA and the COPAas unconstitutional in the United States would apply to the German law,
no significant objection to the law has been raised in Germany.  It is an-

other indication of the difference in attitude toward freedom of speech in
the two countries, discussed at length in the previous section.  But it also

indicates the fact that, in Germany, the public is willing to give adminis-
trative authorities the latitude to administer a law that might threaten con-
stitutional rights, on the assumption that those rights will be taken into
account in actually applying the lawÕs provisions.  This difference in atti-
tude toward government appears to be an important distinction between
the two countries.  The greater trust in government, evident in this as well

as other examples, leads German society to look more to government it-
self, rather than to tightly drawn laws, to protect and balance rights and
values.The safe-harbor provisions in U.S. and German law introduce an in-centive for the development of appropriate screening technologies, but it
is not clear at this point either how effective these new technologies are
likely to be or what new threats to constitutional rights they might intro-
duce.  For example, the U.S. courts have viewed filters as a reasonable

approach to controlling inappropriate transmissions.  But many in Eu-

rope (and the United States) worry that the use of these systems, even by
private organizations, might amount to precensorship, particularly where

the filtering is based on the identification of unacceptable sites rather than
specific material.In Europe, there is also the fear that political or religious zealots mightwield control over the site-assessment procedure and that the systems
might become oriented too much toward American moral concepts.  Some

have favored systems that control which users have access to the site of aGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FREE SPEECH AND THE INTERNET119particular content provider.  Similar to age restrictions on the purchase of
written material considered harmful to young people, or a visit to an es-
tablishment in a red-light district, access to the online offers would be
denied to adolescents, but not to adults.  Unfortunately, this Òzoning ap-

proachÓ also requires content evaluation.  Also, it is unclear whether digi-

tal age-verification systems or similar access controls can really work in
the highly decentralized world of the Internet.  Thus, both the technical

uncertainties and the different political value judgments in the two soci-
eties continue to present serious challenges, which are discussed in greater
depth in the following section.5.4OPERATIONALIZING THE REGULATORY GOAL
Even if government policymakers decide under what circumstancesto restrict freedom of speech for the sake of a competing substantive value,
many issues remain.  What is the appropriate point of intervention? Is it

the content provider, the recipient, or one of the intermediaries between
them, such as the Internet service provider? Here the question is not
merely one of where it is most practical to interdict inappropriate trans-
missions, but which party should be made responsible to act, although
the two facets of the question may well be related.  Furthermore, should

the potentially harmful content be prohibited, or is it sufficient to make
access more difficult or more costly? The latter approach is exemplified
by the Òwatershed rulesÓ that are typical for television broadcasting in
many countries, which restrict the airing of ÒoffensiveÓ material to the
late-evening hours.  These questions take on great importance because

even though an initial value balance may have been made in reaching the
decision to restrict free speech, the way it is implemented could pro-

foundly alter the balance.
Given some of the practical difficulties in holding providers or recipi-ents responsible for restricting access to potentially harmful content, a num-
ber of efforts have been made to hold intermediaries responsible.  Because

intermediaries are relatively few in numberÑat least compared to the num-
ber of content providers or recipientsÑand they generally have a local pres-

ence in order to do business, they are an attractive target for regulation.Yet regulation of intermediaries presents different kinds of difficul-ties.  Access providers connect content producers and users to each other
via the Internet.  Once the connection to the network has been made, they

have no influence either on what material moves through the wires or
where it goes.  They are much like the postal system in that they donÕt

know the contents of the messages they deliver.  In consequence, it is

generally agreed in both the United States and Europe that the accessGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESprovider should not be held responsible for the contents of messages.  In
Europe, this has been codified in the E-Commerce Directive of the Euro-
pean Union18 as well as the German Teleservices Act.
19  In the United
States, so-called Òcommon carrierÓ provisions allow certain carriers of

communications to carry all manner of traffic without liability (e.g., tele-
phone service providers), and more recently, Congress granted limited
immunity to access providers for violations of copyright law in the Digi-
tal Millennium Copyright Act.20Host providers, however, are a different story.  A host provider may
be a portal or a proprietary service that gathers in one place a large
amount of third-party content for user access.  Being closer to a virtual

forum site or bazaar than to a postal system, it provides Web space,

helps its subscribers find material more easily,  and establishes Òbulletin

boardsÓ and e-mail services.  Generally, the host provider does not have

anything to do with the contents placed on the server, but a good deal to
do with its organization in the Òmarketplace.ÓBecause the host provider offers more than a connection service, thequestion of liability is more complicated.  Legal systems have to deter-

mine when the value added by the host providerÕs services begins to
make it look less like an access provider and more like a content pro-
vider.  The task is made all the more difficult as the ground keeps shift-
ing: new technologies create new business opportunities for inventive
entrepreneurs, and the services offered by host providers change.  It is

unlikely that a simple or permanent resolution to this question, or that
the resolution of differences in this area between the United States and
Europe, is in the offing.
Access providers and host providers are not the only importantInternet intermediaries.  Search-engine operators, mirror sites, and local

hosts all play a role in connecting producers and users.  Technological

changes that begin to blur the distinction between broadcast and net-
work media will add to this groupÑand to the problems of sorting out
liability.  Each will add to the challenge of harmonizing U.S. and Euro-
18Directive 2000/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on certain legalaspects of information-society services, in particular electronic commerce, in the internalmarket (Directive on Electronic Commerce), Official Journal of the European CommunitiesL 178/1 (July 17, 2000); available online at <http://europa.eu.int/ISPO/ecommerce/legal/
documents/2000_31ec/2000_31ec_en.pdf>.19The German Teleservices Act is part of the Information and Communication ServicesAct of July 7th 1997, BGBl. I, S. 1870; available online at <http://www.iid.de/iukdg/gesetz/
engindex.html>.2017 U.S.C ¤ 512 (limiting liability for persons who transmit, route, provide connections,or provide intermediate and transient storage of material infringing copyright).Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FREE SPEECH AND THE INTERNET121pean approaches to these issues, which are already difficult, as the dis-cussion below demonstrates.5.4.1The United States
Although the provisions of 47 USC 223 of the CDA, described earlier,quite clearly made providers liable if inappropriate material got into the
hands of minors through the Internet, 47 USC 230 of the Act declared that
third partiesÑthat is, intermediariesÑwere not responsible for material
they transmitted and were not liable for refusing to transmit material they
viewed as Òquestionable.Ó21 CongressÕs position was probably influenced
to some degree by contradictory court decisions that had been handed
down on the question of host-provider liability.22 However, the ActÕs lan-
guage suggests that Congress was also guided by the belief that interac-
tive computer services should be given strong protection because they
Òprovide a forum for the real variety of political discussion, unique possi-
bilities for cultural development, and a multitude of ways in which intel-
lectual activity can develop.Ó These services had already developed, help-
ing the United States to establish its leadership in the networked world,
and the ActÕs preamble stated that it is the Òpolicy of the United States to
keep the lively and competition-shaped open market that now exists for
the Internet and other interactive computer services as free as possible
from federal or state regulations.ÓIn the court tests thus far, 47 USC 230 has fared very well, with inter-mediaries held harmless from liability whether or not they have known
what they were transmitting, known that it was illegal, or even if they
paid the provider for it.23  The Supreme Court has not yet handed down
any rulings on this section, but all indications are that the strong commit-
ment to freedom of expression in the United States will continue to result
in support for 47 USC 230.  Furthermore, the wording of the Act and the

actions of the lower courts are consistent with the American belief that
self-regulation is preferable to governmental controls.21Through these provisions, referred to as ÒGood SamaritanÓ clauses, it should be madeclear that no provider is liable because it, in good faith, attempts by the use of computer
programs to remove questionable contents from its servers, that is, to block access to thesecontents.22Cubby v.  CompuServe
, 776 F. Supp. 135 (S.D.N.Y. 1991); Stratton Oakmont, Inc. v. ProdigyServs. Co., 1995 WL 323710 (N.Y. Sup. Ct. May 24, 1995).23A description of cases involving 47 U.S.C ¤ 230 can be found online at <http://www.techlawjournal.com/courts/zeran/47usc230.htm#cases>.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUES5.4.2Germany
The laws of the Federal Republic place much greater responsibility onhost providers, although they do not regulate other intermediaries such
as search-engine operators or providers of hyperlinks.  In Germany, host

providers are Òresponsible for foreign contents that they provide for use if
they had knowledge of these contents and it is technically possible, and
also reasonable, to prevent their use.Ó This is called Ònotice liabilityÓ; that
is, if one knows about the material, one is liable if no action is taken to
remove it.  Furthermore, under German law, a provider cannot defend

itself by arguing that it didnÕt consider the questionable contents to be
illegal.  Article 14 of the EU CommissionÕs Directive on Electronic Com-

merce takes the same approach.There have been no explicit constitutional objections to this law raisedin Germany.  It obviously goes in a very different direction from U.S. law.

However, many argue that the host providerÕs liability is actually more
limited than it may appear because the provider need only act if it is Òtech-

nically possible . . . and . . . reasonableÓ to prevent the distribution of the
objectionable material.  This allows for some judgment and balancing by

the prosecutors and courts in deciding, for example, whether a small pro-
vider could ÒreasonablyÓ be expected to install blocking software so ex-
pensive that it might put the company out of business.  Moreover, the law

does not require that the host provider make an active effort to root out
illegal material.With these factors softening the impact of the liability provisions,there appears to be a broad consensus throughout Europe that the Ger-
man law and the E-Commerce Directive of the EU Commission represent
an appropriate middle path.  In the view of most Europeans, these regula-

tions balance the protection of minors with the right to freedom of expres-
sion and the economic interests of host providers.With the laws in the United States and Germany as different as theyare in this case, and with the strong consensus and deep, principled con-
viction that exists in each country for its own law, it is difficult to see how
a practical compromise can be achieved and easy to see how the differ-
ences will inevitably lead to conflicts.  The 
Bavaria v. CompuServe case,
mentioned earlier in Chapter 3, certainly demonstrates the problem.American criticism of the German action in the CompuServe case wasbased on the strong objection in the United States to any action that would
(1) have a chilling effect on freedom of speech and (2) unreasonably or
unnecessarily burden a private company with economically debilitating
regulations.  Germans, for their part, are generally much less concerned

than Americans that government regulations might burden industry, if
those regulations appear otherwise warranted.  Furthermore, most Ger-
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FREE SPEECH AND THE INTERNET123mans would attach more importance to the protection of minors than tothe protection of free speech and would have no compunction about for-
ever blocking a transgressing newsgroupÑor even 282 of themÑif it were
necessary to prevent the distribution of child pornography.But another source of the tension that arose in this case was the frus-tration of the German prosecutors, who had very little leverage to take
action against CompuServe USA.  Because the company is headquartered

in the United States and its executives live there, German law could not
reach them.  The United States would not cooperate in extradition pro-

ceedings because the companyÕs actions were not violations of U.S. law.The Munich prosecutor, anxious to enforce the German law on childpornography, instead charged the executive director of CompuServe Ger-
many, the local affiliate, with violation of the law.  The problem, of course,

was that the local affiliate had no way of blocking the offending
newsgroups.  Thus the prosecutorÕs actions were criticized in Germany as

well as in the United States; but the German criticism arose not because of
any objection to host-provider liability but because the person charged
was not the person responsible.  In fact, though the executive director was

initially found guilty, the conviction was overturned in November 1999
precisely because the court recognized that he was neither responsible for
sponsoring the newsgroups nor able to remove them from the network.5.5INTERNET CONTENT REGULATION AS A
CHALLENGE TO GOVERNANCEThe difficulties in regulating Internet content epitomize the challengesthat global networks present for governance.  It therefore does not come

as a surprise that almost all the elements discussed in Chapter 9 (on gov-
ernance) in abstracto have a bearing on content regulation.5.5.1The Limited Power of Traditional National Regulation
It is useful to keep in mind that the Internet contributes to globaliza-tion in two ways.  First, it is a global entity that brings together cultural

and political influences from many countries and gives rise to a burgeon-
ing new field of commerce.  Second, the Internet makes it possible for

established businesses to coordinate activities across the globe through
various commercial arrangements, freeing them to a certain extent from
the constraints of geography and national boundaries.Globalized business activities are much more difficult for govern-ments to regulate and control, both because they may not be physically
located within a countryÕs boundaries and because nations compete toGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESattract businesses.24 This reduces the feasibility of strong, unilateral com-
mand-and-control as well as the reach of penal law.  The change is one of

degree, and national governments certainly do not lose all their options.25For example, a person residing in a country can be held liable for violation
of its national law or regulation even if he or she is part of an international
business or the illegal action involves transmission of inappropriate mate-
rial from another country.Similarly, a nation could enforce its laws extraterritorially by attach-ing a foreign companyÕs assets that happened to be located within its
boundaries or even arresting a visiting company official.26  Under Ger-
man law, prosecutors not only would be allowed to take these actions, but
are actually required to do so.  With respect to Internet sites, some have

suggested that nation-states could actually go further.  They might attack

foreign Web sites that contravene their laws, using such technical means
as denial-of-service attacks similar to those mounted by hackers against
Yahoo! and amazon.com.27  There seems little question that such tactics
would violate public international law28 but, perhaps more to the point,
they illustrate how the initial value balance involved in a decision to re-
strict transmission of certain content can be distorted by the means em-
ployed to implement the decision.The ideal situation, of course, would be one in which national lawspertaining to the Internet and other global activities were harmonized.
That does not seem to be a realistic expectation for the foreseeable future,
however.  So the most reasonable hope is for cooperation among govern-
ments to help providers and hosts understand the laws and regulations in
each jurisdiction.  Over time, this kind of transparency might lead toward

creative harmonization and compromise.The practical question is how far one nation can go in imposing lawsand regulations in a global economy in which firms have the ability to24On the governance of the Internet in greater detail, see Christoph Engel, 2000, ÒTheInternet and the Nation State,Ó in Christoph Engel and Kenneth H. Keller, eds., Understand-ing the Impact of Global Networks on Local Social, Political and Cultural Values (Law and Econom-ics of International Telecommunications 42), Baden-Baden: Nomos, 201-260.25This point has been stressed repeatedly by Jack Goldsmith.  In the context of this report
see in particular Jack Goldsmith, 2000, ÒThe Internet, Conflicts of Regulation, and Interna-tional Harmonization,Ó in Christoph Engel and Kenneth H. Keller, eds., 2000, Governance ofGlobal Networks in the Light of Differing Local Values, Nomos: Baden-Baden, 197-207.  26For greater detail, see Werner Meng, 1994, Extraterritoriale Jurisdiktion im ıffentlichenWirtschaftsrecht, Berlin.
27Cable News Network, ÒCyber-attacks Batter Web Heavyweights,Ó February 9, 2000.  See
<http://www6.cnn.com/2000/TECH/computing/02/09/cyber.attacks.01/index.html>.28Cf., Jamie Frederic, 1997, ÒRwandan Genocide and the International Law of Radio Jam-ming,Ó American Journal of International Law 91:628.
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FREE SPEECH AND THE INTERNET125withdraw their activities from the nationÕs territory.  Some observers be-
lieve that this threat is overstatedÑthat firms are unlikely to abandon a
large national market that would be difficult to maintain without some
presence in the country.  There may also be other reasons for keeping a

presence in a country, including the preference of investors or the avail-
ability of research-and-development capacity.  However, although these

considerations may make it impractical for a firm to avoid a nationÕs laws
on illegal Web content or its intellectual-property regulations, it is cer-
tainly possible for the firm to move large parts of its operation offshore, to
the detriment of the nationÕs economy.5.5.2International Legal Harmonization
International treaties provide one way of creating global order in aworld where there is no supranational government.  They work reason-

ably well when there is a common view on the values to be protected,
general agreement about what needs to be done, and an obvious advan-
tage in dealing with the issues on a global basis.  A number of treaties are

in existence today that appear, at least nominally, to deal with matters
closely related to some of the content issues that have arisen with regard
to the Internet.For example, the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment ofGenocide, dating from 1948,29 requires the parties to make criminal the
Òdirect and public incitement to commit genocide.Ó  The 1966 Interna-

tional Convention on the Avoidance of All Forms of Racial Discrimina-
tion30 proscribes words and acts of racial discrimination.  The United
NationsÕ Human Rights Pact of the same year31not only deals with hu-man rights, but also bans war propaganda and Òevery encouragement of
nationalistic, racial, or religious hatred [that] incites discrimination, ani-
mosity, or violence.Ó  In addition, there is a UN International Convention

on the International Right of Correction from the year 195332 (although
neither the Federal Republic nor the United States has adopted it).One promising approach to internationalizing some aspects ofInternet regulation would be to extend existing treaties to the new con-
text.  That would require a willingness on the part of each signatory coun-
29Convention of 09.12.1948, BGBl.  1954 II.  729.
30Convention of 07.04.1966, BGBl.  1969 II 961; compare also BTDrs.  13/1883.
31International Pact on Civil and Political Rights of 09.12.1966, BGBl.  1973 II 1533.
32Convention on the International Right of Correction from 31.03.1953, UNTS 435, 192.The Òright of correctionÓ refers to the right of a nation Òdirectly affectedÓ by a private orpublic report that it considers Òfalse or distortedÓ to secure Òcommensurate publicityÓ forthe ÒcorrectionsÓ that the nation wishes to publicize.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.126GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUEStry to interpret or extrapolate the treatyÕs provisions to the new environ-ment of the Internet and to amend its own national laws to reflect the new
interpretations.  Thus far, that has not happened.
For these and other reasons, there continues to be a push for newtreaties to achieve international harmonization.  Of course, they are easier

to negotiate when nations largely agree on the issues.  That requires either

finding issues on which there is essential unanimity to begin with or de-
fining a set of countries or a region with largely shared values.  What

should be evident from the discussion in this chapter is that the value
agreement must pertain not only to the problem giving rise to the chal-
lenge but also to the appropriateness of government roles and regulatory
tools for implementing a solution.At the moment, the one area in which it appears likely that some in-ternational harmonization will be achieved, at least in Europe, is the regu-
lation of child pornography.  In June 2001, the European Committee on

Crime Problems (CDPC) of the Council of Europe approved the Draft
Convention on Cybercrime, which was submitted to the full Committee
of Ministers for adoption in September 2001.  Article 9 of the Draft Con-

vention commits signatories Òto adopt such legislative and other mea-
sures as may be necessary to establish as criminal offenses under its do-
mestic law, when committed intentionally and without right,Ó acts that
relate to child pornography.33 In addition, a supplement to the Europol
agreement is being prepared that gives the European police authorities
wider jurisdiction to deal with the production, sale, and distribution of
child pornography.However, the inclusion of content-related offenses other than thoserelated to child pornography (e.g., the Òdistribution of racist propaganda
through computer systemsÓ) proved too controversial to include in the
Draft Convention.  The European Committee on Crime Problems may

consider an additional protocol relating to these offenses, but it faces op-
position from a number of civil liberties organizations.34The problem with harmonization is that if consensus requires draw-ing a too-small circle of cooperating nations, violators can find a regula-
tory haven fairly easily in a nation-state not party to the convention.  There
33These acts include producing child pornography for the purpose of its distributionthrough a computer system; offering or making available child pornography through a com-puter system; distributing or transmitting child pornography through a computer system;procuring child pornography through a computer system for oneself or for another; and
possessing child pornography in a computer system or on a computer-data storage me-dium.  See <http://conventions.coe.int/treaty/EN/projets/cybercrime27.htm>.
34See <http://www.privacyinternational.org/issues/cybercrime/coe/ngo_letter_601.htm>.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FREE SPEECH AND THE INTERNET127are, of course, political and economic pressures that can be brought tobear on nonsignatory states to bring them into compliance.  And for that

matter there are carrots as well as sticks, as has been shown in certain
aspects of global environmental protection.35There are dangers in this approach, however, where global networksare concerned.  The uneven penetration of the Internet (and its benefits)

has already created a global sense of ÒhavesÓ and Òhave-notsÓ that might
well be exacerbated by unidirectional pressure from the United States or Eu-
rope on other nations, regardless of the merit of their position.  Beyond that,

there is the danger that harmonizing with a particular set of values, or adopt-
ing a universal approach to the structure of legal institutions, will reduce the
very diversity that the Internet has the useful potential to promote.5.5.3Commercial Law
As pointed out elsewhere in this report, there are a number of circum-stances in which commercial lawÑrules that have been developed for
resolving business conflicts by coordinating the laws of different nationsÑ
could be used to deal with harmful contents accessible through the
Internet.  Consumer fraud, for example, does not change its legal charac-

ter just because it is carried out with the aid of a Web page.Nevertheless, commercial law is a weak foundation for matters suchas child pornography and politically tainted hate speech.  The major

problem in such cases is that the potential harm is to people who are not
likely to bring a private legal action for redress, may well not have stand-
ing to sue, and might have a difficult time proving damage.  Who would

sue and how would the case be made if easy access to child pornogra-
phy increased the risk that more children might be abused? Who would
sue and what would be the proof if easy access to Nazi propaganda
increased the risk that extreme right-wing political forces might gain on
the next Election Day? Even if the law gave standing to the public at
large, would enough people have the incentive and the wherewithal to
bring such actions?5.5.4Self-regulation Without State Intervention
A number of groups, certainly among them the Netizen and e-com-merce communities, argue that in most instances the best approach to
controlling the diffusion of offensive Internet-based material is self-regu-35
nisms as Viable Means, Berlin.
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESlation.  The great attraction of this approach is the flexibility it provides;
individuals can make their own judgments about what material they
want to avoid (or to access), and the need to force value consensus within
a particular country or across the globe is removed.  When one nationÕs
nudity is anotherÕs pornography, broad consensus is next to impossible.
On the other hand, access-control systems, age-verification systems, and
various kinds of filtering software can facilitate customized nonstate

regulation.To understand filtering systems, it is important to distinguish betweena siteÕs content and the judgment one makes about it.  For example, though

a site might have an image of a naked woman or a swastika, there may be
many judgments about whether or not such content is offensiveÑone per-
son might think so; another might not.Many filtering systems are designed by vendors who act both aslabeler and judgeÑthey describe the content and also make a judgment
about appropriateness (though they may or may not provide the user with
an option to override their judgment).  A second approach is to separate

the functions of labeler and judge.  To facilitate content labeling, the World

Wide Web Consortium designed the Platform for Internet Content Selec-
tion (Box 5.2), which provides a standardized vocabulary and format for
labeling content.  Once labels have been associated with specific content,

the user can deploy a filter that examines the labels associated with in-
coming content, and based on those labels, makes judgments about
whether content with certain labels should or should not be displayed.Note that that different filters can behave differently with regard tothe same content.  That is, Filter A may allow content that is labeled as

containing ÒnudityÓ and reject content that is labeled as containing Òswas-
tikas,Ó while Filter B may do exactly the opposite.A second issue is that the scope and granularity of the labeling arecritical.  If the labeling vocabulary does not include a category for Òswas-
tikas,Ó a filter based on this approach cannot block content containing
swastikas.  At least one particular vocabularyÑof the Internet Content

Rating AssociationÑallows labeling of sites that contain certain kinds of
language, nudity or sexual content, violence, and information related to
gambling, drugs, and alcohol.  However, there is no reason in principle

that a party concerned about other categories of possible offensiveness
cannot create vocabularies that cover them (though in practice, obtaining
a broad scope of coverage for such alternatives is difficult).Though filtering systems can be created by anyone, the required ef-fort may be large.  In principle, the organizations responsible for filtering
systems must stand behind the judgments they make about offensiveness
(and perhaps about content labeling as well), and users of filtering sys-Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FREE SPEECH AND THE INTERNET129BOX 5.2  The Platform for Internet Content Selection
The Platform for Internet Content Selection (PICS) is technology
that is intended to give users of interactive media, such as the Internet,
control over the kinds of material to which they and their childrenhave access.  PICS is intended to enable ÒselfÐratingÓ (the ability of
content providers to voluntarily label the content they create and
distribute) and Òthird-party ratingÓ (the ability of multiple, indepen-dent labeling services to assign additional labels to content createdand distributed by others) in an easy-to-use manner that allows indi-
viduals to use ratings and labels from a diversity of sources to control
the information that they and those under their supervision receive.Using the capability for third-party rating, services may each devise
their own labeling systems, and the same content may receive differ-ent labels from different services.
The philosophy underlying PICS is one of voluntary use.  How-
ever, PICS-based technology can be installed anywhereÑat the enduserÕs client, at the proxy servers of the userÕs employer, school, orlibrary, at the servers of the Internet service provider to whom he or

she subscribes, or even at the points of Internet entry to a country.Thus, concerns have been widely expressed that PICS is a technologythat can greatly facilitate government censorship.  Furthermore, to

the extent that PICS is used by private parties other than the end useras a tool for censorship, it is not subject to the political processes thatcan be used in democratic countries to forge compromise and con-
sensus.SOURCE:  Description of PICS adapted from <http://www.w3.org/PICS/prin-
ciples.html>.Articles critical of PICS include:¥  Simson Garfinkel. 1997. ÒGood Clean PICS: The Most Effective Censorship
Technology the Net Has Ever Seen May Already Be Installed on your Desk-top.Ó  See  <http://hotwired.lycos.com/packet/garfinkel/97/05/index2a.html>.
¥  Lawrence Lessig. 1997. ÒTyranny in the Infrastructure,Ó 
Wired 5.07 (July).
Available online at <http://www.wired.com/wired/5.07/cyber_rights.html>.¥  Jonathan Weinberg. 1997. ÒRating the Net,Ó 
Hastings Comm./Ent. L.J.19:453.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.130GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUEStems may make their own judgments about the attractiveness of productsfrom different vendors based on how well their own values about offen-
siveness are reflected in the vendorsÕ judgments.  Thus, users not wishing

to see pro-racist material might use filters developed by civil-rights orga-
nizations, or users not wishing to see anti-religious material might use
filters developed by their church.36One of the attractive features of a labeling system is that it is inher-ently self-policing.  The value of the label depends on the reputation it

develops for reliability.  Each site that receives the labelÕs endorsement

has a stake in giving it meaning.  The user community itself has an inter-

est in the quality of the label and can also be part of the enforcement

process.As movie- and video-rating organizations in the United States havelearned, making judgments about offensiveness is fraught with difficul-
ties.  Such groups must tread a fine line between being overly rigid and

prescriptive in their classifications and being so ambiguous that no real
information is conveyed to the user.  Generally speaking, categories or

rules that have some flexibility are more likely to be suitable for a rapidly
changing world like the Internet.An important technical issue is the extent to which computer-execut-able rules for distinguishing between appropriate and inappropriate con-
tent can be formulated.  Some of the filtering software with which people

have experimented thus far has shown how difficult this can be, some-
times leading to absurd results, as when some particular words are coded
as unacceptable.  Moreover, filtering systems are usually designed with

some particular point of view to take advantage of a market, pursue an
ideological agenda, or avoid liability on the part of the software provider.
This means that, at least until now, there has been little incentive for trans-
parency in how the filters are created37 and little attempt to take oppos-
ing interests or values into account, as one might hope would be the case
in a legislative approach to regulation.38 In that sense, filter systems can
36A fuller discussion of the advantages, disadvantages, and other realities of filters is con-tained in CSTB, National Research Council, Youth, Pornography, and the Internet: Can We Pro-vide Sound Choices in a Safe Environment?, Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, forth-coming.37This is not to say that it is impossible or even difficult to increase transparency of filtersby making available the lists of Web sites that are blocked or the lists of keywords that might
be objectionable.  However, vendors of filter products often argue that the creation of their
blocked lists or Òbad wordsÓ is their intellectual property, and that publication of such listswould deprive them of the benefits of their work if others took their work as a starting point
to develop other lists.38This has been recently pointed out by Lawrence Lessig, 1999, Code and Other Laws inCyberspace, New York: Basic Books.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FREE SPEECH AND THE INTERNET131work against certain free speech values of a community and, indeed, helpto de-integrate the community.Host providers have a different problem in undertaking self-regula-tion; the control systems available to content providers or content users
are not applicable to them.  First, the material that host providers carry is
an aggregate from a huge spectrum of content providers; and second, they
are not end users, so that filtration software would be inappropriate.
Many host providers have adopted their own codes of ethics.  They may

commit themselves, for example, to checking complaints about sites that
come from users or to working cooperatively with legal authorities of par-

ticular nation-states to take action against sites involved in illegal activity.Critics of self-regulation point out that because such codes of ethicsare unenforceable, they are primarily symbolic.  However, it may be pos-
sible to develop a legal framework that would make codes enforceable,
even if the host providers themselves determined the details of the code.
A more serious criticism is the possible curtailment of free speech; the
codes may deprive content providers who are sanctioned or excluded by
a host provider of the due process they would have under a more formal
legal structure.  Such points have not been thoroughly discussed at this

early stage in the development of these self-regulatory instruments.The role of hosts as intermediary between user and content providersuggests that it may be inappropriate to think of them as engaged in regu-
lation per se.  Their role in a nongovernmental regulation scheme is to

provide a service to users who would like to be shielded from harmful or
otherwise unwanted contents.  Users could do this for themselves by sim-

ply not accessing certain sites or by installing filters on their computers
(or using other technologies that may be available in the future), or they
could access the Internet via a service provider with a declared access
policy.  Whether users want to pay for the hostÕs service is something to

be determined by the market.  In fact, it would appear that, in the future,

host providers will compete with each other and with companies produc-
ing self-help tools like filters, and users may choose on the basis of conve-
nience, comprehensiveness, and selectivity.5.5.5Hybrid Regulation
Self-regulation and intermediation have many attractive features, butif governments do not intervene, the market alone will shape the array of
mechanisms actually used to control the distribution of harmful content.
These mechanisms, in turn, will largely determine what material is elec-
tronically available to whom.  Obviously, the outcome may not always

conform to the values of the society.  It might therefore be useful to con-

sider hybrid forms of regulation, combining public and private controls.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESGovernments can use both sticks and carrots to influence the opera-tion of self-regulatory schemes.39 As pointed out earlier, command-and-
control regulation of content providers doesnÕt work very well in the net-
worked world.  The CompuServe case indicates that an alternative for

governments is to threaten action against host providers.  But there are

softer options.Governments can insist on an organizational framework for self-regu-lation that gives outside interests a voice and ensures that the process of
developing and applying a rating system or excluding a provider from a
host network is transparent.  They can give industry limited antitrust or

liability protection to encourage joint rulemaking and vigorous joint ac-
tion.  Or they can set up an authority to check on how well self-regulation

is working (a role played by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission with
respect to certain privacy issues and other aspects of consumer protec-
tion).  It is even possible to envision governments supporting or encour-

aging education and training programs to improve the media competence
of users so that they are better able to use the self-help tools that become
more and more available as technological advances occur.It does seem likely that a hybrid regulatory approach will finally
emerge, but it is difficult to predict what particular balance of mecha-
nisms will actually obtain in each country.  The experimentation now go-

ing on appears to be healthy, and if there is a bottleneck, it is the legal
systemÕs difficulty in understanding the technical possibilities and react-
ing quickly and flexibly to them.  It may well be that in an area as techno-

logically dynamic as this one and as capable of bringing about major so-
cial changes, expert panels similar to those developed under the aegis of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change could play an important
role.  They might be especially useful in advising governments on the

state of the technology and the feasibility of various regulatory ap-
proaches.39For the theoretical framework, see Fritz W. Scharpf, 1997, Games Real Actors Play: Actor-Centered Institutionalism in Policy Research, Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1336Privacy and Freedom of Information
6.1INTRODUCTION
Chapter 5 discussed how the United States and Germany differed intheir approaches to resolving the tensions between formal and substan-
tive values.1 Both countries subordinated the formal value of free speech
to certain substantive values, but in the case of the United States, the
trumping substantive value was an aversion to pornography, while for
Germany it was an aversion to hate speech and its Nazi overtones.This chapter examines potential tensions between another substan-tive value (privacy) and a formal value (transparency in government, as
exemplified by notions of Òfreedom of information,Ó or FOI).  The situa-

tion is not quite the same as that in the earlier chapter, however.  Free

speech is more or less understood in the same way in both nations and it
enjoys explicit constitutional protection, which can be abridged only in
very limited circumstances.  Privacy,
 on the other hand, is not interpretedin the same way in the two countries and, at least in the United States,
arguments continue as to whether it enjoys constitutional protection.Freedom of information is also interpreted in different ways in theUnited States and Germany, and is not explicitly protected in either con-
stitution.  How privacy and freedom of information are actually inter-
1Recall (Chapter 3) that formal values can be regarded as general principles by whichindividuals choose to live, while substantive values relate to specific aspects of oneÕs envi-
ronment and behavior.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.134GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESpreted in the two countries determines when and how they are in tensionas values.  What kinds of information are explicitly designated as public in
the pertinent statutes, and, at least in the United States, what protection of
privacy is provided for in statute, determine when and how they are in
tension as a legal matter.Although neither nation protects privacy or freedom of informationas strongly as it does free speech, to the extent that they do provide pro-
tection Germany puts greater emphasis on privacy and the United States
favors transparency.  Germany, and Europe more generally, have com-

prehensive systems of law and regulation in place to protect privacy.  The

United States, by contrast, has a patchwork of incomplete protections.
With respect to freedom of information, the situation is reversed.  The

United States has a comprehensive system that provides the public with
access to an enormous range of information and data, while Germany has
a patchwork system.With respect to freedom of information, both countries rely on ordi-nary legislation rather than constitutional law to specify which documents
should be accessible to the public and under what terms.  The situation

with respect to privacy is somewhat different, in that German constitu-
tional jurisprudence does recognize the right explicitly and many Ameri-
can scholars argue that privacy protection is implicit in a number of con-
stitutional provisions.  Nevertheless, here too legislation plays the more

important role in defining the meaning of the right.A further distinction between the tensions described in this chapterand the one addressed in the preceding chapter is that the threat to pri-
vacy does not necessarily come about because of information made avail-
able by the government; it often derives from information collected by
and/or shared between private parties.2Privacy and freedom of information are not always in tension; in someinstances, societyÕs commitment to freedom of information is the key to
maintaining a personÕs privacy.  That is, if an individual can invoke FOI

rights to learn what personal information the government holds about
him or her and how it has used the information, the government can be
held accountable for any misuse.  Thus, the person can effectively exercise

some control over abuse of the information, which is one of the important
dimensions of privacy.In many other cases, rights to privacy and FOI rights do not intersectat allÑfor instance, data on the performance of the economy, on land use,2The distinction is not always clear-cut.  For example, personal data in a companyÕs pos-
session may enter government records (e.g., through a bankruptcy or other court proceed-
ing).  In such a case, information may be subject to FOI disclosure.
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRIVACY AND FREEDOM OF INFORMATION135or on a host of other issues of importance to governments are not obvi-ously relevant to privacy.3 In other words, to the extent that privacy re-
fers to keeping personal information private and under the control of the
individual with whom it is associated, privacy rights need not conflict
with the free disclosure of information relevant to the workings of gov-
ernment.  Even in these cases, however, the formal value of transparency
of state activities is not necessarily viewed by governments as an unal-
loyed good.  That is, a question arises concerning the extent to which gov-

ernments need to be able to deliberate in private or to control the release
of raw data to prevent public panic (one end of the spectrum) or provide
a desired spin (perhaps the other end).But despite these caveats, privacy rights and FOI rights do, in manyinstances, come into conflict.  In these cases, privacy is in conflict not only

with the formal value of transparency of state activities, but also with the
public interest (e.g., in the prevention and prosecution of criminal of-
fenses) or commercial interests (e.g., in the collection and exploitation of
data).Global networks such as the Internet have raised the stakes signifi-cantly for both privacy and freedom of information.  Clearly, they facili-

tate dissemination of information held by both public and private institu-
tions.  But perhaps even more significantly, the capabilities of computers

and software to mine, sort, and reorganize data have increased the ability
of many institutions to exploit that information.  They can more readily

put it into useful formats and tease out of disparate databases compre-
hensive and accessible profiles on private individuals and the actions of
governmental bodies.6.2PRIVACY
6.2.1The Values Involved
Privacy is the epitome of a substantive value.  It encompasses ideas of
autonomy, dignity, and personal freedom and control, and it provides
protection for the individual.  Box 6.1 describes examples of what might

be regarded as violations of privacy.Privacy is different from secrecy and confidentiality.  Secrecy is a func-
tional concept, requiring an agreement on the part of those who are party3The development of new technologies make statements of this kind always subject tocaveats.  For example, the increasing capacity to mine nominally ÒanonymousÓ data to back
out information about individuals is often acknowledged.  Further, even when data are
gathered remotely, low-orbit photoreconnaissance satellites with high resolution (or even
photoreconnaissance aircraft) might yield data on the behavior of individuals.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESto some information to not share it with others.  It generally does not
require (or seek) the sanction of society, merely the commitment of those
who share the information.  Confidentiality is a more formal and social

concept, a set of rules that govern the use of information held by institu-
tions about individuals and the conditions under which that information
can be shared.  Privacy is quite distinct from both of these concepts; it

refers to the right of individuals to control information about themselvesÑ
to keep it secret or to share it with others only as they see fit.Although privacy in essence serves individuals by protecting andempowering them, it also serves society and government.  When a person

believes that his or her privacy is threatened, that individual may become
defensive, minimizing personal exposure by being cautious about ex-
pressing views and disengaging from society as much as possible.  But

because democratic societies rely on full participation and free expressionBOX 6.1  Examples of Privacy Violation
A drugstore chain sold customersÕ medical information to a marketingcompany that sent consumers coupons for drugs related to their disorders.
An outcry over privacy concerns halted the practice.
Veteran U.S. sailor Timothy R. McVeigh (not the Oklahoma Citybomber) faced expulsion for homosexuality based on evidence the Navy
gathered from America Online.  McVeigh, since reinstated, had cited his
sexual orientation in an online profile that he thought was confidential.  Ajudge ruled that the Navy violated the law by obtaining confidential infor-
mation about McVeigh from AOL without a warrant or court order.
Retail salesman Bronti Kelly, 34, couldnÕt land a job for years and hadno idea why.  The reason was that a police record sent across the Internet

to employers had wrongly labeled him a shoplifter.  The company that
failed to correct the report was ordered to pay more than $73,000 to Kelly.State motor vehicle departments in Florida, South Carolina, and Colo-rado sold driversÕ photographs in digital form to a private firm that devel-
oped a system to enable clerks at points of sale to verify a customerÕs iden-
tity.  Once the public learned about the sale of photos, the reaction in all

three states was highly negative, causing the effort to collapse.SOURCES:  Robert Gellman, ÒPrivacy and Harmonization: A Discussion Paper for a
Symposium on Global Networks and Local Values,Ó National Academy of Sciences,Woods Hole, Massachusetts, June 3-5, 1999.David E. Kalish, ÒNet Privacy Victims Lash Back at Thefts,Ó The Detroit News, April19, 1998.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRIVACY AND FREEDOM OF INFORMATION137by its citizens, the threat that gives rise to the individualÕs defensivenessbecomes a threat to society as well.Obviously, privacy is not an absolute right.  For example, commit-
ments to maintain privacy may conflict with free expression (if, for ex-
ample, that free expression might divulge private information).  Societies
have asserted a need (and therefore a right) to gather and use information
about individuals for such purposes as taxation, census, and health; to
hold people to their obligations as citizens; to serve them in accordance
with their entitlements; and to support law enforcement efforts.  Such

societal assertions must be balanced against the desirability of the per-
sonal right of individuals to know what information about them is being
gathered and used; in that way, they can monitor the conformity of such
use to law, and control any uses beyond those sanctioned purposes.Private institutions or other individuals do not have a constitutionalright to violate an individualÕs privacy, although they may gain the privi-
lege of using someoneÕs personal information in certain ways under a
contractual arrangement with that person.  (On the Web, personal infor-

mation is often collected under a theory of Òimplied consent,Ó in which
use of a Web site grants the site operator the right to collect certain per-
sonal information automatically through ÒcookiesÓ and the like (Box 6.2).To illustrate the conflicting pressures, it is instructive to compare dis-closure policies for health records with policies for pizza-delivery records.

There are many users who can legitimately argue for access to patient
health records without the specific authorization of the patient.  In order

to meet a number of social, economic, and health needs, a society may
allow access to some parts of health records by public health authorities,
health researchers, fraud and abuse investigators, accreditation firms, and

even law-enforcement agencies under some circumstances.  Actually, elec-

tronic databases may provide for greater privacy protection in these in-
stances than traditional paper records because it is easier to limit access to

only certain parts of the patient record.  For pizza-delivery records, on the

other hand, it may never be appropriate to allow for any nonconsensual
disclosures because there are no overriding societal needs that justify it.The privacy interests of individuals are likely to be greater in theirmedical records, however, than in their pizza-delivery records.  And, the

public uproar over unauthorized release of medical records is inevitably
much larger than in the case for pizza delivery records.  Confidentiality of

medical information has also been regarded as a prerequisite for free and
candid discussions between health-care professionals and their patients.
For these reasons, a culture of resistance to unauthorized disclosure of
medical records is common in the health profession.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUES6.2.2German and American Perspectives
In 1983 the German Constitutional Court summarized the underlyingvalue balance as follows:The individual . . . has the right to know and to decide on the informationbeing processed about him.  At the same time, as a social being the indi-
vidual cannot avoid becoming the object of information processing.
However, limitations to his basic right have only to be accepted whenthere is an overriding general interest and if that interest is molded into
a law that follows the basic requirements of clarity and proportionality.To protect these principles a number of safeguards are required; thesesafeguards consist of data processing principles (correctness, timeliness,
purpose limitation, fairly and lawfully obtained), derived rights (access,correction), and organizational safeguards (independent institutions).4In the United States, the development of privacy policy has been slowand uneven, with the privacy of information collected and held by gov-
ernment receiving much more attention than information collected and
held by private companies and organizations.  For example, the Privacy

Act of 1974 (P.L. 93-579) and the subsequent Privacy Protection Study
Commission both focused on information collected and held by the gov-
ernment as the potential misuser of personal information.  The Privacy
BOX 6.2  ÒCookiesÓ Facilitate Collection of Personal
Information Regarding Information Retrieved from Web SitesA Web server typically cannot link one userÕs visit to a given site to anyother visit by that same user.  This limitation is overcome by causing a Web
client (i.e., the userÕs workstation ) to submit an identifier with each requestfor information.  The identifier, called a 
Òcookie,Ó can be associated with
personal data obtained from the requester on his or her first visit to a par-
ticular Web site.  Because the individual
Õs cookie is resubmitted with eachsubsequent visit,  the server knows all  the information that interested a

particular requester before.  The server can thus create a profile of the
customer.  And by combining profiles from multiple Web sites, cooperat-
ing providers of information can construct even richer profiles.4BVerfGE 65,1 (41 ff).Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRIVACY AND FREEDOM OF INFORMATION139Act in particular provides a broad policy framework for privacy relevantto such information.Some specialized privacy protections applicable to nongovernmentalentities emerged in the 1970s and 1980s, including the Fair Credit Report-
ing Act of 1970, the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974,
the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Electronic Communi-
cations Privacy Act of 1986, and the Video Privacy Protection Act of 1988.
The privacy of health information was addressed in the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act of 1998 and the ChildrenÕs Online Pri-
vacy Protection Act of 1999.  However, U.S. privacy policy remains un-

settled, in part because of concerns about the costs (and other burdens) of
compliance, ambiguity about the appropriate application of underlying
philosophical principles (property and free speech, for example), and un-
resolved political clashes between those who collect and process data and
those who advocate for broad privacy protection.As the above paragraphs illustrate, the United States and Germany(which is much like the rest of Europe in this respect) approach privacy
from very different political and legal traditions.  The German approach

is rooted in its experience with totalitarian regimes and military occupa-
tion, which has given rise in Europe to a strong antipathy toward, even an
anxiety about, invasions of privacy or illegal surveillance.  On the other

hand, Europeans, and Germans in particular, tend to trust their govern-
ment more than Americans do and turn to it to protect their interests.
Thus the first data-protection law in the world, the Hesse Data Protection
Act, was passed in Germany in 1970, and it established an enforcement
structure that became the model for data protection all over Europe.  The
act created a governmental structure to preserve each individualÕs pri-
vacy rights, and it stipulated that the data-protection officer established
under this act, though formally a public official, would be independent
from all other branches of government.5As importantly, the willingness to trust government has made it ac-ceptable for German privacy law to take a comprehensive approach.  All

record keepers, public and private, have to comply with fair information
practices (Box 6.3).  Although earlier laws imposed different rules on pub-

lic and private record keepers, more recent legislation dealing with the
Internet largely removes that distinction.  The 1997 Teleservices Data Pro-

tection Act6 implementing the European Union directive on the protec-
5The Federal Data Protection CommissionerÕs independence is laid down in sect. 22 par. 4sent.  2 and 3 of the Federal Data Protection Act.  He is independent in the performance of

his duties and subject to the law only.  According to Art.  28 par. 1 subpar. 2 of the European
Directive the data protection authorities act with complete independence in exercising thefunctions entrusted in them.6BGBl.  I 1997 S.  1871-1872
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.140GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUEStion of privacy in the telecommunications sector,7 and the 2001 amend-
ments to the German Federal Data Privacy Act8 implementing the 1998
European UnionÕs directive on data protection,9 apply to private compa-
nies and individuals as well as to public authorities.  German law does

distinguish between privacy (ÒSchutz personenbezogener DatenÓ) and busi-ness secrets, providing less protection for business secrets on the argu-
ment that the individual rights at stake are not of the same order.BOX 6.3  Fair Information Practices
1.Openness.  Existence of record-keeping systems and databanks contain-
ing data about individuals should be publicly known, along with a de-
scription of the main purpose and uses of the data.2.Individual participation.  Each individual should have the right to see
any data about himself or herself and to correct or remove any data that
is not timely, accurate, relevant, or complete.3.Collection limitation.  There should be limits to the extent of personal
data collection, those data should be collected by lawful and fair means,

and they should be collected, where appropriate, with the knowledgeor consent of the subject.4.Data quality.  Personal data should be relevant to the purposes for whichthey are to be used, and should be accurate, complete, and timely.5.Finality.  There must be limits to the uses and disclosure of personaldata.  The data should be used only for purposes specified at the time of

collection, and it should not be otherwise disclosed without the consentof the data subject or other legal authority.6.Security.  Reasonable security safeguards against such risks as loss, un-authorized access, destruction, use, modification, or disclosure shouldprotect personal data.7.Accountability.  Record keepers should be accountable for complyingwith fair information practices.7Directive 97/66/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 December 1997concerning the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the telecommu-nications sector: Official Journal L 024 , 30/01/1998, p. 0001-0008.  Available online at <http:/

/europa.eu.int/eur-lex/en/lif/dat/1997/en_397L0066.html>.8Federal Data Protection Act of December 20, 1990 (BGBl.I 1990 S.2954) as amended bylaw of May 23, 2001 (BGBl I S.  904).
9Council Directive 95/46/EC of 24 October 1995 on the Protection of Individuals withRegard to the Processing of Personal Data and on the Free Movement of Such Data, art.  32,1995 O.J.  (L 281) 31, 49 (requiring member states to adopt legislation conforming to terms of

directive) [hereafter European Privacy Directive].  Available online at <http://
europa.eu.int/eur-lex/en/lif/dat/1995/en_395L0046.html>.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRIVACY AND FREEDOM OF INFORMATION141By contrast, the United States has a populist mistrust of governmentalinstitutions and a strong tradition of relying on market forces not only to
regulate the economy but to serve many social needs as well.  Thus while

the U.S. Congress has adopted legislation to protect personal privacy from

encroachment by federal agencies,10 the regulation of private industry
has moved more slowly and in a piecemeal manner.  In practice, the U.S.

norm is a patchwork of legislation and court decisions arising from epi-
sodic scandals and political pressures from both industry and privacy
advocates.  Thus, highly specialized solutions have been crafted for dif-

ferent technologies (e.g., statutory regimes specific to the protection of
postal mail, telephone communications, e-mail, and other Internet com-
munications) and for different subject areas (Box 6.4).Finally, in U.S. law, privacyÑthat is, the control of oneÕs personaldataÑis basically understood as a property right.  Individuals can trans-

fer or sell their property rights to a firm interested in its use or even to
government, provided that the transfer is voluntary and the terms and
conditions are fair.  But the traditional European approach treats indi-

vidualsÕ interests in data about themselves as an inalienable liberty rightÑ

that is, a right that cannot be given up, even voluntarily.BOX 6.4  A Patchwork of Privacy Legislation
Credit reports are protected by the Fair Credit Reporting Act.1Medical records have historically been protected by state legislation.However, in late 2000, federal regulations to protect medical records werepromulgated by the Clinton administration under the provisions of theHealth Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996.  These regu-

lations granted individuals new rights with respect to medical privacy.
Bank records are protected by (among other things) 15 USC 6801 (TitleV of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999), which requires disclosure of
financial institution policies on the sharing of nonpublic personal informa-tion.  This affords individuals the opportunity in certain cases to decline to
allow such sharing.
Records pertaining to videotape rentals are protected by 18 USC 2710(the Video Privacy Protection Act of 1988), which provides for civil dam-ages against unauthorized disclosure of such records.115 U.S.C. ¤ 1681a.
10Federal Privacy Act, 5 U.S.C. ¤ 552a.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.142GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESYet despite the differences in legal traditions, both Germany and theUnited States over the last 25 years have developed what have become
known as Òfair information principlesÓ that reflect substantial agreement
on basic issues.  This common ground is summarized in Box 6.3.  The ques-

tion is whether these commonaltiesÑcoupled with the strong linking forces
introduced by global networks in general as well as the more specific desire
to exploit them for commercial usesÑwill ultimately lead to harmoniza-
tion, in which the United States moves toward the more comprehensive
and integrated approach to privacy that is prevalent in Europe.If privacy is to be protected by direct legal enforcement, then there aretwo possible approaches (regardless of whether privacy rights are charac-
terized as property or liberty interests).  The first approach is to establish

independent governmental data-protection authorities responsible for
monitoring and enforcing fair information principles, as is done in the Ger-
man system.  This approach avoids the high transaction costs, and the diffi-

culty of proving cause and establishing injury, that may make individual
enforcement illusory.  However, as a practical matter, it is difficult for pub-

licly funded enforcement authorities to handle all individual complaints.The second approach is to allow individuals to bring lawsuits to pro-tect their privacy rights and to recover damages for injuries resulting from
violation of those rights.  This approach decentralizes enforcement of pri-

vacy rights, but it may not be efficacious because it is difficult to prove
cause, and the stakes involved in any particular invasion of personal pri-
vacy may be so small that individuals are unwilling to pay the costs of
litigation (though efficiency can be increased when numerous injury cases
are grouped into class actions).6.2.3Technology and Privacy
Individuals have many good reasons to want information about them-selves to be stored electronically and to be made available over communi-
cations networks.  The rapid and accurate transfer of electronically stored

medical records can improve a personÕs medical care and might even save
a life; stored credit card and address information makes Internet shop-
ping convenient; and user-friendly online banking transactions have at-
tracted millions of customers.Yet advances in information technology can also threaten privacy.  Avisitor to a Web site may involuntarily leave behind personal information
that the Web site owner can later use for commercial purposes.  Seem-

ingly harmless fragments of information left at different sites can be com-
bined into a potentially harmful aggregate.  Even easier, cookies can be

set in a userÕs hard drive, creating a built-in history of sites visited, mate-
rial browsed, and purchases made.  Such data can be used for marketing
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRIVACY AND FREEDOM OF INFORMATION143purposesÑtargeting an individual with ads that are customized to his orher tastesÑwhich may represent a convenience to some and little more
than an annoyance to others.  However, it is the absence of control over

the collection or the use of the information that is the quintessential viola-
tion of privacy, and it is not difficult to construct scenarios in which that
violation can be harmful to individuals.Of course, personal information can be collected by Internet serviceproviders as well as by Web site hosts.  ISPs can and do record informa-

tion on user actions for internal purposes or to comply with court orders,
and this might include sites visited, the amount of information down-
loaded, and when such visits occurred.Databases containing ÒpublicÓ information are another source of pri-vacy concern.   Much of such informationÑe.g., records pertaining to

property tax, motor vehicles, driversÕ licenses, convictionsÑwas hereto-
fore not public because it was hard to access or extract from voluminous
databases.11  Making such information easily available to the general pub-
lic through the Internet may well be viewed as a violation of an
individualÕs privacy rights because this allows it to be used for purposes
other than those for which it was originally collected (together with the
individualÕs implied or explicit consent).  In the United States, for ex-

ample, these databases have been a valuable source of information for
telephone-solicitation operations.Other methods of data collection are possible as well, including
records of cellular-telephone location, records of building ingress and
egress (created when magnetic cards are used to gain access), and records
of credit-card and telephone usage.  And the World Wide Web itself is a

source of information about individuals.  Commercial transactions and

political dialogues posted in forums create opportunities to collect infor-
mation about personal interests and activities.Today, different structures exist for regulating personal data collec-tion and use in each of these areas of activity from local exchange to long
distance telephone companies to cable television companies and Internet
service providers.  That is certainly a source of confusion and chaos.  Tech-

nological convergence, however, is leading companies to strive to become
sole-source information providers and handlers, and the differing regula-
tory traditions and customs that characterize each domain may well come
to overlap, leading, at least initially, to greater turmoil even within na-
tional borders.  The technical convergence can also create the opportunity

for a kind of regulatory arbitrage that can work to the detriment of pri-11In Germany, third-party access to all these kinds of information is severely controlled bylaw, so that the term ÒpublicÓ in this discussion is even more properly put in quotation
marks.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.144GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESvacy rights.  On the other hand, the turmoil and the obvious regulatory
inequities may serve as a stimulus to rationalize the present cacophony of
regulatory regimes.  In so doing, it could reinforce the fundamental con-

cepts of privacy sometimes lost or distorted in the past as individual sec-
tors developed rules that weighed particular political, commercial, and
even technical factors more heavily than privacy per se.Information technology is not only a threat to privacy; it can also pro-vide the technical means for increasing oneÕs privacy.  For example:
¥Encryption (Box 6.5) is widely used to ensure privacy and to en-
able secure commerce.  Encryption (at the sending end) and decryption

(at the receiving end) provide end-to-end confidentiality when the inter-BOX 6.5  Secret-key and Public-key Encryption
Classic encryption requires both the sender and receiver to possess asecret keyÑwhich is used to encode (encrypt) the message at one end andto decode (decrypt) it at the other.  The most common secret-key crypto

system in use today is the DES, or Data Encryption Standard, developed in
the mid-1970s.  It is in widespread use for high-volume commercial/finan-
cial transactions.Of more relevant current interest is 
Òpublic-key encryption,Ó which
makes possible the secure transmission of messages without requiring thesender to have access to a secret key.  Public-key systems, also developed
in the mid-70s, use two different, but mathematically related, keysÑtheÒpublic keyÓ and the 
Òprivate key.Ó Knowledge of the public key allows
anyone to encrypt a message, but not to derive from the encrypting key

(without enormous computational effort) knowledge of the private, decrypt-ing key.  It can take a supercomputer weeks or months to 
ÒbreakÓ a private
key; indeed, if the key is made long enough (e.g., 2048 bits), the task can
become, in effect, impossible.1In practice, a personÕs (or an organizationÕs) public key is published ina trusted public directory.  Then, anyone wishing to send a confidential

message to that person encrypts the text using the personÕs public key andtransmits it.  The intended recipient uses his or her private key to decrypt
the message, which, since it is encrypted, cannot be read by anyone else.1Thus Òkey lengthÓ and its effect on secure communications has become an impor-
tant matter of public-policy debate.  The question is what encryption software
Ñthatis, what encryption-key lengthÑshould private parties be allowed to use or export toother countries? The balance sought is between the right of private parties to securetheir transmissions and the needÑor rightÑof governments, with appropriate judi-cial supervision, to monitor commercial traffic or to maintain an edge in its ability toprotect the security of its own messages.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRIVACY AND FREEDOM OF INFORMATION145BOX 6.6  Anonymizers
An anonymizing service dissociates the identity of a user from a mes-
sage that he or she sends.  Anonymizing services fall into two categories:

true anonymous remailers and pseudonym servers.
A true anonymous remailer is based on a chain of remailers.  The user
sends a message to the first remailer, which passes it along to the second
remailer, and so on, using a protocol that provides anonymity with respectto mailers farther up the chain.  Thus, only the first remailer knows the
identity of the sender.  And, if each remailer discards information about the

sources of the messages it receives for forwarding, it is technically verydifficult to reconstruct the identity of the original sender.  (Note that undersuch circumstances, replying to a message sent through a true anonymizing
remailer is quite difficult.)A pseudonym server provides a pseudonym for a user and more easily
supports replies to a message.  The pseudonym owner sends a message to

the server, which substitutes an e-mail address such as <johndoe@.alias.net>, and people can send mail to the user without knowing who heor she is.  However, in order to route replies back to the user, the server

must keep local records that map real e-mail addresses to pseudonyms.This leaves the server open to compromise (e.g., by law-enforcement au-thorities in that country acting under court order).  To reduce the likelihood

of compromise, pseudonym servers can be an element in a chain ofremailers.  In this scenario, the person who owns the pseudonym leaves a
set of multiply encrypted instructions on how to route mail to him or her (a

Òreply blockÓ).  Typically, a reply block will contain the address of an
anonymous remailer, and then an encrypted block that only the remailercan read.  When the remailer decrypts the block, it will contain the address

of another remailer, and a block only that remailer can decrypt.
Typically, anonymous remailers in the chain are set up in different coun-tries, with different legal traditions.  Thus in order to compromise the ano-
nymity of a sender wishing replies, every single remailer would have to becompromisedÑa difficult and time-consuming task.Note also that replies can be effected in ways that do not depend onknowledge of a userÕs return path.  For example, a reply can be broadcast
to a widely read newsgroup in an encrypted form, using a key known to thesender.  Anyone can view the encrypted message, but without the key it

shows up as gibberish.  However, the sender can read it easily, because he
or she knows the decryption key.  Another possibility is to send the reply to
a Web-based e-mail service such as Hotmail, which the user can check
from any location.  (And, using an anonymizer that enables anonymous
Web surfing, the user can keep his or her identify private.)Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.146GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESmediate communications channels are either public or, if private, subjectto malicious intrusion.¥Anonymization enables a user to send (and sometimes to receive)
messages anonymously (Box 6.6).  Anonymizing services make it very

difficult and sometimes impossible to trace the identity of a user.¥Automated privacy-negotiation protocols, such as the Platform for
Privacy Preferences Project (P3P), enable Web site operators to express
their privacy policies in a standardized machine-readable format that can
be interpreted by clients linking to the Web site.  Clients ÒrememberÓ their

usersÕ own privacy preferences, which are automatically compared with
the policies of the visited Web site.  If the two match, the connection is

allowed; otherwise, discrepancies are called to the userÕs attention.  Thus,

the human user need not read the privacy policies at every site he or she
visits, but rather can rely on his client for this task.Reliance on technical approaches has two major drawbacks.  First,
technical approaches generally require explicit user actionÑan individual
wanting to protect privacy must take an action to do so (this may change
in the future if defaults for encryption are widely built into e-mail or other
communications software).  Because many individuals do not know that

the tools exist or do not have the skills to use them effectively, the privacy
interests of those individuals may be compromised.Second, if privacy protection relies on software that both client andprovider must install, such as P3P, then it is viable as a privacy-protection
mechanism only if a large number of Web site operators adopt the same
software and a critical mass of users install it in some relatively brief ini-
tial period.  The issue of timing is important because the value of the sys-
tem grows with numbers of users (an illustration of positive network ex-
ternalities discussed further in Chapter 7), so that the willingness of
operators to invest in such a system depends strongly on how rapidly
users can be recruited and a financial return generated.In any case, although technical tools can offer some degree of dataprotection, few in the United States or Europe advocate relying on them
exclusively.  Technical tools per se do not provide a framework for bal-

ancing competing values where privacy is involvedÑor, for that matter,
in any other case.  The appropriate balance cannot and should not depend

on the ever-changing state of technology and the relative power it may
confer at any particular moment on those who seek to protect their pri-
vacy or on those who seek to invade it.  It is the role of communities to

come to agreement about the appropriate framework and to use institu-
tional structures to regulate, guide, or stimulate the use of technical and
other tools to achieve the desired value balance.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRIVACY AND FREEDOM OF INFORMATION1476.2.4Privacy Protection as a Challenge to Governance
Although, or perhaps because, European and American approachesto privacy differ, together they provide a rich array of tools to help an
individual maintain control over personal information.  These include not

only mandatory legal regulations introduced through laws and enforced
by courts and government agencies, but also a variety of self-regulatory
procedures and practices.The Limited Power of Traditional National RegulationThe globalization of information flows makes it much more difficultfor a single nation-state to unilaterally protect the privacy of its citizens.
Routine consumer transactions can involve players in five or even more
countries, given that consumers, merchants, manufacturers, Web site op-
erators, credit-card issuers, and other parties to a single transaction can all
be located in different political jurisdictions.In effect, a nationÕs data-protection laws are subject to a kind of com-petitive pressure.  In many instances, strict privacy legislation in one

nation-state can be circumvented by shifting the collection and use of the
data to another nation-state that has less restrictive laws.  However, data

protection differs from content regulation in the global-networked envi-
ronment.  The businesses collecting personal data during commercial

transactions often require a local presence in order to make money.  If so,
this feature makes an out-of-nation vendor vulnerable to the extraterrito-
rial application of national rules.  Even if the actual storing or processing

takes place abroad, local data-protection authorities can argue that the
local entity representing the operator is subject to local law and, more-
over, responsible for the parent companyÕs actions.  Thus, the local au-

thorities can take action against the local representative.Neither the argument nor the threat is merely theoretical.  In the well-
publicized conflict between the European Union and the United States
concerning e-commerce transactions, the European position embodied in
the European Privacy DirectiveÑwhich stated that personal data cannot,
in most instances, be transferred out of the European Union to countries
that do not provide an ÒadequateÓ level of privacy protection12Ñwas ef-12Article 26 of the European Privacy Directive provided several exceptions to this generalprohibition.  In particular, transfers of personal data to third countries that do not ensure an
adequate level of protection can take place anyway if (1) the data subject has given his or her
consent unambiguously to the proposed transfer, or (2) the transfer is necessary for theperformance of a contract between the data subject and the controller or for the implemen-tation of precontractual measures taken in response to the data subjectÕs request, or (3) theGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.148GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESfectively an extraterritorial applicability argument.13 
 The fact that U.S.
corporations were vulnerable to prosecution through their local offices
gave significant negotiating power to the European position, resulting in
the Òsafe harborÓ compromise whereby American corporations undertook
a contractually enforceable commitment to privacy protection (see dis-
cussion below).International Legal HarmonizationA straightforward solution to harmonizing data protection would bethe conclusion of an international treaty on the issue.  Within Europe, this

is precisely what happened.  The Council of Europe prepared its Conven-

tion for the Protection of Individuals with Regard to Automated Process-
ing of Personal Data, and the European Union used its power to legislate
the Directive on Data Protection.  These two legal instruments effectively
harmonize the standards and, more to the point, spread and reinforce the
substantive value.Similar approaches have been tried in the broader international arenaas well.  In September 1980 the Organization for Economic Cooperation

and Develoment (OECD) adopted Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy
and Transborder Flows of Personal Data,14 and in December 1990 the Gen-
eral Assembly of the United Nations adopted Guidelines Concerning
Computerized Personal Data Files.15  But neither instrument has the en-
forceability associated with domestic law.  Indeed, as noted elsewhere,

substantive international treaties work only when there is such completetransfer is necessary for the conclusion or for the performance of a contract concluded in theinterest of the data subject between the controller and a third party, or (4) the transfer is
necessary or legally required on important public interest grounds, or for the establishment,exercise or defense of legal claims, or (5) the transfer is necessary in order to protect the vitalinterests of the data subject, or (6) the transfer is made from a register that according to laws
or regulations is intended to provide information to the public and that is open to consulta-tion either by the public in general or by any person who can demonstrate legitimate inter-est, to the extent that the conditions laid down in law for consultation are fulfilled in the
particular case.13Although prohibiting data transfers out of Europe does not, in a formal sense, contra-vene international-law principles of prescriptive, adjudicative, and enforcement jurisdic-
tion, the practical effect of such a prohibition is to disrupt international commerce.  See
Henry H. Perritt, Jr. and Margaret G. Stewart, 1999, ÒFalse Alarm,Ó Fed. Commun. L.J. 51:811.14OECD Document C(80)58 (Final).  Available online at <http://www.oecd.org/dsti/sti/
it/secur/prod/PRIV-EN.HTM>.15Resolution Number A/RES/45/95.  Available online at <http://www.un.org/docu-
ments/ga/res/45/a45r095.htm>.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRIVACY AND FREEDOM OF INFORMATION149agreement on the values involved that domestic law is, or can easily bemade, consistent with the treatyÕs provisions.There are in fact sufficient differences between the United States andEurope on defining what privacy does and does not mean with respect to
government and commercial institutions that such agreement has proven
difficult to obtain.  Moreover, both jurisdictions fundamentally differ in

their approach to structuring institutions of enforcement.  While the Eu-

ropeans are willingÑindeed, preferÑto rely on command-and-control
regulation and governmental enforcement authorities, the United States
prefers industrial self-regulation and litigation.16Finally, it should be noted that the traditional international treaty pro-cess is slow and cumbersome, certainly more so than the process of reach-
ing agreement within the European Union.  Few who are familiar with

the International Telecommunications Union or the World Trade Organi-
zation would view a similar approach to privacy protection as practical,
particularly within the context of the rapidly evolving technical environ-
ment of the Internet.Internationally Coordinated Private LawA second technique for resolving the U.S.ÐEuropean conflict over dataprotection involves coordinating legislation with the help of each nationÕs
rules on the application of foreign commercial law to international cases.
This technique, called the conflict-of-laws approach, is available because
the protection of data among private parties is generally covered by pri-
vate rather than public law,17 and privacy issues on the Internet often
involve the use of data by private businesses rather than by government.One obstacle to this approach, however, arises from the distinct dif-ference between the U.S. view of privacy (analogous to a property right)
and the traditional European view (which deems individualsÕ interests in
data about themselves as an inalienable liberty right).  In a case in which

this difference was significant, it is quite possible that Europeans might
not regard the U.S. legal provisions as being functionally equivalent to
their European counterparts.  Under those circumstances, the national

conflict rules might require that the European, rather than the U.S. rules,
apply.16Henry H. Perritt, Jr. 1997. ÒRegulatory Models for Protecting Privacy in the Internet,Ó inWilliam M. Daley, ed., Privacy and Self-Regulation in the Information Age, U.S. Department ofCommerce, Washington, D.C., Chapter 3.  Available online at <http://www.ntia.doc.gov/

reports/privacy/selfreg3.htm>.17Reinhard Ellger. 1990. 
rechtsvergleichende und kollisionsrechtliche Untersuchung. Baden-Baden, 582 s.
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.150GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESThere are other complications as well.  If a private lawsuit is brought by
a foreign customer in the country of origin of the supplier, will the courts be
convinced that an Internet transaction between these two parties is prop-
erly viewed as having occurred in the home country of the customer (so
that the customerÕs national laws apply)? Furthermore, even though the
private-law rules can generally be applied where only private entities are
concerned, nation-states have generally been unwilling to apply foreign

rules if they are perceived as a hidden regulatory tool.  This is likely to be

the case with data-protection rules, given the conceptual differences be-
tween nations about what should be protected and how.18 Indeed, the factthat independent public officials have jurisdiction to intervene would sig-
nal the inherent public-law character of data protection laws.  Finally, from

a pragmatic point of view, it seems doubtful that Europeans would accept,
for example, a data-protection arrangement under which European nation-
als would have to sue U.S. firms before U.S. tribunals; nor would Ameri-
cans be comfortable with the opposite arrangement.Self-regulation Without Direct State InterventionMany data users in the United States have expressed a strong prefer-ence for self-regulation, and American industry has begun to move in that
direction.  Whether motivated by the need to respond to consumer pres-

sure or the desire to avoid legislation, American companies acknowledge
the pressures that lead to calls for regulation but assert that they can po-
lice their own actions.  When the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) under-

took a series of investigations of online privacy in the mid-1990s and be-
gan to develop guidelines for possible regulation, the Direct Marketing
Association responded by adopting a code of Fair Information Practices.
Since 1998, industry representatives have worked with the Federal Trade
Commission to develop credible and effective self-regulatory approaches
and accompanying audit and enforcement mechanisms.  There are limits

to how far the FTC can go.  For example, the ChildrenÕs Online Privacy

Protection Act, which was passed in 1999, makes the Commission respon-
sible for rulemaking and requires any Web site or online service that is
directed to children to obtain parental consent before collecting personal
information from children under the age of 13.Self-regulatory approaches can be more decentralized and flexiblethan governmental regulation, and thus more responsive to particular cir-
cumstances.  On the other hand, they are unlikely to have much credibil-
18For greater detail, see Ellger (supra note 17) 597-604.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRIVACY AND FREEDOM OF INFORMATION151ity if they comprise no more than broad guidelines.  Effective self-regula-
tion needs substantive rules, as well as mechanisms to ensure that con-
sumers know the rulesÑe.g., a requirement that companies publish pri-
vacy policies.  Furthermore, there must be some sanction for failure to

comply with these rules.  Among the suggested approaches are the cre-

ation of certifying seals or logos, which can be withdrawn for noncompli-
ance; publishing the names of noncompliant companies on a Òbad actorÓ
list; or making a company liable under fraud laws.  Other possibilities are

audits of compliance with established fair information practices or inde-
pendent authorities with power to resolve complaints.None of these self-regulatory approaches, including the publicationof codes of good practice, are acceptable to most privacy advocates, who
view them as toothless and therefore not truly protective of individual
interests.  However, some of these advocates are willing to agree to a sys-

tem with Òopt-inÓ provisions, which requires individuals to agree explic-
itly to the collection or use of personal information.  (Industry usually

argues for Òopt-outÓ provisions that permit collection or use of personal
information unless individuals explicitly object.)Self-regulation has been strongly opposed on the European side formany of the same reasons advanced by the privacy advocates.  Many,

perhaps even most, Europeans do not trust the mechanism, suspecting
that self-regulation is merely a cover for lowering the standards of data
protection, or ignoring them entirely.Hybrid RegulationThus there is a growing interest in new forms of governance, whichmight be characterized as ÒhybridÓ in character, that feature flexible inter-
national public-law frameworks within which private self-regulation is
used to work out the details.  Private self-regulation within a public inter-

national law framework may not only provide solutions to the inherently
international character of traffic in personal data; they also may avoid
some of the problems of the fragmented regulatory structures currently in
place.  Some precedent for such an approach can be found in a German-

U.S. contract between the Berlin Data Protection Commissioner and
Citibank (Box 6.7).A more contemporary example, and one that has received a great dealof attention, is the hybrid regulatory scheme developed by the European
Commission and the United States government to avoid privacy-related
disruptions of transborder data flows and international trade.  In 2000,

they exchanged letters that articulated a Òsafe harborÓ for U.S. companies
and other organizations receiving personal data from the EuropeanGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.152GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESBOX 6.7  The German RailwayCard and Citibank
The RailwayCard (BahnCard) is a popular discount card issued by theGerman railway company, Deutsche Bahn.  In November 1994 Deutsche
Bahn announced a co-branding agreement with the German subsidiary ofCitibank to issue a RailwayCard with a Visa credit-card function as a no-additional-cost option for the customer.  Under the agreement, after July
1995 the RailwayCards were no longer produced in Germany but in datacenters run by Citibank subsidiaries in South Dakota and Nevada.  Huge
quantities of sensitive personal data on the creditworthiness of customers ofDeutsche Bahn were transmitted to and processed in the United States.Although the EU Directive on Data Protection was not officially in effect
at that time, the Berlin Data Protection Commissioner (the German supervi-sory authority in this matter) demanded that no transborder data flow to the
United States take place unless the requirements of the directive were met.
In February 1996 Deutsche Bahn and Citibank signed a specific Data Protec-tion Agreement making the German Data Protection Law applicable to theirhandling of cardholdersÕ data on both sides of the Atlantic.  The Citibank
subsidiaries in the United States agreed to on-site audits by the Berlin DataProtection Commissioner or designated agentsÑe.g., an American consult-ing or auditing firm acting on the commissioner
Õs behalf.Whereas the data protection commissioner of Berlin, HansjrgenGarstka, described the agreement as a useful tool, reactions in the UnitedStates were rather skeptical.  Business Week saw 
ÒEuropeÕs privacy copstrek[king] from Berlin all the way to Sioux City, S.D., to Citigroup
Õs giantprocessing center, where computers store financial information about mil-lions of German credit-card holders.Ó  It went on to say that an 
Òideologicalrift between Europe and the United States exists with regard to the regula-tion of privacy.  At the root of the battle is a philosophical chasm nearly as
wide as the Atlantic.  Europeans look to democratic regimes to protect their
privacy.  Americans, meanwhile, tend at first to leave information flows
unregulated.  Later, they slap controls on objectionable areas, such as child
pornography on the Web.Ó  Emanuel Kohnstamm, a Time Warner Inc. vice
president in Brussels, was quoted in the article as saying: ÒIn Europe, peopledonÕt trust companies, they trust government.  In the United States, itÕs theother way around.  Citizens must be protected from actions of the govern-ment.ÓSOURCES:  (1) Alexander Dix, 
ÒCase Study: North America and the European Direc-tive.  The German RailwayCard
ÑA Model Contractual Solution of the ÔAdequateLevel of ProtectionÕ Issue?,
Ó Speech at the 8th International Privacy and Data Protec-
tion Conference: ÒPrivacy Beyond Borders,Ó Ottawa, Canada, September 18-20,
1996; available online at <http://www.datenschutz-berlin.de/sonstige/konferen/ottawa/alex3.htm> (03.03.00).(2) Stephen Baker, Marsha Johnston, and William Echikson, 1998, ÒEuropeÕs PrivacyCops,Ó  Business Week 2 (November), 49-51.
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRIVACY AND FREEDOM OF INFORMATION153Union.19 Organizations receiving personal data transfers from the EU and
complying with certain principles (Box 6.8) would be regarded as meet-
ing the ÒadequacyÓ requirements for data protection in accordance with
the European UnionÕs Directive on Data Protection.In this instance, hybridization allowed the United States and Europeto organize the coexistence of their diverging regulatory traditions and
styles.  The Europeans came to the negotiation table with their trust in

government, and with an existing framework of independent data-pro-
tection officers.  The United States, for its part, had neither a strong regu-
latory framework nor the inclination to impose one.  The compromise

was self-regulation with public oversight via the Federal Trade Commis-
sionÑi.e., a hybrid solution.20The actual implementation mechanism is complex, with roles estab-lished for both government and nongovernment organizations, the issu-
ance of a Òseal of compliance,Ó and the creation of a dispute-resolution
body.  Noncompliance is penalized by a range of sanctions, including

publicity for findings of noncompliance, the requirement to delete data in
certain circumstances, suspension and removal of a seal, compensation
for individuals for losses incurred, and injunctive orders.  In addition, the

U.S. Federal Trade Commission has committed itself to reviewing allega-
tions of noncompliance with safe-harbor principles made by privacy self-
regulatory organizations; the Commission will be looking to see whether
the alleged actions amount to violations of the FTC Act prohibiting unfair
or deceptive acts or practices in commerce.  In this context, all of the usual

tools available to the FTC can be applied, including administrative cease-
and-desist orders prohibiting the challenged practices, as well as pursu-
ing complaints in U.S. federal courts to obtain judicial remedies.  Persis-

tent failure to comply can be punished by denying the violator the benefits
of the safe harbor.The success of these safe-harbor negotiations between the EuropeanUnion and the United States does not mean that the agreement is without
controversy.  For example, the Trans Atlantic Consumer Dialogue (TACD),

representing a group of consumer and privacy groups, argued that the
safe-harbor agreement Ò. . .  fails to provide adequate privacy protection

for consumers in the United States and Europe.  It lacks an effective means
19The U.S. letter can be found online at <http://www.export.gov/safeharbor/larussacovernote717.htm>.  The European Commission letter can be found at <http://
www.export.gov/safeharbor/EUletter27JulyHeader.htm>.  Other related documents can be
found at <http://www.export.gov/safeharbor/sh_documents.html>.20Henry Farrell. 2000. ÒNegotiating Privacy Across ArenasÑThe EU-US ÔSafe HarborÕ Dis-cussions,Ó in Adrienne Heritier, ed., The Provision of Common Goods: Governance Across Mul-tiple Arenas, Boulder, CO: Rowman and Littlefield.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.154GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESBOX 6.8  Safe Harbor Privacy Principles
ISSUED BY THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ON JULY 21, 2000
ÒNOTICE: An organization must inform individuals about the purposes for
which it collects and uses information about them, how to contact the
organization with any inquiries or complaints, the types of third parties to
which it discloses the information, and the choices and means the organi-zation offers individuals for limiting its use and disclosure.  This notice
must be provided in clear and conspicuous language when individuals are
first asked to provide personal information to the organization or as soonthereafter as is practicable, but in any event before the organization usessuch information for a purpose other than that for which it was originally
collected or processed by the transferring organization or discloses it forthe first time to a third party.ÒCHOICE: An organization must offer individuals the opportunity to choose
(opt out) whether their personal information is (a) to be disclosed to a thirdparty or (b) to be used for a purpose that is incompatible with the purpose(s)
for which it was originally collected or subsequently authorized by theindividual.  Individuals must be provided with clear and conspicuous,
readily available, and affordable mechanisms to exercise choice.ÒFor sensitive information (i.e., personal information specifying medicalor health conditions, racial or ethnic origin, political opinions, religious orphilosophical beliefs, trade union membership or information specifying
the sex life of the individual), they must be given affirmative or explicit(opt-in) choice if the information is to be disclosed to a third party or usedfor a purpose other than those for which it was originally collected or sub-
sequently authorized by the individual through the exercise of opt-inchoice.  In any case, an organization should treat as sensitive any informa-
tion received from a third party where the third party treats and identifies it

as sensitive.ÒONWARD TRANSFER: 
To disclose information to a third party, organiza-tions must apply the Notice and Choice Principles.  Where an organization
wishes to transfer information to a third party that is acting as an agent,. . . , it may do so if it first either ascertains that the third party subscribes tothe Principles or is subject to the Directive or another adequacy finding orenters into a written agreement with such third party requiring that the thirdparty provide at least the same level of privacy protection as is required by
the relevant Principles.  If the organization complies with these require-
ments, it shall not be held responsible (unless the organization agrees oth-erwise) when a third party to which it transfers such information processes
it in a way contrary to any restrictions or representations, unless the orga-Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRIVACY AND FREEDOM OF INFORMATION155nization knew or should have known the third party would process it in
such a contrary way and the organization has not taken reasonable steps toprevent or stop such processing.ÒSECURITY: Organizations creating, maintaining, using or disseminatingpersonal information must take reasonable precautions to protect it from
loss, misuse and unauthorized access, disclosure, alteration and destruc-tion.ÒDATA INTEGRITY: 
Consistent with the Principles, personal informationmust be relevant for the purposes for which it is to be used.  An organiza-
tion may not process personal information in a way that is incompatible
with the purposes for which it has been collected or subsequently autho-rized by the individual.  To the extent necessary for those purposes, an
organization should take reasonable steps to ensure that data is reliable for
its intended use, accurate, complete, and current.ÒACCESS: Individuals must have access to personal information about them
that an organization holds and be able to correct, amend, or delete that
information where it is inaccurate, except where the burden or expense ofproviding access would be disproportionate to the risks to the individualÕsprivacy in the case in question, or where the rights of persons other thanthe individual would be violated.ÒENFORCEMENT: 
Effective privacy protection must include mechanismsfor assuring compliance with the Principles, recourse for individuals towhom the data relate affected by non-compliance with the Principles, and

consequences for the organization when the Principles are not followed.At a minimum, such mechanisms must include (a) readily available and
affordable independent recourse mechanisms by which each individualÕscomplaints and disputes are investigated and resolved by reference to thePrinciples and damages awarded where the applicable law or private sec-
tor initiatives so provide; (b) follow-up procedures for verifying that the
attestations and assertions businesses make about their privacy practicesare true and that privacy practices have been implemented as presented;and (c) obligations to remedy problems arising out of failure to comply
with the Principles by organizations announcing their adherence to themand consequences for such organizations.  Sanctions must be sufficiently
rigorous to ensure compliance by organizations.ÓSOURCE: Reprinted from <http://www.export.gov/safeharbor/SHPRINCIPLESFINAL.htm>.
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.156GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESof enforcement and redress for privacy violations.  It places unreasonable
burdens on consumers and unfairly requires European citizens to sacri-
fice their legal right to pursue privacy complaints through their national
authorities.  The proposal also fails to ensure that individual consumers

will be able to access personal information obtained by businesses.Ó21The controversy illustrates what is bound to be a continuing debatebetween those who see hybrid regulation as the answer to the conflict-
ing approaches and inconsistent regulations between one country and
another, and those who see it as a threat to the existing protections that
national regulation provides in at least some countries.  Experience

gained in these next years with the Safe Harbor agreement may well
provide important evidence for future decisions on whether or not to
use this approach.6.3FREEDOM OF INFORMATION
The term Òfreedom of information,Ó as used in this report, is not onlya legal concept but also a social and political one.  In the former sense, it

refers to the legally enforceable right of access to informationÑan indi-
vidual right.  But in the social and political sense, it is a measure of the

openness of the society, as discussed below.  It is in this context that we

may define what kinds of information ought to be accessible and, addi-
tionally, begin to understand the associated conflicts in public and private
interests.6.3.1The Value Involved
As pointed out in the introduction to this chapter, freedom of infor-mation is a formal value.  Adherence to this value safeguards transpar-

ency and accountability of governmental action, and it is closely related
to the Western concept of democracy.  Access to information gives citi-

zens a sense of ownership of their society, and it creates confidence in the
legitimacy and appropriateness of government administration.  Freedom
of information is a tool for engaging citizens in the work of government,
alerting them to any excesses of government, and providing them with
the basis to exercise their rights and obligations more knowledgeably.  In21Available online at <http://www.epic.org/privacy/intl/TACD_SH_1299.html>.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRIVACY AND FREEDOM OF INFORMATION157Thomas JeffersonÕs words, ÒThe best protection of a democratic society isan informed public.ÓTechnological developments have affected the availability of infor-mation in at least two ways.  First, the Internet and the World Wide Web

have made it increasingly practical for enormous amounts of information
to be made availableÑquickly, easily, and inexpensivelyÑto the public.
The complete texts of laws, court records, judicial findings, administra-
tive rules and records, statements of public officials, transcripts or min-
utes of public meetings, and the like can all be put online for the public to
access, copy, or search.  This is an extraordinary new tool for implement-
ing freedom of information in societies unambiguously committed to that
value.  However, it is also a challenge to those who are less than enthusi-
astic about such total disclosure (and who, in the past, could be shielded
from the need to justify restrictions on the distribution of information by
simply citing its impracticality).Second, new computer tools allow the manipulation and reorganiza-tion of data and records into much more useful and transparent forms.
Tools for searching, filtering, organizing, and analyzing data can produce
intermediate products that, in a very practical sense, make the raw data
significantly more accessible and, in so doing, make freedom of informa-
tion as much a practical reality as a formal commitment or value.  How-

ever, these new technical tools create two problems.  First, the very capac-

ity to manipulate and mine public data may expose private information
embedded within it; thus a formal balancing of interests is involved in the
collection and publication of data for public purposes.  Again, this is a

problem that did not need to be urgently confronted in the past because of
the practical limitations on teasing the private information out of the pub-
lic database.Furthermore, because many intermediate data products serve a pub-lic purpose, it is in the public interest for government to encourage the
growth of markets for these products.  That means creating incentives for

the private sector to invest in their development.  Generally, these incen-

tives have taken the form of intellectual-property protection.  Conflict then

arises in determining what balance between the public nature of informa-
tion and the private protection of intellectual property will maximize free-
dom of information as a practical reality.In the following sections, such conflicts and tensions are examinedin the context of specific kinds of public information and specific legal
approaches.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.158GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUES6.3.2Types of Information Subject to Freedom of Information
Primary Legal InformationÒPrimary legal informationÓÑinformation having the force of law,such as parliamentary enactments, judicial decisions,22 and comparable
instruments from administrative agencies such as rules and ordersÑis
the raw material of democracy.  Most observers committed to freedom of
information would agree that making primary legal information widely
accessible to the public is not only consistent with individual rights but
also important for effective governance.  Indeed, if the public doesnÕt

know the law, it canÕt follow it.  In addition, if it doesnÕt have complete

access to information about the operations of government, it canÕt exer-
cise democratic oversight.  Thus there is an overriding public interest in

easy and inexpensive access to primary legal information.An important and ongoing controversy related to the publicÕs right tolegal information is the issue of who may hold a copyright on information
subject to disclosure under freedom-of-information laws.  If private enti-

ties obtain information from public entities under such laws and then re-
organize it, may they copyright the product thus created? If so, what does
the copyright cover?In the United States, these controversial questions have been raised inconnection with the U.S. CongressÕs consideration of two database-pro-
tection bills23 modeled in part on the European database-protection di-
rective.24 Specifically, both of these proposed bills would have granted
certain property-like rights to database owners entirely apart from what-
ever copyright interest they did or did not hold; in general, these rights
would have forbidden other parties from extracting large quantities of
information from these databases in a way that caused financial harm to
the database owner.On the other hand, federal entities in the United States are precludedfrom copyrighting public information.  In Germany, the situation is

slightly more complicated.  According to Article 5 of the Copyright Act,
22Germany is a civil-law country.  Court decisions thus do not, in and of themselves, have
legal force erga omnes, though the decisions of the upper courts have high persuasive author-ity.  This does not, however, change the desirability of having easy and inexpensive access to
their texts.23H.R. 354 in the 106th Congress, the Collections of Information Antipiracy Act, and H.R.1858 IH, the Consumer and Investor Access to Information Act of 1999.24Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 March 1996 onthe legal protection of databases (O.J. 27/3/96 no L 77 p. 20).Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRIVACY AND FREEDOM OF INFORMATION159ÒLaws, ordinances, official decrees and notices [and] also decisions andofficial grounds [for] decisionsÓ cannot be copyrighted.  The same applies

to other official works published to satisfy the official goal of informing
the public.  But information collected and maintained by public agencies

can be granted a private copyright when it is material actually written by
private individuals.In the United States, some courts have held that certain state and locallaws can sometimes be copyrighted, and have forced third parties to re-
frain from reproducing or distributing primary legal information con-
tained in such statutes and court decisions.  For example, Peter Veeck

posted on a private Web site the municipal building code for Denison,
Texas.  The text of this building code is actually owned by the Southern

Building Code Congress International (SBCCI), a private, not-for-profit
organization whose primary mission is to develop and maintain a set of
model building codes.  The SBCCI has developed the building code and

gives it free to municipalities as an incentive for adopting it.  However,

sales of the code to engineers and architects is a revenue-generating enter-
prise for SBCCI, and thus it sued Veeck for copyright infringement.  The

case is working its way through the U.S. court system; in February 2001, a
panel of the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals upheld by a vote of 2-1 that
SBCCI had the right to force Veeck to refrain from publishing these mate-
rials on the Web.25It has been argued in the past that the private publication of govern-ment information is the only practical way to ensure its broad distribu-
tion, and that the incentive of copyright protection is necessary to encour-
age the involvement of the private sector.  However, Internet and PC

technologies have sharply reduced the costs and increased the ability of
government agencies to publish their own material.  As noted earlier,

these same technologies have also created incentives for the private sector
to create value-added products from the raw data produced by govern-
ment agencies.  The challenge is to develop appropriate criteria to protect

private-sector innovations that enhance the usability of original govern-
ment data without depriving the public of its access to that data.2625The opinion of the panel can be found at <http://www.ca5.uscourts.gov/opinions/pub/99/99-40632-cv0.htm>.  A press article on this controversy is in Daniel Fisher, 2001,
ÒWe Own That Law,Ó Forbes, April 30, p. 60.26This is a topic of ongoing debate in the United States.  The Computer Science and Tele-
communications Board is participating in a National Research Council project that addressesthese issues for weather-related information.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.160GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESPublic Records Containing Personal InformationPublic records that contain personal information create an obviousconflict between freedom of information and privacy rights.  In principle,

this is not a new concern, but advances in information technology have
made it a practical concern.  In the past, the cost and effort of extracting

personal data from public records was so great that few attempted it.
However, as such records are computerized and become available under
freedom-of-information law, the threat to privacy becomes quite real.Whether privacy or freedom of information takes precedence dependson the particular situation.  If the invasion of an individualÕs privacy is

limited and noninjurious, one might argue that the cost is worth the ben-
efit of retaining the publicÕs access to government information.  On the

other hand, if the interest in access to public records is purely commercial
and unrelated to the democratic and integrative functions of freedom of
information, then one might argue that protection of individual privacy
should be given greater weight.In addition to facilitating the mining of databases for personal infor-mation, technological advances affect the balance of rights in two other
ways.  First, information technology enables ÒprofilingÓÑthe linking of

data from a number of different sources to create much more serious in-
vasions of individual privacy than would be possible with any single
record.  The possibilities for such profiling are thus an element in judging

the harm to individuals that results from granting access to public records,
though the number of actual instances in which an individual has been
harmed by profiling is apparently small.  Second, and on the other hand,

information technology also facilitates the anonymization of data, a prac-
tice that can help to protect privacy without compromising the publicÕs
access to the aggregated database.27Some have argued that anonymizing data can reduce its worth be-cause the process essentially blocks certain information that might, in fact,
be useful.  But that raises the question of whether the competing prin-

ciples of privacy and public interest have, in the past, been thoroughly
weighed in deciding what information on individuals it is appropriate for
governments to collect.  In the past, the government may have had no

alternative but to gather more information than it had a right to gather, in
order to glean the information that it needed and to which it was entitled.
The practice may not have been challenged because, as a practical matter,
there were limitations on the misuse of the private data.  However, the
27Such an outcome depends on the particulars of the data in question, because sometimeseven anonymized data can be assembled in such a way as to uniquely identify an indi-vidual.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRIVACY AND FREEDOM OF INFORMATION161mere fact that the government has collected or is in possession of the ag-gregated database does not mean that it is actually entitled to use all of
the data or to use it for any purpose.  Because technology increases the

ability to link information, the potential for such misuse by governmentÑ

and othersÑincreases, and government agencies will have to revise their
past approaches to collecting data and weigh the competing claims of pri-
vacy and public need more rigorously.Notes, Drafts, and Intermediate Documents of Public Officials and BodiesDocuments that shed light on the administrative aspects ofgovernmentÕs decision-making process (e.g., preliminary or internal
drafts) present thorny problems, and how far a society should go in pro-
viding access to such documents is a matter requiring much further dis-
cussion.28 On the one hand, transparency in the political and administra-tive decision-making process is of major importance in a democracy and
one of the strongest arguments for a freedom-of-information principle.
On the other hand, disclosure of every conversation and recorded thought
between administrators or judges and their advisors would have a chill-
ing effect on candid deliberation that would, in fact, reduce the quality of
decisions.  Government needs space and time in which to assess argu-

ments and conduct internal debates with a certain degree of privacy of its
own.Technology (though not necessarily as part of global networks) againcomplicates matters.  In the past, a good deal of highly informal conversa-

tion might have taken place on the telephone or in face-to-face meetings.
It was possible to record these kinds of conversations, but not required.
29When they were recorded, they might well have been subject to freedom-of-information requests (or subpoena, as Richard Nixon learned).  The

applicability of freedom-of-information regulations in these instances was
often debated, even litigated.  But the participants had an option that al-

lowed them to control the balance between privacy privilege and the
publicÕs right to information; except where public meetings were involved
(itself a question of definition), they could decide whether or not to record
the conversation.28It was discussed in the United Kingdom. See ÒYour Right to Know.  The GovernmentÕsProposals for a Freedom of Information Act,Ó  presented to Parliament by the Chancellor ofthe Duchy of Lancaster by Command of Her Majesty, December 1997. Available online at
<http://www.official-documents.co.uk/document/caboff/foi/foi.htm> (03.03.2000).29Indeed, in many jurisdictions, it would be illegal to record such conversationsÑfor ex-ample, if the recording were carried out by third parties or without appropriate notice.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.162GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESNow, many of these same interactions are conducted through vehiclessuch as e-mail or bulletin board postings. Electronic records of these ex-
changes exist and are frequently the subject of freedom-of-information
requests.  In effect, technology has shifted the balance and the control

without any change in the substantive social and political facts.  In this, as

in other instances, each society must determine if the shift is consistent
with its balance of the values involved.  The technology itself should not

be the determining factor.Records Associated with Publicly Funded ResearchA relatively new area of contention, particularly in the United States,is the public accessibility of research data produced with government
grants.  Although the principle of openness in research is, in and of itself,
an important value in the scientific community, freedom-of-information
requests for scientific data in recent years seem to have been motivated by
political agendas outside that community.  As scientists have become

more engaged in issues with strong political overtonesÑsuch as the health
effects of tobacco, the environmental effects of industrial wastes, or the
relative contributions of nature and nurture to I.Q., lawyers, lobbyists,
and other advocates have sought access to scientistsÕ raw data.  The rea-

sons for such requests vary, and how they are viewed depends on the eye
of the beholder.  What is seen by one party as a legitimate attempt to

understand the basis of a scientistÕs conclusions can be seen by another as
an effort to discredit or harass.The matter has been further complicated by the heightened concernabout scientific fraud.  Public bodies, including congressional commit-

tees, have sought access to the notebooks of scientists in order to assess
the veracity of their published works.  They have used forensic approaches

to determine the time sequence of notebook entries, the actual (expected)
randomness in raw data, the inclusion or exclusion of data in final re-
ports, and the laboratory instruments actually used in measurements.  In

so doing, they have tried to assess not only the integrity of scientists, but
their competence as well.In some respects, this is a rather new facet of the issue of privacy.That is, to what extent is the practice of oneÕs professionÑthe way one
thinks, how one creates, what oneÕs personal style is likeÑa public activ-
ity for which the researcher must be accountable? Where should we draw
the line between legitimate access and inappropriate revelation of oneÕs
personal information and idiosyncrasies? The balance to be struck must
ensure accountability while respecting the intellectual process and avoid-
ing the chilling effects of harassment or intimidation.The U.S. Congress attempted to balance these considerations in a lawGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRIVACY AND FREEDOM OF INFORMATION163recently enacted30 that requires all recipients of federal research grants to
disclose research data in accordance with the provisions of the Freedom
of Information Act.  However, the law defines the term Òresearch dataÓ as

Òthe recorded factual material commonly accepted in the scientific com-
munity as necessary to validate research findings, but notÓ such things as
trade secrets, commercial information, personnel and medical informa-
tion, and any Òsimilar information which is protected under law.Ó In ad-
dition, it limits the application of the new provision to Òresearch data re-
lating to published research findings,Ó which it defines as either
Ò[r]esearch findings [that] are published in a peer-reviewed scientific or
technical journalÓ or those that are Òpublicly and officially cite[d] . . . in
support of an agency action that has the force and effect of law.Ó It is too
early to assess the effects of the law, because it is still being shaped as
administrators develop rules for its enforcement and requests for infor-
mation lead to court cases that will provide further interpretation.  Cer-

tainly, the issue remains one of great concern to the scientific community.6.3.3Global Networks Affecting Freedom of Information
As with privacy, global networks exert direct and indirect pressureon national disclosure policies.  Global networks are multiplying the op-

tions through which citizens can gain access to information and are mak-
ing it more difficult for nations to maintain restrictive policies.New Technical OptionsIn the past, even if the public was legally entitled to access govern-mental files, in practical terms it was not easy to exercise this right.  In the

earliest times, the citizen had to go to the appropriate office and transcribe
excerpts by hand.  Photocopiers significantly reduced the logistical bur-

den on these efforts.  But the digital representation of public documents

means that they can be searched, stored, and combined at will.  Moreover,

if these files are available online, access becomes so comfortable that it can
become a routine operation for citizens.There has been considerable progress in this direction.  Congressional
legislation is available online; all of the opinions of the U.S. federal appel-
late courts are available in full-text form and in popular word-processing
formats on the Web, and a growing number of state courts and agencies30Office of Management and BudgetÕs Appropriations Act for Fiscal Year 1999, PublicLaw No. 105-227.  See FOIA Update, Vol.  XIX. No. 4, available online at <http://www.usdoj.
gov/oip/foia_updates/Vol_XIX_4/page2.htm> (03.03.2000).Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.164GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESalso publish information on the Web.  German authorities are moving
into the same direction, albeit at a somewhat slower pace.  All decisions of

the Bundesverfassungsgericht are already available online free of charge.
Other federal courts in Germany are planning to follow, and the Euro-
pean Commission has launched a similar initiative.The Modest Effect of GlobalizationAlthough the Internet has had a strong impact on national policiesconcerning free speech and privacy, its effect on FOI policies is much
weaker because it is the disclosure of information held by local govern-
ments that is often at issue.  Global networks do not change the local char-

acter of the source.  Thus, even under changed technological conditions,

each country can in principle pursue its own policy.  However, for a num-

ber of reasons, this may be an unwise choice for nations where present
policy appears to limit freedom of information, or at least to not promote
it vigorously.First, global networks expose people to new ideas from other places.Thus citizens in a more restrictive nation who see examples of govern-
mental openness in other nations may demand more openness and access
at home.31 Given the pronounced differences in regulatory traditions,
there is a great potential for such policy diffusion.  Of course, it took hun-

dreds of years for the legal structure providing for freedom of informa-
tion to spread beyond the borders of Sweden (where the first law on the
subject was enacted in 1766). But with the present high degree of connect-
edness between nations it is inconceivable that a concept such as freedom
of information could long remain contained within the borders of one or a
few nations.  Other hastening factors include the conceptÕs inherently de-

mocracy-promoting character, the United StatesÕ broad commitment to it,
and its manifestation on the Web.In the United States, freedom-of-information norms are expressed ina collection of federal and state statutes: the Freedom of Information Act
of 1966; 32 the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (revised subsequently in1995);33 the Federal Register Act of 1935;
34 and the Electronic Freedom of
31Of course, such change is possible only when the government of the more restrictivenation is responsive to the popular will.  Indeed, some governmentÑin general, those of the

more authoritarian nationsÑmay impose restrictions on access to certain Internet contentprecisely in order to prevent their citizens from seeing the openness of other nations.
325 U.S.C. ¤ 552.33Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (94 Stat. 2825; 44 U.S.C. ¤ 3503 note) [set out as a noteunder ¤ 3503 of Title 44, Public Printing and Documents].3444 U.S.C. ¤ 1505.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRIVACY AND FREEDOM OF INFORMATION165Information Act of 1996.35 Most American states also have freedom-of-
information laws.  These typically adopt the same norms as those of the

federal laws.  There are, however, some differences.  Many states provide

no deadlines for agency responses to private requests for information.
Others are vague about the availability of judicial review.  Still others

require the identification of a legitimate private interest in the informa-
tion requested.  And some distinguish between requests that are made for

personal reasons, which are favored, and those made by commercial enti-
ties for a profit-making purpose, which are not favored.36Germany, on the other hand, has not yet established a Freedom ofInformation Act at the federal level.  The only applicable provisions are

those of the German Basic Law art. 5, subsec. 137 and the Federal Law onAdministrative Procedure ¤¤ 29, 30.38 These legal instruments, however,
actually express a principle of secrecy rather than openness, restricting
provision of information on administrative procedures to persons who
take part in the procedures or who might be affected by their outcomes.
This tradition obviously does not give rise to a general public right to
government information, and no other specific law addresses such access.Still, there is currently some movement away from government se-crecy and toward greater transparency, both in Germany and throughout
Europe.  The general approach is to build on the foundation of individual

rights, beginning with the existing rights of participants in particular pro-
ceedings to obtain information pertinent to those proceedings.  This is

rather different from the American approach, which links freedom of in-
formation to democratic oversight of governmental operations and thus
grants rights of access to all citizens.  Nonetheless, the strategy has al-

ready been successful in several cases.  For example, in 1994, the German
Federal Freedom of Access to Environmental Information Act was
adopted,39 implementing a European Union directive granting access to
environmental information held by public authorities.4035Electronic FOIA Amendments Act of 1996, P.L. 104-231, 110 Stat.  3048 (Oct.  2, 1996),
amending 5 U.S.C. ¤ 552.36Media requests, which obviously serve commercial, profit-making purposes, have al-ways been given exceptional status in the United States under the protection of the First
Amendment of the Constitution (see Chapter 8).37amended up to and including Gesetz zur •nderung des Grundgesetzes of July 16, 1998
(BGBl. I S. 1822).38Verwaltungsverfahrensgesetz vom 25 Mai 1976 (BGBl. I S. 1253), as amended up to andincluding Gesetz of August 6, 1998 (BGBl I 1998, 2022).39BGBl.  I, 1490.
40Council Directive 90/313/EEC of 7 June 1990 on the freedom of access to information onthe environment, Official Journal L 158, 23/06/1990, p. 0056-0058.  See <http://europa.eu.

int/eur-lex/en/lif/dat/1990/en_390L0313.html>.  Note that the directive allows a numberGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.166GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESof exemptions that specify environmental information that can be withheld from the public.Specifically, it may be withheld if the release of the information affects the Òconfidentialityof the proceedings of public authorities, international relations and national defence; public
security; matters which are, or have been, sub judice, or under inquiry (including disciplin-ary inquiries), or which are the subject of preliminary investigation proceedings; commer-cial and industrial confidentiality, including intellectual property; the confidentiality of per-
sonal data and/or files; material supplied by a third party without that party being under alegal obligation to do so; material the disclosure of which would make it more likely that theenvironment to which such material related would be damaged.Ó In addition, requests for
information may be refused Òwhere it would involve the supply of unfinished documents ordata or internal communications, or where the request is manifestly unreasonable or formu-lated in too general a manner.Ó41Akteneinsichts- und Informationszugangsgesetz (AIG) vom 10.  M−rz 1998 (GVBl. I S. 46).
42Berliner Informationsfreiheitsgesetz vom 15.  Oktober 1999 (GVBl. I, S.561).
43COM (1998) 585 final.On the state level, the East German States of Brandenburg andMecklenburg-Vorpommern provide a general right of access to informa-
tion in their constitutions.  General freedom-of-information acts were also

enacted in Brandenburg41 and Berlin
42 in 1998 and 1999, respectively.
However, comprehensive nationwide or EU-wide legislation on freedom
of information is not yet a reality, although it is becoming a goal.  Indeed,

the present coalition government in Germany has expressed its intention
to enact a general freedom-of-information law on the federal level.  In

addition, Directorate General 13 of the European Commission has been
working for more than 5 years on the development of a legal regime for
freedom of information, seeking to implement the transparency guaran-
tee of the Maastricht treaty.  However, recently published drafts have been

criticized for being too tentative (Box 6.9).Second, the impact of global networks is not limited to disseminatinga normative yardstick.  A restrictive national policy with respect to free-

dom-of-information principles can be undermined to a certain extent by
use of the Internet.  Ironically, this became obvious recently as drafts of

the European CommunityÕs freedom-of-information regulation were
leaked and published on the Internet.Third, and perhaps most important, economic considerations in a glo-balized world may provide an even stronger motivation for adopting free-
dom-of-information principles in Germany.  As the European Com-

missionÕs ÒGreen Paper on Access to Public InformationÓ43 states,
ÒWithout user-friendly and readily available administrative, legislative,
financial, or other public information, economic actors cannot make fully
informed decisions.Ó Therefore, the Commission notes, Òthe ready avail-
ability of public information is an absolute prerequisite for the competi-
tiveness of European industry.  In this respect, EU companies are at a

serious competitive disadvantage compared to their American counter-Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRIVACY AND FREEDOM OF INFORMATION167parts, which benefit from a highly developed, efficient public-informa-tion system at all levels of the administration.Ó In addition, public-sector
information may itself be a vehicle for economic growth, as the public
sector is the biggest single producer of information in areas such as legis-
lation, statistics, culture, finance, geography, transport, and research.  Box

6.10 provides more discussion.Because nations can determine their own FOI policies that are, in theiressence, nonoverlapping, there is no particular need for international

harmonization of freedom-of-information laws.  It is important, how-
BOX 6.9  No Secrets About Public Access Regulation?
Any citizen of the Union . . . shall have a right of access to European Parlia-ment, Council and Commission documents subject to the principles and theconditions to be defined. (Article 255 of the Treaty establishing the EuropeanCommunities [Amsterdam Treaty]).The European Commission was charged with drawing up a draft regula-tion governing the publicÕs Òright of accessÓ to documents from the Com-
mission, Council, and European Parliament, according to Article 255 of the
Amsterdam Treaty.  The Commission
Õs original intention was to publish aÒcommunicationÓ (discussion paper) and then draft a regulation.  Drafts ofthis communication were leaked to Statewatch, a nongovernmental orga-
nization (NGO) that monitors state and civil liberties in the EuropeanUnion, in April 1999.  The document was widely circulated and subject to
strong criticism by other NGOs, members of Parliament, and academics.

In June 1999 the Commission decided to withdraw the publication of the
draft communication from its agenda and proceeded instead straight to the
draft regulation of the European CommissionÕs ÒProposal for a Regulationon Public Access to Documents of the European Parliament, the Counciland the Commission.Ó  Statewatch again obtained 
ÒunpublishedÓ drafts
and published them on its Web site, criticizing the draft as 
Òa new regula-
tion which will completely undermine the intent and spirit of theAmsterdam Treaty to 
ÔenshrineÕ the citizen
Õs right of access to documents.ÓTony Bunyan, Statewatch editor, said, ÒWe have obtained a copy and we
intend to ensure that it is ÔreproducedÕ as widely as possible so that civil
society can register its anger that such a proposal could even be consideredin a democratic Europe.ÓSOURCE: See <http://www.statewatch.org> (04.03.00).Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.168GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESever, to ensure that international treaties do not hamper national free-dom-of-information policies.  A case in point is internationally harmo-

nized copyright law.  So far, the pertinent international rules are silent

with respect to copyrighting governmental information; neither the
TRIPs agreements under the WTO treaty,44 the Berne treaty,
45 nor the
BOX 6.10  Economic Significance of Access to
Governmental InformationÒ . . . [I]t is important that efforts made by the public sector to render
information accessible for commercial exploitation are recognized and re-warded.  At the same time, if the private sector is to develop competitive
products from public-sector information, the [source] materials must be

available to them at a reasonable price.
ÒPricing is therefore a crucial issue for the exploitation of public-sectorinformation by the content industries.  It largely determines whether they

will [have] an interest in investing in value-added products and servicesbased on public-sector information.  American companies benefit from the
fact that they can obtain U.S. public-sector information [at no cost].ÒAn American software firm is about to release a business mapping soft-
ware product allowing users to find and illustrate points on the map, inte-grate maps in their documents, and identify the trends of their business on
the map.  The objective is to make it easy for business users in organiza-
tions of any size to use maps to make better-informed business decisions.Over 15 million addressed street-level segments are included for all U.S.
and worldwide country-level boundaries.  The estimated retail price of the
product is $109.ÒAs an element of comparison, a German map-information company isoffering geodata for [a single] German state . . . for a total of 9,728 DM +VAT 16%.ÓSOURCE:  Excerpted from European Commission, 1998, 
ÒGreen Paper on Access toPublic Information,Ó COM 585.
44The TRIPS Agreement (Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual PropertyRights) is Annex 1C of the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organiza-tion signed in Morocco on 15 April 1994.  It is available online at <http://www.wto.org/

english/tratop_e/trips_e/t_agm0_e.htm>.45Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works of September 9, 1886,as amended on September 28, 1979, UNTS No. 11850, available online at <http://
www.wipo.int/treaties/ip/index.html>.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRIVACY AND FREEDOM OF INFORMATION169World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) conventions
46 deal
with the issue.  If they were extended to such information, the potential

for conflict between treaty obligation and FOI for government data would
be obvious.NOTE ADDED IN PROOFIn the wake of the horrific events in New York City and Washington,D.C., on September 11, 2001, the ÒUniting and Strengthening America by
Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terror-
ismÓ (USA PATRIOT) Act was enacted into law (P.L. 107-56).  Reflecting

congressional concern that the legislative tools available to law enforce-
ment were inadequate in an advanced-technology environment in which
terrorists can freely travel and operate relatively free of the constraints
imposed by national borders, the act expanded government authority to
monitor Internet traffic, to compel disclosure of information contained in
public and private records if approved by the judicial branch, and to share
information collected in grand jury investigations with Òany Federal law
enforcement, intelligence, protective, immigration, national defense, or
national security official in order to assist the official receiving that infor-
mation in the performance of his official duties.Ó47 This legislation hasimplications for privacy interests of individuals vis ‹ vis government, and
a number of public interest groups have strongly criticized this legislation
for weakening protection for these interests.48In addition, in the freedom of information domain, the Bush adminis-tration has promulgated a policy that Òdiscretionary decision by [a federal]

agency to disclose information protected under the FOIA should be made
only after full and deliberate consideration of the institutional, commercial,
and personal privacy interests that could be implicated by disclosure of the
information. . . . When [an agency] carefully consider[s] FOIA requests and
decide[s] to withhold records, in whole or in part, [it] can be assured that
the Department of Justice will defend [its] decisions unless they lack a sound
legal basis or present an unwarranted risk of adverse impact on the ability
of other agencies to protect other important records.Ó4946WIPO Copyright Treaty adopted by the Diplomatic Conference on certain copyrightand neighboring rights questions, Geneva, on December 20, 1996 and WIPO Performances
and Phonograms Treaty adopted by the Diplomatic Conference on December 20, 1996.Available online at <http://www.wipo.int/treaties/ip/index.html>.47See <http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/bdquery/z?d107:h.r.03162:>.48See, for example <http://www.cdt.org/press/011025press.shtml> and <http://www.epic.org>.49See <http://www.usdoj.gov/oip/foiapost/2001foiapost19.htm>.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1707The Impact of Global E-Commerce on
Local Values
7.1INTRODUCTION
Given the great potential that the Internet offers for commercial ap-plications, it is hardly a surprise that e-commerce has become a subject of
intense interest. There is a growing literature on market opportunities,
business strategies, transaction efficiency and security, electronic cur-
rency, intellectual property, tax policy, trade policy, and other regulatory
issues related to doing business electronically. Indeed, the National Re-
search Council has itself produced a number of reports relevant to several
aspects of e-commerce.This chapter does not aim to re-cover all this ground. What is of con-
cern is the extent to which e-commerce affects the values of a society (and
vice versa)Ña more limited task, but still no small challenge. Indeed, there

are at least three ways in which interactions between e-commerce and
local or regional values might come about:¥To the extent that e-commerce encourages new business models,
changes the relationship between seller and buyer, and challenges exist-
ing regulatory structures, it has the potential to alter certain traditional
commercial values. Those values are often locally, regionally, and nation-
ally specific, so that the effect of e-commerce on commerce itself can also
be local, regional, or national.¥The continued growth of e-commerce raises the possibility that,
either directly or through the institutions developed to regulate (or stimu-
late) the commercial uses of the global network, e-commerce may alterGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE IMPACT OF GLOBAL E-COMMERCE ON LOCAL VALUES171the structure and/or operation of the Internet. These changes may affectthe InternetÕs noncommercial uses as well. For example, the control of
portals, the organization of browsers, the legal protections afforded to
operating-system and application software, and even the control over
URLs can have significant implications for all users. Indeed, the changes
can alter the culture and values that characterized the Ònetwork of net-
worksÓ during its formative stages.¥To the extent that commerce itself has a role in defining a local
society, the changes brought about by e-commerce may affect some of the
other local political and social values discussed in this report.7.2COMMERCE AND VALUES
Economic activity is often assumed, particularly in neoclassical mod-els, to be largely or entirely driven by individual profit-maximizing be-
havior. In this utilitarian view, commerce is essentially a value-free activ-
ity. As long as institutions are properly designed to provide efficient
markets with adequate property rights, freedom to enter into contracts,
and strong protection against monopolies, competition and self-interest
will do the rest.The utilitarian assumption is useful for many purposes, but most ob-servers (including economists) recognize that it is an incomplete descrip-
tion. The individual and group values and attitudes that are the subject of
this report manifest themselves in the rich network of informal social in-
stitutions in which a market-oriented economic system is embedded. At
the heart of these institutions is what might be called commercial values:
personal motivation, the material dimensions of social status, andÑper-
haps most importantÑvarious aspects of trust. Buyers and sellers know
the great value of trust and have developed ways of judging whom to
trust. They understand that an untarnished reputation, credit rating, and
reliability are essential to commercial success.Although these fundamental values are, on the surface, much thesame in most successful market economies, they manifest themselves in
different ways in different nation-states.  For example, Germany and the

United States have very different concepts of contract.  When a German

firm sells a complex piece of equipment or system to another, the contract
is typically no more than a few pages in length.  In the United States, the

contract for the same transaction might run to hundreds of pages.  This

difference arises, as a legal matter, out of the distinction between the civil
law rules in Germany and the common law rules in the United States.
The former tend to be broad and abstract, the latter quite specific as they
are derived from case analysis and precedent.  However, the very preva-

lence of those two different traditions reflects a profound value differenceGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.172GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESin the two countries.   Germans appear more willing to trust the courts toÒfill in the gapsÓ in a contractual relationship.   Americans may look to the

courts for redress, but expect the entire contractual relationship to be ex-
plicitly stated; whatÕs written is what counts, and few would expect (or
trust) the courts to go beyond a strict reading of the language of the con-
tract.Another difference in the manifestation of values between the twocountries lies in how they define intellectual property. In the United States,
patents and copyrights are property rights granted by the society. In Ger-
many, they are innate or moral rights earned by an individual as a reward
and recognition for his or her creation. Moreover, because it views intel-
lectual property rights primarily as an effective stimulus to economic ac-
tivity, the United States has been more flexible in defining what kinds of
creative ideas are worthy of protection and has tended to extend intellec-
tual-property protection to more and more activities, such as business
processes. German law has been more cautious in allowing such exten-
sions, perhaps coupling the deeper respect and greater protection for in-
dividual innovation with a narrower definition of what constitutes a cre-
ative act. In effect, the German system may place somewhat less emphasis
on intellectual-property protection as a stimulus to economic activity and
approach the issue primarily as a balance between individual rights and
the rights of the public to have access to new ideas.This governmental responsibility and concern for protecting the rightsof the public is also evident in German attitudes and law concerning com-
petitive practices. Germany places severe constraints on borderline mar-
keting practices and exaggerated advertising claims, and competitors are
quick to seek judicial relief when it appears that the line has been crossed.
The consumer is assumed to be vulnerable and entitled to protection, and
there are a host of default and mandatory rules in commercial law to pro-
vide that protection. In the United States, there is much less interference
with market transactions, per se, and the order of the day is caveat emp-
tor. On the other hand, the United States has product-liability laws that
are much more severe than in Germany, and liability suits leading to very
large jury awards are much more common in the United States.These examples illustrate the values of commerce that relate to com-merce itself. But commerce also provides some of the glue for a society. Its
form and dynamics shape a society as much as commerce is shaped by it.
Exchanging goods and services is a means by which people connect. The
suburban malls and chain restaurants of most U.S. cities build different
kinds of community relationships than the pedestrian-oriented, city shops
and cafes of most European cities. And businesses are not only commer-
cial but also social organizations. The GE employee who carries a lami-
nated card enunciating the companyÕs principles and commitments hasGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE IMPACT OF GLOBAL E-COMMERCE ON LOCAL VALUES173not merely entered a business relationship but has become part of a defin-ing social system. The German worker who has built a relationship with a
specific corporation since his or her apprenticeship days has developed a
social structure as well as a stable employment situation.E-commerce enters the picture in two ways. First, network-relatedcommercial values differ, at least in emphasis, from other commercial val-
ues. Second, by competing with local commercial systems and wresting
market share from them, e-commerce can weaken their embedded values.7.3THE IMPACT OF E-COMMERCE ON LOCAL
COMMERCIAL VALUES7.3.1The Globalization of Markets
Because global networks reduce the distance-related transaction costsof certain kinds of business, they may clearly increase the magnitude of
international commerce and change the cast of participants. Electronic
commerce may be of several kinds. Business-to-consumer traffic encom-
passes the range of transactions between firms and end users, from pur-
chase of goods to information and financial services. Business-to-business
transactions offer opportunities to develop efficient auction-based plat-
forms for procurement and supply-chain management systems that are
very attractive to large corporations. Business-to-government exchanges
make it practical for many new and smaller players to enter the interna-
tional market.Commercial opportunities on the Internet both arise from and are lim-ited by the fact that only digitized information moves through the net-
work. This makes it a natural medium for activities that depend on the
movement or manipulation of informationÑincluding words, numbers,
symbols, and descriptors or digital representations of shape, color, and
sound. Databases and the tools for using them, as well as many other
kinds of software programs, obviously fit this description, and it is not
surprising that a large fraction of Internet trade occurs in these Òsoft
goods.Ó But other kinds of digital content are fast catching up. Financial
services are expanding and, as bandwidth increases, so is the flow of real-
time audio and video files. Search engines have pioneered new ways of
allowing interactive information retrieval. Furthermore, customized ad-
vice and support are increasingly being provided through the Internet.Many kinds of tangible goods are also traded on the Internet, thoughstill constituting a relatively small fraction of total activity. The advan-
tages of the Net for hard goods come into play in different phases of the
value chain: price-setting mechanisms, including auction formats, can be
set up; procurement can be carried out electronically; and billing andGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.174GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESmaintenance services can be executed. These services are becoming moreattractive as technical and regulatory issues related to security and ano-
nymity are resolved.The globalizing effect of networks on these types of commerce differsmarkedly. Trade in hard goods is less likely to be globalized than soft
goods because the merchandise needs to be physically transported and is
subject to the same delays and border controls as non-e-traded goods.
Even for soft goods, globalization can be hindered by bandwidth capacity
in different parts of the world. In this latter case, however, technical im-
provements in physical networks and wireless communications, and po-
litical developments that increase the openness of certain societies, will
markedly reduce the barriers to global e-commerce.One of those barriers is the difficulty of establishing the level of trustthat has always been an important part of commerce generally and that
has been built up in particular ways within local regions and nations.
Some have argued1 that the problem is exacerbated when information
products are involved because of the lack of ÒtransparencyÓ of informa-
tion. That is, it is difficult to judge a priori how well the product will serve
the purpose for which it was purchased. In that sense, information goods
can be categorized as ÒexperienceÓ or even ÒcredenceÓ goods. Experience
goods are those whose quality can be judged only by useÑi.e., after the
purchase has become binding. With credence goods, the purchaser can
never really assess the quality of the good.2Technical approaches to credit validation, seals of approval, and co-operation among national governments can help to develop new ap-
proaches to trust building. Producers also spend a great deal on market-
ing, providing free information about the good, as well as samples or
demonstration versions. Large firms in business-to-business transactions
can use initial face-to-face meetings to establish the trust basis for an on-
going business relationship. Firms marketing branded goods or services
over a long period of time will also have little trouble. But small busi-
nesses will not necessarily have these and other mechanisms available for
generating trust across large distances and national borders. Intermediar-
ies such as eBay, that solicit and publish the ratings of buyers and sellers,
will undoubtedly have a greater role.1See Bradford DeLong and Michael Froomkin, 2000, ÒSpeculative Microeconomics forTomorrowÕs Economy,Ó in Brian Kahin and Hal R. Varian, eds., Internet Publishing and Be-yond, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.2These concepts have been developed by G.A. Akerlof, 1970, ÒThe Market for ÔLemons.ÕQuality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism,Ó Quarterly Journal of Economics 84:488-500.
They have been applied to information in M. Kretschmer, G. Klimis, and J.C. Chong, 1999,
ÒIncreasing Returns and Social Contagion in Cultural Industries,Ó British Journal of Manage-ment 10:61 ff.
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE IMPACT OF GLOBAL E-COMMERCE ON LOCAL VALUES1757.3.2Business on the Internet
There is an ongoing debate concerning the extent to which produc-tion and distribution decisions in the information economy differ from
those in manufacturing industries.3 But the emerging consensus is that e-
commerce leads to fundamentally different Òbusiness models.ÓNetwork EffectsThe spread of a hardware or software standard is accompanied by anexponential increase in the usefulness of that standard for its users, as
more and more elements can be connected to an interactive system. Ac-
cording to ÒMetcalfeÕs Law,Ó the value of a network increases in approxi-
mate proportion to the square of its numbers of usersÑor, to be more
precise, the potential value, V, is proportional to n(nÐ1).4 While some may
disagree about the magnitude of the effect or the precise functional rela-
tionship between number of users and value, the benefit of communica-
tions technologies depends crucially on the number of those participating
in their use. This effect has been observed in many consumer-product
markets. Often, it leads to veritable Òstandards wars,Ó as in the case of the
two video recorder standards VHS and Betamax. It also applies in the
production sector.In every case, we find a shift away from competitive equilibria, inwhich there are many suppliers, and toward single-firm equilibria. These
monopolists have a strong interest in locking customers into network re-
lationships. Concepts like trust, reputation, loyalty, and commitment play
a key role in the business strategies of online companies.5  We also find
new strategies for price setting, from giving away products to complex
schemes of price discrimination.6  Although it can be argued that compe-
tition remains intactÑbecause of a fierce contest for the maintenance and
eventual replacement of such network monopoliesÑthe recent evidence3Among the two leading contributions, Shapiro and Varian take a more conservative view,whereas Kelly foresees sweeping changes for fundamental concepts such as property andscarcity. See Kevin Kelly, 1998, New Rules for the New Economy. 10 Radical Strategies for aConnected World, Harmondsworth: Viking Penguin; and Carl Shapiro and Hal R. Varian,
1998, Information Rules: A Strategic Guide to the Network Economy, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
Business School Press.4For a survey of the literature, see Shapiro and Varian, 1998, p. 184.5AOL, for instance, has launched a long-term campaign to increase customersÕ trust in itsprovider services.6Shapiro and Varian offer the most detailed advice to the aspiring information entrepre-neur, while at the same time demonstrating the economic logic behind the new strategies.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.176GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESfrom the Microsoft case has shown that there is considerable potential forweakening the competitive process.Production by CopyIn traditional markets, firm size is constrained by the ultimately in-creasing marginal cost of material resources. In markets for digital prod-
ucts, few material resources are needed for reproductionÑwhich essen-
tially consists of copying a file of binary digits. Once initial hardware costs
are paid, digital copying costs are next to nothing. The largest supplier
will have the lowest marginal cost and thus appear to be a Ònatural mo-
nopoly.ÓObviously, the low cost of copying increases the incentive to com-mand the largest share of a digital good market. It also poses problems for
the protection of information products. Though the cost of assembling the
original good may be very high, as in the case of new operating-system
software or a movie, its digital reproduction involves a simple operation
that can be carried out with little technical skill and equipment. In conse-
quence, there is an incentive to Òtrespass.Ó7Properties of InformationOnly information can be transformed into the digital signals that travelthrough global networks. Information makes its impact on users in a very
specific manner: it does not change their physical state or modify their
physical circumstances. Instead, it affects the usersÕ thoughts, knowledge,
or feelings. Users learn something new, or they gain pleasure, or they re-
ceive instructions to behave in ways that make them more successful.The receipt of such signals by individuals does not destroy or alterthe original message. In consequence, there is no rivalry in consuming an
information good. This is the core reason why information is considered a
public rather than a private good. In many cases, it is still easy to exclude
those who do not pay for the consumption of the good, either through
electronic walls, legal sanctions against unauthorized copying, or techni-
cal copyright-management systems (see below). Such interventions may
meet the goals of an individual producer, but from a social-welfare per-
spective, there are inevitable losses in potential utility associated with
them. That is the reason why patent and copyright statutes try to strike a
tenuous balance between the temporary protection of exclusive property7For a discussion of problems associated with a lack of excludability, see Bradford DeLongand Michael Froomkin, ÒSpeculative Microeconomics for TomorrowÕs Economy,Ó 2000.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE IMPACT OF GLOBAL E-COMMERCE ON LOCAL VALUES177rights and the subsequent free use of new inventions, be they technical orartistic in nature.The particular nature of information also accounts for its lack of trans-
parency.8 The qualities or potential defects of material goods are some-
times immediately visible. In the case of information goods, nothing can
be gleaned from the appearance of a CD-ROM or a pdf file.Producers react to this situation with a massive increase in the pro-portion of total expenses devoted to marketing. Prospective buyers re-
ceive free information about the good, or samples, or even demo versions
in order to decrease their perceived risk. This amount of free publicity
poses a problem in itselfÑthe much-discussed Òinformation overloadÓÑ
when the entire public is exposed to these messages. On the other hand,
the basic lack of transparency of information goods provides incentives to
try out various schemes in order to reduce the likelihood of fraud or the
delivery of inferior-quality products.7.4EFFECTS ON LOCAL COMMERCIAL VALUES
To the extent that global networks lead to significant increases in e-commerce, some local business ventures will clearly be subjected to com-
petitive pressures, particularly where the transactions involve tangible
goods. Of greater concern for purposes of this report, however, is the valuecompetitionÑthe degree to which Internet-based business creates ten-

sions with local commercial values.Because business conducted through the Internet has such differentcharacteristics from local commerce, it requires a somewhat different set
of commercial values. This is as true of e-commerce conducted within a
single nation as it is of global e-commerce. In principle, individuals can
adapt to operating with two sets of values, one for local commerce and
another for e-commerce. But the more that traditional values become a
burden or disadvantage in e-commerce, the less likely the separation can
be rigidly maintained.Globalization of e-commerce enters the picture in several ways. Thedegree of tension between Internet-commerce values and more traditional
local ones is at least in part a function of the local value systemÑwhich, of
course, differs from nation to nation. In effect, each nation faces a differ-
ent challenge in resolving the discrepancies between local and Internet
values. Moreover, if e-commerce transactions are globalÑthat is, do
bridge different nationsÑthere must be some harmonization between the
accommodations adopted by each of the nations.8See DeLong and Froomkin, ÒSpeculative Microeconomics for TomorrowÕs Economy,Ó2000.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.178GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESCommercial values, as noted earlier, are implicit in the design of thelaws and the formal and informal institutions that give meaning and shape

(and a regulatory framework) to such concepts as intellectual property,
contracts, and competition. It is useful to examine how each of these is
affected by e-commerce.7.4.1Intellectual Property
The recognition of intellectual property provides a means for soci-eties to grant monopoly rights to an individual (or corporate entity) for
some specified period of time. As pointed out earlier, these rights are
granted to recognize and reward the inventorÕs creativity as well as to
stimulate the creative process for the benefit of society at large. These two
goals are balanced differently in each society, as a function of laws, formal
and informal institutions, and other practical factors.The legal institutions that have been developed to protect intellectualproperty include patents, copyrights, and trademarks.9  Patents grant
temporary rights to the inventor of a product or process that meets certain
criteria of originality, usefulness, and non-obviousness. Copyrights grant
temporary rights to the author or owner of a work of human expression.
Traditionally, works of art, music, and literature were protected by copy-
right. Today, both copyright and, increasingly, patent protection has been
extended to software programs and databases.  Patents for software in

particular have been controversial, and the practice is also not followed in
all countries.  Trademarks protect a visual symbol or label used as an

identifying mark.The growth of digital information and communications technologieshas created a number of knotty intellectual-property problems, particu-
larly with respect to copyright law.10 A comprehensive discussion of the
issues is presented in a separate CSTB report.11 The comments that follow
here are therefore quite brief and intended only as a summary and to
touch on some recent developments.Information and communications technologies raise issues in copy-right law for several reasons. The technological capacity to manipulate,
organize, and transmit information allows the generation of a large num-9For completeness, one should include trade secrets in this group, as companies can takelegal action against misappropriation of such secrets. But it is a category that is much less
dependent on a specific legal structure than the others, and therefore is not treated here.10In contrast, advances in molecular and cellular biology have had much greater impacton patent law.11Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council. 2000.The Digital Dilemma. Intellectual Property in the Information Age. Washington, D.C.: National
Academy Press.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE IMPACT OF GLOBAL E-COMMERCE ON LOCAL VALUES179ber of new information products whose producers need (and, in manycases, deserve) intellectual-property protection. However, these products
do not easily fit into one or another of the traditional intellectual-property
categories. Copyright is attractive to most producers because protection
can be obtained much more quickly and easily than is the case with pat-
enting, and this has been of great value to them in a rapidly changing
environment. But copyright protects only the expression of an idea, not
the idea itself, leaving producers rather vulnerable to misappropriation.For example, copyrighting the lines of code in a software programstill leaves the program owner vulnerable; code can be altered to avoid
copyright infringement, while the underlying design of the program is
exploited. As another example, the organization of a database into a for-
mat that is much more usable than the raw (often public) data on which it
is based adds value worthy of protection. But again, if the protection
comes through copyright, small reformations of the data would allow oth-
ers to avoid copyright infringement.The problem is exacerbated in e-business because the same digitaltechnologies that offer so many opportunities to create new information
products and market them at very low marginal costs also make it ex-
tremely easy for others to copy those products. Indeed, they could make
copies in such numbers that it might seriously reduce the size of the origi-
nal producerÕs market. The producerÕs vulnerability is thus all the greater.There are technical countermeasures, however. Copyright manage-ment systemsÑtechnologies that enable copyright owners to regulate and
automatically charge for access to digital worksÑare now available.12They make it considerably easier to control the distribution of informa-
tion and to trace who uses it (as well as when and how often), who copies
it (legally or illegally), and who redistributes it.Taken together, these factors are exerting pressure to change tradi-tional attitudes toward copyright and traditional strategies for protecting
it. Although copyright is a well-established element in intellectual-prop-
erty protection, legal institutions have provided for Òfair-use exceptions Ò
and Òfirst-sale limitations.Ó In adopting these provisions, society and the
law have recognized the practical limitations on monitoring every pos-
sible copyright violation and the relatively small damage to the value of
intellectual property that limited and sporadic violations represent. In
addition, by making the barrier to the publicÕs unfettered use of informa-
tion covered by copyright slightly porous, the system has achieved a
somewhat better balance between private and public interests.12See Julie E. Cohen, 1997, ÒSome Reflections on Copyright Management Systems andLaws Designed to Protect Them,Ó Berkeley Technology Law Journal 12.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.180GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESWith the increased vulnerability that producers feel and the new toolsavailable to them, copyright owners have generally become much less
willing to tolerate the porosity that has, up until now, indirectly acknowl-
edged and accommodated the communal property aspects of informa-
tion. For example, source codes for programs are much more closely
guarded than in the earlier days of information technology.13 In addition,
although database producers may only own the form of the data they
market, they make efforts to restrict the easy availability of the (often)
public data on which their information product is based.  Major copyright

holders, particularly the U.S. film industry, initially invoked provisions of
international treaties in order to eliminate private copying, or fair use;
these efforts were denounced as Òcopyright grab.Ó14 The issue is hardly
settled, however, as the recent Napster controversy illustrates.15  It has
become clearer that illicit copying may not be as simple and inexpensive
to monitor as originally thought; when such copying involves networks
with several million usersÑrepresenting a considerable potential market
for property such as music filesÑcopyright holders are aggressively seek-
ing legal remedies. Thus, whether the solution ultimately lies in law or
technical architecture remains to be seen.16The suddenness of the changes has led to turbulence both in the dip-lomatic and judicial arenas. The Copyright Treaty adopted within the
framework of the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) by
the Diplomatic Conference on December 20, 1996, requires contracting
parties to provide Òadequate legal protection and effective legal remedies
against the circumvention of effective technological measures that are
used by authors in connection with the exercise of their rights.Ó This has
given rise to a strong political reaction by groups committed to protecting13A significant exception is the rise and continued growth of Òopen sourceÓ (OS) softwaredevelopment. OS development is a process in which many individual programmers collabo-
rate to maintain, refine, and upgrade software. The primary example of OS development isLINUX, an operating system that is widely regarded as a highly robust operating platform.See, for example, Steve Weber, 2000, The Political Economy of Open Source Software, BRIEWorking Paper 140.14Pamela Samuelson. 1997. ÒConfab Clips Copyright Cartel,Ó Wired 5.3, March.
15The Napster controversy concerned a service provided by Napster that the music re-cording industry believed operated in violation of copyright law.  Napster did not copy
copyrighted files; instead, it provided an index of titles, many of which were copyrighted,and enabled ÒmatchmakingÓ between a person wanting a particular title and another per-
son who already had that title.  The latter would provide the former with the requested title,
usually without compensation.  In February 2001, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth
Circuit upheld an injunction issued in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of
California that effectively shut down Napster.  See 
A&M Records, Inc. v. Napster, Inc., 239
F.3d 1004 (9th Cir. 2001), available at <http://www.riaa.com/pdf/napsterdecision.pdf>.16Lawrence Lessig, 2000, ÒArchitecting for Control,Ó preprint, Stanford University.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE IMPACT OF GLOBAL E-COMMERCE ON LOCAL VALUES181free access to ideas and preventing interference with the Òflourishing ofcultural life.ÓThe arguments have been joined in the discussions and debates sur-rounding the U.S. and EU legislation implementing the WIPO Treaty (the
U.S. Congress has enacted the Digital Millennium Copyright Act
(DMCA),17 and the European Union promulgated Directive 2001/29/EC
on the harmonization of certain aspects of copyright and related rights in
the information society18). But these arguments have made clear that thereare some significant differences between the European Union and the

United States on some of the values underlying the current conflicts. The
Europeans tend to emphasize the Òmoral rightsÓ of the author. In contrast
to pecuniary rights, moral rights are inalienable personal rights allowing
an author to claim authorship and to prevent the mutilation or distortion
of the work. Moral rights are rooted in natural law principles recognized
by a number of European nations in civil law and in the Berne Treaty.19Although the United States signed the Berne Treaty in 1989, it hasbeen quite reluctant to grant such sweeping moral rights to authors and
artists.20 First (as the Napster case has shown), many in the U.S. public
perceive that what is at issue is often the rights of owners rather than of
authors or artists. Second, the United States has focused on the public
value of information and the damage to research that excessive restric-
tions on Òfair useÓ might cause.The conflict is an excellent illustration of the challenge to local valuesthat the new technologies represent. Moral rights are a component of con-
tinental European law that, if compromised, would certainly be perceived
as the destruction of an important value. Indeed, an artist or writerÕs moral
rights to a voice in all transactions involving a work of art have been in-
troduced into the EU code.  On the other hand, freedom of information

has always been extremely important in the United States, and laws that17P.L. 105-304, 112 Stat. 2860 (October 28, 1998).18See <http://www.europa.eu.int/comm/internal_market/en/intprop/docs/index.htm>,  or Official Journal L 167, 22/06/2001 P. 0010-0019.
19Article 6 bis(1), Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, No.11850, 828 U.N.T.S. 221 (September 9, 1886) (revised 1908, 1928, 1948, 1967, 1971).20As Howard B. Abrams puts it: ÒThe fact of the matter is that the United States wasanxious to join the Berne Union; and the Berne Union, and its governing bodyÑthe World
Intellectual Property OrganizationÑwere quite anxious to have the United States as a mem-ber. Thus both parties have been more than willing to accept the fiction that the UnitedStates really has a right of respect, and the fact that the United States does not truly recog-
nize moral rights will almost certainly be glossed over.Ó See Howard B. Abrams, 1991, TheLaw of Copyright, New York, (Looseleaf) Vol. 2, ¤ 18.02 [C][2].
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.182GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESmight compromise it would also be perceived as the destruction of animportant value.Still, it now appears that e-commerce is leading to modifications inthe underlying values of both the European Union and the United States.
Where the final compromises will lead and what steps can be taken to
ameliorate the perceived losses, however, are difficult to predict.7.4.2Contract and Consumer Protection
Successful market economies have always recognized the need to Òlevelthe playing fieldÓ between seller and buyer, particularly where the buyer is
an individual consumer at a great power disadvantage with respect to typi-
cal producers and sellers. Governments have seen it as their role to provide
this leveling by regulating advertising, contracts, and liability.In an online economy, the fundamental issue is much the sameÑover-
coming the power differential between seller and buyerÑbut a number of
circumstances make it a somewhat more challenging task. Internet trans-
actions will increasingly involve buyers and sellers in different nations
with different commercial-law regimes. Of course, international trade is
not, in itself, a new concept, and mechanisms for resolving jurisdictional
disputes have long been in place. What renders the Internet situation dif-
ferent is that many of the buyers (and sometimes the sellers) are relatively
unsophisticated, and they are not supported by the kind of legal structure
that has allowed large commercial ventures to deal with such issues in the
past. Thus it is likely that governments will be pressed to improve the
transparency, efficiency, and reach of their mediation processes.More than process is at issue, however. As pointed out earlier in thischapter, there are considerable differences between the European Union
and the United States regarding consumer protection and the role of con-
tracts. Europeans are more severe in restraining false advertising claims
than are Americans. For their part, Americans are more literal in inter-
preting (and relying on) the specific wording of contracts to define and
limit the obligations of seller and buyer. Yet Americans give consumers
much more latitude to seek judicial relief and are more likely to hold pro-
ducers financially liable for mishaps involving their products.Thus the resolution of the different contract and consumer-protectionapproaches is more than a procedural problem. It begins with the need to
establish the extent to which the parties have voluntarily consented to the
terms of the contract. In the Internet world, with hypertext or icon-linked
Web pages, contract terms may not be obviously and explicitly apparent
to the buyer. Moreover, certain actions far less conscious than an explicit
signature (box or button clicks online, opening a shrink-wrapped soft-
ware package offline) may be taken as constituting acceptance of contrac-Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE IMPACT OF GLOBAL E-COMMERCE ON LOCAL VALUES183tual terms. In certain cases, these terms may create continuing obligationsrelated to the use of the product that contravene other laws in one of the
constituencies involved.21The problem continues with the need to resolve differences in viewsabout the appropriate role of government in enforcing or supplementing
contracts to protect consumers, which would appear to make the issue
more complicated than merely one of negotiating the proper application
of commercial law. Furthermore, which nationÕs values should apply in
determining what is appropriate advertising? Should one take into ac-
count that a consumer in a country where advertising has previously been
more constrained might be more vulnerable to exaggerated claims? Or,
on the other hand, should a seller be expected to alter what amounts to a
cultural standard by exhibiting more restraint when operating in the in-
ternational setting? And should a seller be considered as Òoperating in an
international settingÓ even before an actual transaction occurs? Finally, to
what extent do competitors have standing to challenge, on the basis of
laws (and their underlying values), the practices of sellers who are not in
their country?The technology of the Internet also enables a number of practices re-lated to e-commerce that have no obvious equivalent in the non-Internet
world. The practice of spamming, the use of cookies, the involuntary
opening of other Web pages when one connects to a particular URL ad-
dress, are all far more intrusive than sales and advertising practices offline.

Therefore, each practice raises new challenges to governments in balanc-
ing the rights of sellers and consumers. Although attempts can be made to
extend present law to cover these new practices, they appear to be suffi-
ciently different from existing situations that a deeper consideration of
the underlying conflicting values should first take place.7.4.3Competition
The Internet changes the competitive environment of commerce. Be-cause the information space is unlimited and the entry cost is low, small
entrepreneurs can enter the marketplace easily. And because direct com-
munication between customer and entrepreneur is enhanced, transaction
costs are lower. For both these reasons, the Internet appears to facilitate
greater variation and diversity. Most importantly, as new niches of prom-
ising business activity are identified, large numbers of (initially) small
business entities may occupy them.21See Margaret J. Radin, 2000, ÒHumans, Computers and Binding Agreements,Ó IndianaLaw Review 75:1125.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.184GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESOn the other hand, the Internet especially facilitates enterprises whosesuccess depends on network effectsÑÒwinner-takes-allÓ situations for
companies with significant market shareÑwhich further facilitate their
growth and market dominance.This effect leaves competition and antitrust policy in a quandary: canmarket domination continue to be viewed as a threat to competition if
gaining a (temporary) monopoly is the central strategic guideline for com-
petitors in information-goods markets? The only actions likely to continue
to be viewed as violations will be Òunacceptable practicesÓ by the tempo-
rary-monopoly holder to perpetuate that position. Even then, it may be
difficult to agree on what is Òunacceptable,Ó given the long tradition of
practices like tie-in sales and product bundling.The obvious illustrative case for such violations, U.S. v. Microsoft,22 is,
of course, still not quite settled. However, it has already provided both
the legal and the economic fields with a wealth of new insights.Among other issues, an important aspect of the case was MicrosoftÕsbehavior during the market introduction of its Web browser, Internet Ex-
plorer. The techniques it used to push the then-incumbent standard
browser, NetscapeÕs Navigator, out of the market led to the claim that
Microsoft extended its operating-system monopoly by unfair means. The
trial proceedings have developed at length the arguments around Òtem-
poral natural monopolies,Ó and the case illustrates two major controver-
sies: whether, and how much, the use of market power should be limited;
and the extent to which antitrust law should be restraining.The network nature of global communication gives rise to anothermajor current issue. Because the networks of competing firms are con-
nected into larger nets, interconnection can be successively leveraged in
ways that effectively exclude specific competitors. Of course, such mea-
sures can be billed (or even deliberately designed) as technical incompat-
ibilities.23 
 Exclusion can also be practiced at the basic hardware level. For
example, in the absence of regulation preventing the restriction of access
to last-mile telephone lines and cable networks, companies can preserve
monopoly positions despite fierce price and service competition.2422United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, June 28, 2001, UnitedStates of America v. Microsoft Corporation; appeal on District Court of Columbia Circuit, 97 F.Supp. 2nd 59 (D.D.C. 2000)ÑFinal Judgment; see also 84 F. Supp. 2nd 9 (D.D.C. 1999)Ñ
Findings of Fact and 87 F. Supp. 2nd 30 (D.D.C. 2000)ÑConclusions of Law.23There is also an OECD report on various countriesÕ responses to related questions:ÒCompetition Issues in Electronic Commerce,Ó DAFFE7CLP (2000)32, January 2001.24See Francois Bar et al., 1999, ÒDefending the Internet Revolution in the Broadband Era:When Doing Nothing Is Doing Harm,Ó Berkeley: BRIE Working Paper N. 0137, August.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE IMPACT OF GLOBAL E-COMMERCE ON LOCAL VALUES185In the United States, antitrust has in recent years focused on economicpolicy, and has been aimed at enhancing efficiency. Germany has always
shared that goal, but influential politicians believed that antitrust policy
should also serve to protect the political process from excessive economic
influence and power.25  In the United States, on the other hand, there has
been a great reticence to mix economic and political issues, as well as a
greater willingness to let the market work. However, there are signs that
the two systems may be converging, at least where the Internet is con-
cerned. Still, given the track record on recent U.S.-European controver-
siesÑconcerning civil-aviation subsidies, airlinesÕ landing-rights policies,
and in the major differences between U.S. and European authorities on a
proposed GE-Honeywell mergerÑit would be a mistake to assume that
the two systems are converging rapidly.7.5THE IMPACT OF E-COMMERCE ON GLOBAL NETWORKS
The second chapter of this report reviewed the history of the Internetand emphasized how its growth and structure were influenced by the
interests and attitudes of its developers and by the ÒNetizenÓ culture,
which influenced the form of this network of networks and, in turn, was
supported and reinforced by that network architecture. This history illus-
trates the nature of technology developmentÑan interaction between
technologyÕs ÒpushÓ and the ÒpullÓ exerted by its users and adapters of a
technology, an example of both Òsoft determinismÓ and Òpath depen-
dence.ÓBut the evolution of a technology does not stop at some arbitrarypoint. As the user community changes, the ÒpullÓ factors change, and the
architecture and operating systems continue to evolve. One important
current question is the extent to which the explosion of e-commerce will
so shift the makeup of the user community, and so influence the structure
and operation of global networks, that network values will be substan-
tially affected.The commercial opportunities offered by the Internet are largely re-lated to the privatization of digitized information and, to a lesser extent,
the means for obtaining and using it. On the other hand, one of the great
strengths of the Internet is its ability to support and encourage public uses
of information for a range of political, social, cultural, and personal pur-
posesÑobtaining it, using it, sharing it, and being able to accomplish those
functions quickly, unthreateningly, and inexpensively. These are not en-25For a comparative view, see several articles by David Gerber, Chicago-Kent School ofLaw.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.186GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUEStirely conflicting goals (and they together explain, in part, why there aremarkets for information products). However, it certainly seems prudent
to be alert to ways in which e-commerce could drive alterationsÑin archi-
tecture, hardware, software, and regulationÑthat could inhibit other
Internet activities and their related values. Some of these are outlined in
the following paragraphs.One of the more obvious areas of potential conflict concerns privacy,the subject of Chapter 6. Many of the commercial opportunities offered by
new technologies are based on obtaining and using more complete infor-
mation about consumersÑtheir needs, tastes, and patterns. Having such
information allows sellers to locate individuals who may want their ser-
vices and to customize those services; developing databases that aggre-
gate such information helps companies to plan marketing strategies. The
motivation to acquire such data stimulates development of the requisite
technologiesÑcookies, analysis of purchase records, data mining and
matchingÑbut their availability increases the potential threat to privacy.It is important to keep in mind that this is not merely a conflict be-tween the interests of information-product producers (or traders) and of
individuals whose concern is protecting their own privacy. In fact, the
individual may well realize that having the benefit of products and ser-
vices customized to his or her needs depends on some other person or
corporation gaining access to his or her personal information. For ex-

ample, individuals may want the convenience of online booksellers call-
ing certain new books to their attention, and they might appreciate the
life-saving potential of a hospitalÕs emergency room having easy access to
records of their blood type and allergies.Given the recognized usefulness of these new commercial servicesand their enabling technologies, the response has been not so much to
preclude the gathering of information as to regulate its misuse (or its use
without an individualÕs permission). But there are those who argue that
in the long run we may actually see a devaluation of privacy per se; that
is, there may be an increased willingness to relinquish certain control over
oneÕs private data in return for the perceived value of services based on
the easy availability of that data.Another area of potential conflict concerns freedom of information. Itis, of course, the enormous growth in the availability of information
through the Internet that has created many of the market opportunities
for new kinds of Net-based intermediaries. The search engines, the de-
rived databases, the rapid official-document publication services, and the
news-scanning services all help users to sort through the information
overload in order to find what they actually want. These products truly
enhance the availability of information, and they reinforce one of the most
significant values offered by a networked world.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE IMPACT OF GLOBAL E-COMMERCE ON LOCAL VALUES187But these products can also compromise freedom of information intwo ways. First, there is a constant pressure on the system to protect and
increase the value of a product that uses an underlying data set or open
information source by extending intellectual-property protection to the
underlying information, thereby making it less available to the public
generally. The protests of many in the scientific community about the
WIPO Copyright Treaty and the Digital Millennium Copyright Act
stemmed from this kind of concern about restrictions on the availability
of scientific data for use in research.Second, there is concern that the commercial availability of deriveddata products will reduce the incentive for public agencies to make the
same data available in convenient alternative forms. For example, if pri-
vate entities mine the census data in various ways and sell the resulting
products, the raw data may still be available to the public; but the incen-
tive for government agencies to develop intermediate products (which
might be inferior to the private products but still a lot more useful than
the raw data) will be much reduced. And if the full, searchable text of
judicial decisions or legislative actions is available from a commercial firm
for a fee, these texts may still be available to the public in hard copy, but
there will be less incentive for the government to provide this information
online or as quickly.Another area of potential conflict arises from the development of tech-nologies to monitor the distribution and use of commercial information
products. The purpose of these technologies is to trace who accesses such
products, how often they do so, and what they do with them for purposes
of billing (and subsequent marketing).   These technologies can also limit
access to paying subscribers, and filter information to serve clients or to
conform to the requirements of law. But technologies developed for one
use are, of course, available for other uses. Filters used to block offensive
material from reaching a userÕs computer can be used by governments to
filter political information. Systems for monitoring how and when people
access commercial data can be deployed by governments to keep track of
whom citizens communicate with and what information they receive.Clearly, there are a number of countries in which these kinds of usesof the technology are common today. Many argue that, even though tech-
nically feasible, it is unlikely that such practices will be politically sustain-
able over an extended period of time.  Nevertheless, it is clear that the

continuing development of these and similar technologies has the poten-
tial to create a network architecture whose inherent properties no longer
promote the freedom and anonymity of the early days of the Internet.A final example relates to the practicalities of accessing and transmit-ting information. One of the most important characteristics of the Internet
is the sheer volume of information that it permits users to access or com-Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.188GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESmunicate. The continual improvement in chip performance and band-width leads to ever-expanding capacity that, unlike the electromagnetic
spectrum, is almost without limit. In principle, this should all but elimi-
nate competition for a share of the communication space, a major issue in
broadcasting and telecommunication.But in practice, the average user depends on intermediaries such assearch engines to sort through the information overload of the Internet.
At the very least, both users and providers need search engines to help
them find each other. A smaller but still significant number of users rely
on host providers. These intermediaries are commercial entities, and one
rational business strategy for them is to offer information providers
greater prominence in the information universeÑa first-page location in
the list of ÒhitsÓ for certain key words, for example, or more direct and
convenient linkages from user to favored providerÑfor a price. In effect,
market forces can tilt the playing field for information. Whether or not
this occurs on a grand scale will depend on whether the market rewards
intermediaries more for the quality and breadth of their service to infor-
mation users than for their service to information producers.7.6THE IMPACT OF E-COMMERCE ON LOCAL, SOCIAL,
 AND POLITICAL VALUES
The impact of e-commerce on values is generally not separable fromits impact on local values. Privacy, freedom of information, and the right
of free speech, as discussed in earlier chapters of this report, are local
values, though their precise interpretation may differ from one locality to
another. Therefore many of the issues raised in this chapter can be inter-
preted as potential impacts on local values.Over and above those issues, however, is what may be labeled thedecoupling of commerce and community, which the expansion of e-com-
merce may well provoke. Commerce, particularly local commerce, is a
social activity that promotes community connections, reinforces commu-
nity values, establishes community identity, and supports community
development. Some kinds of market activity, of course, must always be
localÑfor example, the provision of food, housing, and much of health
care. However, competition between local commerce and global e-com-
merce is not only possible but already evidenced in a number of business
arenas. Online booksellers such as amazon.com compete with local book-
stores, for example, and mail-order retailing, once primarily a phenom-
enon of rural areas, is now equally commonplace in large cities. As noted
earlier, such activities are likely to remain a small part of the total value of
e-commerce, but their local effects may be significant nonetheless.Because the United States has already seen the replacement of manyGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE IMPACT OF GLOBAL E-COMMERCE ON LOCAL VALUES189kinds of local businesses by large chains, the social change prompted byretail activity on the Internet may be less obvious than in Europe. On the
other hand, the receptivity to online retailing in the United States may be
greater than in Europe precisely because it is the continuation of a pattern
that has already been accepted.Depending on how the tax consequences of e-commerce ultimatelyplay out, there may be additional, and significant, impact on local politi-
cal and social life. It is not our intention in this report to offer a compre-
hensive analysis of Internet taxation. However, it should be noted that in
the United States, with its many local tax authorities and its heavy depen-
dence on sales tax to run local government, a significant shift from local to
Internet commerce would have serious ramifications. On the face of it,
this would put local businesses (which are taxed) at a competitive disad-
vantage, and it would certainly reduce the funds available for local social
services. One interesting possibility is that the United States may respond
to these pressures by moving toward a European-style value-added tax.It would be a mistake to think that e-commerce inevitably leads to aweakening of local social and political structures. Many of the InternetÕs
service functions, which comprise a far larger fraction of e-commerce ac-
tivity than does brick-and-mortar retailing, may serve to stabilize com-
munities by reducing the tight coupling of job and residence location.In the United States, for example, small rural communities whose ex-istences were threatened by the failure of family farms have been able to
remain intact by creating employment in information-network servicesÑ
e.g., airline-reservation centers and credit-card processing centers. In ad-
dition, telecommuting has been growing in the United States, allowing
families more choices with respect to child-rearing arrangements. Indeed,
the virtual mobility of labor permitted by global networks can have sig-
nificant effects on policies, institutions, and social patternsÑregional so-
cial infrastructure (e.g., housing, health care, and transportation), immi-
gration law, dress standards, eating habits, and others.In all these examples, locality is important because it determineswhether the value set will be receptive or resistant to the opportunities of
e-commerce. The attractiveness of telecommuting is likely to be relatively
high in the United States, where commuting distances are getting longer
and longer and the dearth of efficient, inexpensive public transportation
is a growing problem. As noted above, the issue of Internet taxation may
be much less important in Europe than in the United States. On the other
hand, the threat to the local nature of commerce may be more serious in
the European setting.  What remains an interesting question is whether

these various patterns of acceptance or tension will lead to changes in
local values or to a pattern of e-commerce development that differs no-
ticeably from the penetration pattern of global networks themselves.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1See OECD, 1997, Internet Domain Names: Allocation Policies, OECD Document GD(97)207,Paris. See also Chapter 7.8Governance in Cyberspace:Multi-Level and Multi-ActorConstitutionalism8.1INTRODUCTION
This report has identified a number of specific social, political, andeconomic values, and has explored the ways in which global networks
may challenge them or shift the traditional balances between them. The
report is by no means exhaustive, but it does illustrate the kinds of prob-
lems that may arise as global networks expand even further.The question is how to deal with these problems. When is it appropri-ate to intervene? Which regulatory tools are likely to be most effective
and which ones less so?  Should global networks be governed and, if so,

in what way?  That is, what are the appropriate goals and functions of

global-network governance?  How should it be structured?  And which

actors should be involved in its design and its operation?8.2GOVERNANCE
In general, stable governance require commonly accepted operatingprinciples, structures, and responsibilities, and sometimes authorities or
agencies. At the very least in an Internet context, some authority (or au-
thorities) must oversee certain technical operations such as address as-
signment and domain-name administration.1 But for political, commer-
cial, and social issues, what is the relevance of traditional means of190Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GOVERNANCE IN CYBERSPACE191regulation? What role might commercial law play in governing certainaspects of the Internet? What new approaches to governance should be
considered? Note that the issue is not whether governance is relevant to
the Internet, but rather how such governance should be conducted, with
what scope, and at what cost.8.2.1Is Regulation Necessary? Technical Solutions,
Intermediaries, and Self-helpPrior chapters have pointed out that technical solutions can be foundto help deal with some of the problems created by global networks. For
example, filtering systems can help end users to separate desired from
undesired information. New methods for identification (e.g., electronic
signatures), electronic payments (e.g., digital cash), and privacy protec-
tion (e.g., encryption) can strengthen the safety and reliability of network-
based commercial transactions. Regulations may be necessary to facilitate
the use of these tools or to monitor their effectiveness, but the regulations
can be designed to build on and enhance the technical tools rather than to
replace or impede them.In addition, the market creates incentives for intermediaries in theelectronic marketplace to offer services that protect the interests of its cus-
tomersÑboth content providers and users. Users, for example, can choose
an Internet provider that offers a selection of Web sites suiting the userÕs
tastes while blocking sites the user would prefer not to see.2Users can, of course, help themselves rather than depend on interme-diaries. For example, an avalanche of organized e-mail protests to a
spammerÕs address can effectively shut down the spammerÕs e-mail ser-
vice.3 Global networks themselves, as an efficient source of information
distribution and of group organization, help like-minded individuals to
find and help one another. Consumers can exchange opinions on prod-
ucts and services, warn others of unfair practices by merchants on the
Net, and organize groups to take action to protect their interests.2For example, AOL blocked its gateway for e-mails from a company calledÒCyberpromotionsÓ because the majority of its users disliked getting the direct advertising
of that company via e-mail.3Spam is unsolicited and unwanted e-mail. Spammers are broadcasters of such messages,which are usually advertisements. For more information on organized technically based
approaches to prevent spam, see <http://mail-abuse.org/rbl/>.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.192GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUES8.2.2Informal Rules
In the world of global networks, informal sets of rules of behavior, suchas ÒNetiquette,Ó are common. They can exist as an explicit code of conduct
in a certain community or as an implicit agreement about behavior.None of these rules, whether explicit or not, is binding in a legal sense,and they are weak tools for compelling behavior in a person unwilling to
submit to them voluntarily. There are, of course, social means of enforce-
ment that can be effective in relatively closed groups, where the threat of
excluding the individual might be a significant one.  Such groups might

be virtual communities of hackers, people who share special interests, and
even some Internet businesses. But these are very special cases in a net-
worked world with millions of users, which is expanding at a rapid rate.
For most cases in which rules are necessary, legal tools of one sort or an-
other will oftenÑperhaps even usuallyÑprove more effective.8.2.3The Limited Power of Traditional National Regulation
The Internet and some other global networks allow anyone to transferinformation-based material, easily and at minimal cost, from one country
to another. They even allow a person to move in a virtual sense from one
country to another without a passport, visa, or work permit. These new
exit options reduce the regulatory power of the individual nation-state
because its traditional tool for regulationÑpublic lawÑgenerally applies
only within its own borders. Although extraterritorial enforcement of na-
tional laws is possible in principle, this generally presupposes that the
nation-state can exercise jurisdiction over some element of the trans-
national activityÑe.g., by seizing local property or by restricting access to
its market.But although the power of the nation state to regulate is reduced, it isnot eliminated, even in the Internet world.  The fact that the network is

global does not mean that all communications and transactions on it are
between people in different countries.  The end points for many exchanges

are within the same country.  Chat room users often wish to communicate

with partners in the same national community, especially for language
reasons and because of the increased likelihood of meeting in real life.  E-

commerce, especially retail purchases, largely takes place within one
country. These kinds of activities can still be regulated by a single nation-
state, even though the bits may travel anywhere in the world on the way
from sender to receiver.And even when one or more of the parties involved in an Internetexchange is outside the territory of a particular state, the stateÕs power isGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GOVERNANCE IN CYBERSPACE193not necessarily as limited as it may seem at first glance.4  The behavior of
the party who is within the country can certainly be regulated; for ex-
ample, such a person might be prosecuted for downloading illegal con-
tent from the Net.  More importantly, Internet traffic usually goes through

the hands of local intermediaries such as Internet service providers or
credit-card agencies. These intermediaries are prime targets for national
regulation. They can be required by law to block, or at least provide no
support for, an activity in cyberspace that is illegal in the particular coun-
try. Still, this is an imperfect and a costly solution. It is imperfect in that
the creation of new uncontrolled intermediaries is often technically and
economically easy. And it is costly in that disempowering the intermedi-
aries risks slowing the national penetration rate of the Internet, with all of
the attendant economic and social consequences.8.2.4International Legal Harmonization
Some analysts regard the international harmonization of laws as theonly way to meet the challenges of global networks.5  International coop-
eration in implementing and enforcing rules can be accomplished through

agreements that assign responsibility for regulation, or through harmoni-
zation of the regulations themselves.  The problem is that states tend to

balk at cooperating when their own laws and attitudes toward a particu-
lar issue differ from those of the state whose laws they are asked to en-
force.  Therefore, only when there is consensus about an issue is interna-

tional cooperation likely to be achieved quickly and effectively.That reality is illustrated by the fields in which the G-8 states considercoordinated action. For example, the Conference of the G-8 Ministers of
Justice and Interior held in Milan on February 26-27, 2001, issued a
communiqu” in which pedophilia and sexual exploitation, money laun-
dering, and corruption were identified as areas of common concern.6 In
these subjects, the underlying attitudes are similar in all industrialized
countries, and the need for regulation is obvious.But even when there is agreement in principle, regulation will not bea high priority for some nation states if there is no perceived potential
harm to their economic development.  Consequently, few nation-states
4A more detailed discussion of these issues can be found in Jack Goldsmith, 2000, ÒTheInternet, Conflicts of Regulation, and International Harmonization,Ó Understanding the Im-pact of Global Networks on Local Social, Political and Cultural Values, Engel and Keller, eds.5Willem Calkoen uses drastic imagery in his plea for harmonization: ÒThe issue is rapidlybecoming one of whether we choose to have laws or live in a lawless societyÓ (in ÒHarmoni-zation of Laws and the Internet,Ó International Business Lawyer, April 1998, pp. 146 et seq.).6See <http://www.g8.gc.ca/2001/Milan_Justice_Interior-e.asp>.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.194GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESwill invest any significant resources in cooperative enforcement, and somemay want to use cooperation as a lever to extract concessions from the
international community on completely separate matters that are of politi-
cal or economic importance to them. The problem is that even a single
noncooperating state can be a serious challenge to a consistent interna-
tional regulatory framework where the Internet is concerned. That coun-
try can create a Òregulation leakÓ that enables highly mobile content pro-
viders to evade international regulation; or, if the country includes a
significant enough group of network participants, it can, de facto, force its
own regulatory structure on the international community.8.2.5The Use of Internationally Coordinated Commercial Laws
To what extent might commercial law, rather than public law, be usedto regulate global networks? The central actors in commercial law are pri-
vate parties freely shaping their own legal relationships through contracts
and, when necessary, suing each other in the courts. The state takes an
auxiliary role by offering the legal protection of the courts, which inter-
pret and judge the validity of contracts, protect peopleÕs interests in the
contracting process, and help them in the enforcement of legal titles. But
even these limited roles provide the state with mechanisms that can be
used to protect local values in a networked world.Contracts have, in fact, become popular tools for the governance ofInternet transactions. Access to a Web site is often made conditional on
clicking an ÒI agreeÓ button, which is taken to indicate that the site visitor
has agreed to, though has not necessarily read, a long list of terms and
conditions to which the statement refers.  If the participating computers

are appropriately programmed, the actual agreement can even be con-
cluded by the two machines without any explicit action by humans.  More-

over, the first contract can be made conditional on holding to these same
conditions any other parties to which the digital good is later sold.The private laws of the United States and Germany both start fromthe principle that individuals should be free to conclude a contract with
anyone they wish, and to decide on its terms. Basically, the role of con-
tract law is limited to giving these contracts legal validity. The normative
argument is that if the two parties have agreed to the contract, the law has
no reason to intervene. At most, it offers to fill in details, using Òdefault
rulesÓ that supplement the wording of the contract, if the parties have not
explicitly or implicitly ruled them out.77German law is much more active in this respect, resulting in complex transactions beingcontracted on no more than a few pages, whereas similar U.S. contracts can have hundredsof pages.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GOVERNANCE IN CYBERSPACE195This restraint on the part of the legal system does not extend to situa-tions in which the fact of consent is in doubt, or where systematic power
differences are likely to unbalance the outcome. This is why contract laws
in both countries also have mandatory rules, which contracting parties
cannot waive. To the extent that those rules differ between countries, they
add complexity to the enforcement of contracts in which the parties are in
different jurisdictions, but many of those have been dealt with in the past.Online transactions raise a number of additional questions that haveand will continue to challenge specific mandatory rules, as well as their
coordination across national boundaries. Is a simple click enough for con-
sent on unusual or highly burdensome contract provisions?  Must the

substance of the provisions to which the click refers be controlled by the
courts?  Should some provisions, such as an anti-reverse-engineering

clause, be prohibited when they are actually legal under patent law?Default rules also offer a way in which contract law can insert localvalues into the governance of international commercial activity. Although
default rules, unlike mandatory rules, can be changed, both parties to the
contract must explicitly agree to do so. This has two governance effects:
changing a default rule is costly, and it is revealing. A party who asks for
a change signals the other that the change has some particular value. The
other party will then wonder why such a change might be rational for the
first party, leading to a more explicit focus on the underlying values (and
value differences) that gave rise to the default rules in the first place.8Last, but not least, there is tort law, which offers opportunities to regu-late by establishing liability for damage caused by certain kinds of conduct.
This allows the state to establish a financial incentive for a private entity to
refrain from such conduct. The weakness in the approach, of course, is that
the behavior is not proscribed but merely made costly, so that the person
contemplating some socially undesirable enterprise can decide whether or
not to proceed by first doing a cost-benefit calculation. Therefore tort law
cannot, in any absolute sense, protect vulnerable people.Procedural law offers other opportunities to influence the legal rela-tionship between private parties. In effect, the state can use this instru-
ment to establish a right of action by a third party, or by a class or group;
in fact, the state could authorize itself to act on behalf of a third party, as it
often does in protecting the rights of minors. Procedural law can also be
used effectively in a trial to establish rules on accessing information rel-
evant to the trial, to ascertain facts, or to specify the burden of proof to be
used in reaching judgments.8This idea plays a prominent role in what economists call mechanism design. See DouglasG. Baird, Robert H. Gertner, and Randal C. Picker, 1994, Game Theory and the Law, Cam-
bridge, 147-153 passim.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.196GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESThe central advantage of regulation by commercial law lies in the re-ality that national commercial legal systems are much better coordinated
internationally than are systems of public law. In commercial international
law, there are conflicts-of-law rules that determine the applicable national
law. The rules of the international law of civil procedure regulate the au-
thority to adjudicate on national jurisdiction, and they regulate the recog-
nition and enforcement of foreign judgments as well.  In contrast to public

laws and regulations, which have essentially no effect beyond a stateÕs
borders, commercial lawÕs role in accepting foreign legal action (e.g., in
enforcing foreign judgments) is no peculiarity; rather, it is an everyday
process in civil courts.9That is not to say that rules governing conflict of laws are neutral ortotally balanced in their effect. In fact, negotiation of those rules is another
point at which the state can indirectly extend its regulatory intervention.
Jurisdictional rules can be established that give an advantage to either
plaintiffs or defendants, that favor content providers over users (or vice
versa), or that extend a stateÕs regulatory power by giving its residents or
citizens no choice about jurisdictional venues. On the other hand, rules
can be constructed to give the greatest influence to states with the least
regulatory restrictions by allowing parties to a dispute to Òforum shop.ÓSome of the commercial-law conflict rules currently used in the offline
world may not be suitable in their current form for a global virtual arena
like the Internet, and some rethinking will be necessary. The process of
adaptation will require a certain flexibility in the application of existing
conflict rules in order to fit the kinds of cases that are likely to arise in the
context of the Internet.10 For example, rules based on the location of the
plaintiff or the defendant are much less meaningful in the Internet world,119Cf. Wolf Osthaus, 2000, ÒLocal Values, Global Networks and the Return of Private Law.On the Function of Civil Law and Private International Law in Cyberspace,Ó in Christoph
Engel and Kenneth H. Keller, eds., Governance of Global Networks in the Light of Differing LocalValues, Baden-Baden, p. 209-236.10This may be easier in the traditionally more flexible Anglo-American system than in thefixed-connection system of Continental-European design. But the tendency to a more openapproach in the continental Conflict of Laws system can already be ascertained. A goodexample is provided by the rules of the Rome Convention on the legal order governing
contractual relations. According to Art. 4 of the Convention, as a rule, the law of the nationto which the contract has Òthe strongest connectionÓ is to be applied. A list of assumptionsin par. 2 intends to fill out this term for the regular case. But if there is any closer connection
to the law of another state, the judge is free to apply this law (Art. 4 par. 5).11See Matthew Burnstein, 1998, ÒA Global Network in a Compartmentalized Legal Envi-ronment,Ó in Katharina Boele-Woelki and Catherine Kessedjian eds., Internet, Which CourtDecides? Which Law Applies? Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, the Netherlands, pp.23, 27 et seq.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GOVERNANCE IN CYBERSPACE197and a rigid adherence to notions of location would provide easy opportuni-ties for people to evade the law by adjusting their virtual location.There may well be a temptation to find convenient but inappropriateanalogies to Internet cases in existing commercial law, not least because
particular interpretations may serve perceived national interests.12 With
each nation-state making such interpretations in its own interest, the re-
sult could be an unraveling of the carefully developed commercial-law
coordination regime and an accumulation of inconsistent regulations,
comparable to what exists in the area of public law.  Indeed, it could result

in a loss of international willingness to recognize and enforce foreign judg-
ments in civil-law matters. It would be far better at the moment to con-
sider Internet cases individually and de novo, accumulating experience
that might ultimately be used to identify valid abstract norms.As promising as it is, the potential of commercial international lawshould not be overestimated. Regulation by commercial-law systems can
lead to practical problems in which the individual actors are not able to
defend their rights. The most important restriction relates to money: the
commercial law system requires the parties to pay the costs of litigation, a
serious financial burden to those involved. Even if litigants ultimately

obtain a favorable judgment and are reimbursed for the cost of litigationÑ
no certainty in any eventÑthe up-front costs can be enormous. 13
 Gather-
ing evidence, prosecuting the case, and dealing with delays all take time
and money. Furthermore, these costs multiply with every appeal and even
more when judgments must be legitimized and executed in another
state.14 In many cases, the cost and uncertainty discourage a person fromever pursuing a legal remedy, though in the American system, class-
action suits have been one answer to this problem.On the other hand, it is also true that defendants, particularly thosewithout Òdeep pockets,Ó are disadvantaged by a costly legal system and12Here in particular, the U.S.-wide Ògovernmental interest approachÓ could undergo anundesired renaissance.13Here, the national costs associated with litigation are important. The German solution,that all costs follow the event, is advantageous providing one wins. But a victory in court is
never sure. The American system, by which everyone bears their own costs, harbors thedanger that the party has to split an award with his or her lawyers. This is not alwayscompensated for by the high levels of compensation for pain and suffering, structured settle-
ments, or punitive damages. Therefore lawyers find themselves hunting cases and are con-tent with being remunerated only with a share of the amount awarded (contingency fee).14According to an investigation carried out by the E.U. Commission, the costs for lawyersand courts for the enforcement of a judgment worth 4,000 marks, even within the commonmarket, amounts to 5,000 marks. See Enquete Commission, ÒFuture of the Media in theEconomy and Society: GermanyÕs Way in the Information Society: Fifth Report on Con-
sumer Protection in the Information SocietyÓ (Bundestags-Drucksache 13/11003), p. 26 (withfurther references).Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.198GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUEStherefore more likely to settle claims regardless of their merit. No equiva-lent to class action suits exists in this case, and an unfortunate consequence
of excessive dependence on commercial law may be that certain content
providers or intermediaries will adopt a protective strategy to avoid li-
ability, with a resultant chilling effect on freedom of expression. An addi-
tional interesting problem in the application of commercial law to the
Internet is the difficulty of identifying a defendant with some certainty
and establishing his or her location. One cannot sue a domain name or an
IP address per se. (There is an exception, however, where trademark pro-
tection is concerned. The U.S. Anticybersquatting Consumer Protection
Act gives the trademark owner the option to sue Òin rem.Ó In practical
terms, this means that he or she can sue the domain name without even
knowing who has registered it.15)Of course, even if a defendant has been identified, enforcing a judg-ment may be quite difficult because of the high mobility of persons and
capital.16 In the physical world, and where parties are subject to the juris-
diction of the same government, those who win judgments against clearly
identifiable parties often have available such enforcement mechanisms as
attaching a personÕs property or garnishing wages. It may well be that the
Internet world will require new mechanisms (for example, withdrawing a
domain name, or striking the IP addresses from domain servers and rout-
ers) for enforcing judgments that relate to important assets in this new
technological setting.178.2.6Self-regulation Without State Intervention
Many have argued that the state should refrain completely from at-tempting to regulate the Internet and instead allow network participants
to regulate themselves. Indeed, many claim that this kind of self-regula-
tion is already occurring, and that there is a workable set of rules in place
for cyberspace, quite independent of national borders. Variously called
Òcyberlaw,Ó Òlex informatica,Ó18 or Òcommon law of the Internet,Ó its pro-
15In this regard, the EU directive on distance selling also is a (weaker) step in the rightdirection. It stipulates that a consumer, even before concluding a contract, needs to be in-
formed about the (real) identity of his contracting partner (Art. 4 I lit. a).16Peter Swire. 1998. ÒOf Elephants, Mice, and Privacy: International Choice of Law andthe Internet,Ó The International Lawyer 32:991, 1024.
17Henry H. Perritt, Jr. 1998. ÒWill the Judgement-Proof Own Cyberspace?,Ó The Interna-tional Lawyer 32:1123, 1132 et seq., 1139 et seq.
18Joel Reidenberg. 1996. ÒGoverning Networks and Rule-Making in Cyberspace,Ó EmoryLaw Journal 45: 911-929; Aron Mefford, 1997, ÒLex Informatica: Foundations of Law on the
InternetÓ available online at <http://www.law.indiana.edu/glsj/vol5/no1/mefford.html>.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GOVERNANCE IN CYBERSPACE199ponents point to Òlex mercatoriaÓ (the law of the marketplace in interna-tional business) as an example.19 Although these are technically not laws,
they are rules that have evolved through a process of self-regulation that
was essential in the development of the Internet precisely because its ac-
tivities transcended national boundaries. The effectiveness of such self-
regulation, what might be called Òsoft law,Ó depends on such social pres-
sures to conform as the threat of  exclusion from membership in a group

where membership confers benefits.As valuable as soft law can be in many areas, it does raise certainproblems. First, and obviously, private enforcement measures are not al-
ways effective. If the issue is sufficiently important or the inappropriate
behavior sufficiently disruptive, people whose rights are threatened may
try to call on formal state-based institutions to enforce the soft law. But
statesÕ willingness to act may depend on whether the self-regulatory struc-
ture exists within the context of some legal framework. If not, the soft law
may be seen as an ad hoc agreement among Net participants that is not a
matter for legal authorities.20Some might argue that the nation-state should enforce the self-regu-lation rules as it would a contract. That may work in certain circumstances,
but not if the ÒcontractÓ contains provisions that are inconsistent with
mandatory rulesÑi.e., nonwaivable rules of national law.21Furthermore, there is a question as to whether all participants havecontractually accepted the pertinent rules of cyberlaw merely because they
are using the Internet. In principle, one possible approach to giving con-
tractual status to a given set of rulesÑassociated, perhaps, with a particu-
lar Web site or serviceÑwould be to require all users, at the time of log-
ging in,22 to declare their willingness to accept the rules. But it is highly
questionable whether such a vague commitment concerning future, hy-
pothetical actions could have legal validity.An even larger question in a self-regulatory scheme is how to avoid atyranny of the majority that violates the interests of the minority. How
would a party with much weaker bargaining power be protected against
rules imposed by a party with much greater power?23 How would due
19Cf. Burnstein, 1998 (supra note 11); David Johnson and David Post, 1996, ÒLaw andBorders: The Rise of Law in Cyberspace,Ó Stanford Law Review 48:1367et seq. (especially pp.
1387 et seq.).20In German law, for instance, Art. 4 II EGBGB, which only refers to the choice of theÒlawof a state,Ó provides a clear answer: mandatory rules of national law that would be appli-
cable according to the general Conflict of Laws rules cannot be avoided by reference tonongovernmental rules.21Goldsmith (supra note 4) 1200.22Burnstein (supra note  11), pp. 31 et seq., suggests such a negotiation. Following the
expression shrink-wrap, he calls for Òclick-wrap-contracts.Ó23Goldsmith (supra note 4) 1200.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.200GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESprocess be ensured? The notion of self-regulation arose at a time whenInternet users were a relatively homogeneous group with strongly shared
ideals. Informal rules had as much, or even more, effect on behavior as
legally binding rules. Such an ÒInternet communityÓ would be a mere
illusion today, given not only the commercialization of the Net but also its
burgeoning use for many social, political, and cultural purposes. The pro-
tection of local values quite often amounts to nothing more (or less) than
the recognition and protection of the differing ideas of many small groups
that are unable to have any significant influence on the rules in a self-
regulatory regime.For Europeans and others, the majoritarian nature of a self-regulatoryscheme raises the concern that American legal concepts and American
cultural values will dominate the Internet, and further, that American in-
terests will be served by its orientation. This has been characterized as
ÒAmericanization by the back door.Ó24 As people from other cultures seek
their own opportunities to participate in the Internet, the concern about
ÒAmericanizationÓ may well be broadened to a concern about ÒWestern-
izationÓ or even the specter of Òneocolonialism.ÓInterestingly, some proponents of self-regulation may find themselveshaving second thoughts if commercialization of the Internet leads to the
creation of powerful economic interests that can exercise a very strong
influence on the direction of the informal or de facto rules. Where eco-
nomic transactions take place between equally strong partners, self-regu-
lation can be a usefully flexible and effective tool. But when stronger and
weaker participants come together on the Net, self-regulation cannot guar-
antee a desirable result. Similarly, if self-regulation leads to greater influ-
ence for market-driven processes, local values can lose out. In these cases,
some participation by the state seems necessary.8.2.7Hybrid Regulation
As noted in other chapters of this report, a number of experts havesuggested that the best approach to governing the Internet is to combine a
number of different regulatory and policy tools, selecting those that work
best for particular purposes and in particular circumstances. Obviously,
this leads to a rather complex system of governance, but the fact is that the
globally networked world is itself complex, which is why no single regu-
latory approach seems adequate. This use of a panoply of tools and ac-
tors, formal and informal, governmental and nongovernmental, national
and international, is labeled hybrid regulation.24Very clear on that point is Peter Mankowski, 1999, ÒWider ein transnationals Cyberlaw,Ó, p. 138 (140).Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GOVERNANCE IN CYBERSPACE201What Does Hybrid Regulation Mean?In a sense, hybrid regulation is a misleading term. It is not so muchregulation as a broader concept of governance, taken to mean the system
of institutions and processes used to influence the conduct of individuals
and groups. Governance, from this perspective, is about the allocation of
powerÑnot only in a public setting but within private associations as
wellÑand exercised by a multitude of actors at different levels of author-
ity and operation.This system of governance involves a number of challenges: coordi-nating the legal and political actions of national governments; adding and
integrating new forms of transnational institutions such as the European
Union; making use of diplomatic conferences or permanent international
organizations such as the ITU or WTO, when appropriate; and recogniz-
ing and facilitating voluntary self-regulatory mechanisms involving in-
dustry, labor, public interest, and other community interest groups.Applied to cyberspace, with its multitude of activities and many con-stituencies, governance may basically serve an ÒumbrellaÓ function, as-
serting certain normative principles, explicitly recognizing the set of
agreements and arrangements that deal with the subjects of public inter-
national law, and providing some level of legitimacy to the principles and
self-regulatory schemes that govern, respectively, business, civil society
and other nongovernmental entities. Put differently, one can envision a
hybrid regulatory regime in which government provides a framework for
private self-ordering that meets certain minimum requirements estab-
lished by the framework.25 Over time, this might well lead to an even
more limited role for the nation-state, as new actors appear who assume
regulatory powers that have traditionally been state responsibilities.Public institutions also share authority at the level of global gover-nance. New nongovernmental actors with transborder reach, such as mul-
tinational or transnational enterprises,26 internationally organized pub-
lic-interest groups, and other nongovernmental organizations (NGOs),
increasingly exercise influence and assume responsibilities complemen-
tary to, or in cooperation with, established public actors in the interna-
tional legal community.27 Global networks, of course, play an important
25See Henry H. Perritt, Jr., 2000, ÒThe Internet Is Changing the Public International LegalSystem,Ó Kentucky Law Journal, 88:885-955.26Klaus W. Grewlich. 1988. Transnational Enterprises in a New International System, Alphenaan den Rijn.27James Rosenau and Ernst-Otto Czempiel, eds. 1992. Governance Without Government.Cambridge.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.202GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESrole in helping these new entities evolve positions on various issues andin empowering them to act.Developing a public international-law structure that enables the inte-gration of binding public international law, Òsoft law,Ó self-regulatory ar-
rangements, and nonbinding self-policing measures might, in the long
run, change the nature of international law itself. Gradually, a scheme of
governance that was originally designed to achieve some sort of workable
coexistence among sovereign actors might develop its own normative
demands, along with procedures for new institutions to address them.Interest in Hybrid RegulationHybrid regulation is not a new concept. Indeed, governance in boththe United States and Germany relies on several levels of federalism, in-
cluding national, state, local, and district law and regulation. Further,
trade associations often make their own rules on competition and anti-
trust, and various interest groups such as NGOs lobby, draft regulations,
and get them approved by legislative or administrative bodies. Against
this background, hybrid regulation just adds anotherÑinternationalÑ

level.Governments on both sides of the Atlantic appear to be willing toconsider hybrid forms of governance in a number of domains, though
they generally speak in terms of opening markets and minimizing gov-
ernment interference. For instance, at the G-7 Conference in Brussels in
February 1995, the following policy principles were endorsed by the con-
ferees: promoting dynamic competition; encouraging private investment;
defining an adaptable regulatory framework; providing open access to
networks; ensuring universal provision of, and access to, services; pro-
moting equality of opportunity to the citizen; promoting diversity of con-
tent, including cultural and linguistic diversity; and recognizing the ne-
cessity of worldwide cooperation, with particular attention to
less-developed countries.These principles have been refined in statements and reports emerg-ing from a number of international governmental meetings, such as the
1997 Ministerial Conference on Global Information Networks in Bonn and
the 1998 Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
(OECD) Ministerial Conference, ÒA Borderless World: Realizing the Po-
tential of Global Electronic Commerce,Ó in Ottawa. The Ministerial Decla-
ration issued after the Bonn Conference, as well as a parallel ÒIndustrial
DeclarationÓ put forward by the private sector, asserted that if there was
to be further expansion in electronic commerce, a number of key strate-
gies would have to be adopted. For example, regulation would have to be
as light-handed and flexible as possible; legal rules applicable to globalGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GOVERNANCE IN CYBERSPACE203information networks would have to be consistent across borders; andtelecommunications markets would have to be opened up to effective

competition. It would also be necessary to allow market forces to drive
the development of open technical standards; to avoid discriminatory

taxes on the use of information networks; and to provide a high level of
intellectual-property-rights protection for the creation, storage, and dis-
tribution of cyber-content.Businesses also seem to be open to self-regulation under a govern-mental umbrella. For example, at the 1998 OECD Ottawa Conference,
business spokespersons proposed a set of fundamental principles Òto
shape the policies that govern electronic commerce, if the promises of elec-
tronic commerce are to be fulfilled.Ó28 It included the following:
¥The development of electronic commerce should be led primarily
by the private sector in response to market forces.¥Government intervention, when required, should promote a stable,
international legal environment, allow a rational allocation of scarce re-
sources, and protect the general interest. Such intervention should be no
more than is essential and should be clear, transparent, objective, nondis-
criminatory, proportional, flexible, and technology-neutral.¥Mechanisms for private-sector input and involvement in policy-
making should be promoted and widely used in all countries.¥Regulation of the underlying telecommunications infrastructure,
where necessary, should reduce impediments to competition, enabling
new services and new entrants to compete globally in an open and fair
market.¥A high level of trust should be pursued by mutual agreement, edu-
cation, further technological innovations to enhance security and reliabil-
ity, the adoption of adequate dispute-resolution mechanisms, and private-
sector self-regulation. Business should make available to users the means
to exercise choice with respect to privacy, confidentiality, content control,
and, under appropriate circumstances, anonymity.The apparent enthusiasm for new governance approaches should not,however, obscure two realities. First, the more important that telecommu-
nications, information services, electronic commerce, and global informa-
tion networks become to national societies and economies, the less likely28OECD Ministerial Conference. 1998. ÒA Borderless World: Realizing the Potential ofGlobal Electronic Commerce,Ó A Global Action Plan for Electronic Commerce Prepared by
Business, with Recommendations from Governments, 7-9 October 1998, Ottawa, Canada,OECD Document SG/EC(98)11/REV2, 5 October 1998.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.204GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESit is that governments will relinquish all controls. Second, on the flip side,withdrawal of controlsÑi.e., liberalization and deregulationÑwill only
work if international cooperation becomes more stable and reliable and
the right balance is struck between subsidiarity, harmonization, and the
transfer of some authority to new entitiesÑinternational or private.Constitutionalizing Public International Law to Facilitate Hybrid RegulationEffectively managing the changes inherent in the global evolution to-wards an information society is a challenge involving many constituen-
cies and rules at once.  It would appear more effective and appropriate to

explicitly engage all of these constituencies, rather than to rely on the tra-
ditional monolithic concept of national sovereignty. This approach would
be tantamount to ÒconstitutionalizingÓ public international law that in
the past has served little more than a coordinative function for sovereign
governments. Public authority would become the joint and separate re-
sponsibility of a multiplicity of coordinated authorities, with nation states
being but one of the elements of this system.29In addition to multilevel authority, the system would have a multi-plicity of actors.30 In its umbrella function, this constitutionalized inter-
national legal system31 might establish normative principles, agreements,
and procedures pertaining not only to subjects appropriate for public in-
ternational law but also to self-regulatory schemes that would apply to
business, labor, civil society, and other nongovernmental entities. In the
most optimistic scenario, this umbrella function, at first little more than a
compilation of arrangements, might ultimately lead to integration of the
public and private, the traditional and newly emerging, and regulation by
law and the process of self-regulation.29See, in this context, Ingolf Pernice, 1999, ÒMultilevel Constitutionalism and the Treaty ofAmsterdam: European Constitution-Making Revisited?,Ó Common Market Law Review 36 :703
(709).30Klaus W. Grewlich, 1999, Governance in CyberspaceÑAccess and Public Interest in GlobalCommunications, Den Haag/London/Boston (Chapter Ten).31Ernst U. Petersmann, 1999, ÒHow to Constitutionalize International Law and ForeignPolicy for the Benefit of Civil Society?,Ó Michigan Journal of International Law 20; Hannes L.
Schloemann and Stefan Ohlhoff, 1999, ÒÔConstitutionalizationÕ and Dispute Settlement in
the WTOÑNational Security as an Issue of Competence,Ó American Journal of InternationalLaw 93:424.
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.9Information Networks and Culture
9.1INTRODUCTION
The interaction between global networks and local cultures is clearlyan important dimension of the study of global networks and local values
generally.  Both ÒcultureÓ and ÒvaluesÓ are terms with a number of mean-

ings.   Culture and values are obviously not entirely independent of one

another.  Values are embedded in cultures and, to a certain extent, derive

from those cultures.  At the same time, values are part of the glue that

gives the culture cohesion and identity.  Chapter 3 discusses the term Òval-

uesÓ in some depth; this chapter takes on the same task with respect to
culture.Other chapters in this report have dealt with local differences on such mat-ters as privacy, pornography, and hate speechÑsubjects that can properly be
viewed as manifestations of local cultural differences.  
Not only do d
ifferentcultures attach different weights or varying levels of importance to each of
these issues, but they even give alternative meanings to the terms we use toidentify them.  These differences then affect the social, political, and legal tools
that each society is willing to employ in dealing with the issuesÕ challenges.In this area perhaps more than any other, the limitation imposed byfocusing this study on two nations that are more alike than different be-
comes obvious.  As the introduction to this report points out, although

there are a number of differences between American and German cul-
tures, in the context of the worldÕs overall cultural diversity they are quite
similar.  Both are modern and wealthy nation states with strong, techno-

logically based market economies and highly educated populations.  Each
205Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.206GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUEShas been strongly influenced by Western European history and tradition(a significant, though now-decreasing, fraction of the U.S. population
traces its family origin to Germany) and they have comparable distribu-
tions of religious affiliations among their people.  They also share an al-

phabet, and their languages are closely related.In contrast, most people elsewhere in the world live in cultural set-tings far different from those of the United States or Germany.  Their dif-
ferences make clear that the introduction of global networks in many of
those settings challenges, and is challenged by, a variety of local cultural
values that are not relevant to the American or German cases.The committee was thus faced with a dilemma: to ignore a topic ofobvious relevance to the study generally because it could not be explored
adequately within the limited framework of U.S. and German culture, or,
at least for this chapter, to remove that geographical constraint in order to
address the broader issues.  The committee chose the latter course, argu-

ing that in this, the penultimate chapter of the report, it is reasonable to
highlight some questions that might well be explored more comprehen-
sively in a later study by a committee with a far broader range of regional
expertise than the present one.  Thus, what follows should be viewed as

an introduction to the range of issues that need to be considered in assess-
ing the potential cultural impacts of global networks.ÒCultureÓ is a term with many meanings.  It covers art, literature, and
music; it refers to various dimensions of identity, including the linguistic,
national, local, ethnic, and religious; it is sometimes described in terms of
social solidarities or epistemic connections, which run the gamut from
single-issue interests to professional occupation; and it depends on level
of education, social and professional status, and age.  Culture is also a

moving target, affected by economic, social, political, and technological
changes, even as it affects each of them.  Global networks are clearly one

of those changes, but it would be a major challenge to separate out this
one factor from the many others associated with globalization that are
also bringing about cultural evolution.Anthropologists, sociologists, historians, and economists have writ-ten much about the dynamics of technological change, with most reject-
ing a rigid technological determinism.  They instead emphasize that trans-

formations over time result from interactions between new technologies
and the existing social and economic circumstances.1 To interpret these
interactions, cultural theorists have given us a certain structure that cat-1Robert McC. Adams, 1996, Paths of Fire: An AnthropoligistÕs Inquiry Into Western Technol-ogy, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press; Leo Marx, 1964, The Machine in the Garden:Technology and the Pastoral Ideal in America, Oxford: Oxford University Press; NathanRosenberg, 1994, Exploring the Black Box: Technology, Economics, and History, Cambridge: Cam-bridge University Press.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION NETWORKS AND CULTURE207egorizes cultural patterns according to Òsocial solidarities.Ó2 This provides
some insight into not only the nature of the interactions between tech-
nologies and cultures, but also the limitations on how far the former can
go in altering the latter.  Although such writings provide a framework for

analyzing the interaction of global networks and local cultures, they also
make clear that the analysis must be approached comprehensively if it is
to advance our understanding.Looming large among these questions to be considered is the specterof cultural hegemonyÑthe concern of many that the architecture and soft-

ware of global networks so strongly reflect the language, values, and in-
terests of the United States that other cultures will be either disadvan-
taged or displaced as these networks exert an ever-increasing influence
not only on the language of commerce and discourse, but on community
hierarchy and organization, business style, education, and entertainment
programming as well.There are many other questions as well.  Some have suggested that
class cultural differences within societies may be more significant than
differences between societies in assessing the effects of global networks.
On the other hand, age differences may be more telling than either class
or nationality.  Or, perhaps, as others have suggested,
3 the Internet in and
of itself may be giving rise to a new culture, relatively homogeneous in its
values, and quite distinct from the local cultures in which its members are
otherwise embedded.From still another perspective, we need to be able to distinguish tran-sient effects from long-term consequences.  To what extent do cultural

factors merely have an effect in the short termÑsay, in slowing the adop-
tion of or accommodation to global networksÑand to what extent do they
influence or entail permanent cultural changes? And of course, how much
are particular cultures economically or politically disadvantaged relative
to others in the short or long term?The sections that follow provide some amplification of these is-sues, based on discussions that took place during the committeeÕs de-

liberations.2Michael Thompson. 1999. ÒGlobal Networks and Local Cultures: What Are the Mis-matches and What Can Be Done About Them?,Ó in Understanding the Impact of Global Net-works on Local Social, Political and Cultural Values, Christoph Engel and Kenneth H. Keller,
eds., Law and Economics of International Telecommunications, Vol. 42. Baden-Baden:Nomos.3See Esther Dyson, 1997, Release 2.0. New York: Broadway Books, p. 52.
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.208GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUES9.2CULTURAL HEGEMONY
The very essence of global networks is the power they give individu-als to participate actively, either as providers or recipients of information.
Low cost of entry, wide penetration of networks, and the transparency of
Web-browsing software all contribute to this characteristic.  In principle,

any individual or group can easily distribute information to a seemingly
unlimited audience, and at minimal cost.  Also in principle, anyone can

selectÑor blockÑinformation from the vast universe of sources available
throughout the world.But the practical reality is somewhat different.  Networks provide an
infrastructure whose actual characteristics are determined as much by
which people and groups use and design them as by their innate poten-
tial.  When one group or nation constitutes a significant, even dominant,

fraction of the users and providers, then the networkÕs hardware and soft-
wareÑÒthe code,Ó to use Lawrence LessigÕs term4Ñand the preponder-ance of its available information, are likely to reflect the culture of that
group or nation.The language used on Web sites is clearly one measure of this kind ofdominance, and indeed, a very large fraction of all Web sites use English.
In a world of networked communication, language takes on an impor-
tance even greater than that in broadcast or entertainment media because
it affects not only how well one can understand what is said or written
but how effectively one can communicate.  Language in that sense is a

form of power, and thus the requirement that one communicate in an
unfamiliar language is, effectively, a restriction on freedom of speech.Those who raise the issue of cultural hegemony point out that theeffect could go even deeper.  With native speakers of English being the

single largest linguistic group of network users,5 market considerations
dictate that a large fraction of the software written for use in conjunction
with networks will also be developed in English.  At present, for example,

it is estimated that American companies develop about 80 percent of pack-
aged software.  Thus, English is the language not only of communication
but also of programming.  Further, there is more impetus to focus on digi-

tal coding for the Roman alphabet, and such programs are likely to be
more effective than coding for other alphabets.  As a result, those tech-

niques that increase the efficiency of Web and document searches, trans-
mission rates, and the like will be better developed for the Roman alpha-4Lawrence Lessig. 1999. Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace. New York: Basic Books.5Native English speakers now represent approximately 45 percent of the online popula-tion.  See United States Internet Council, 2001 State of the Internet Report, Press Release
November 12, 2001.  Available from <http://www.usinternetcouncil.org/>.
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION NETWORKS AND CULTURE209bet and the English language than for other modes of written communica-tion.With the disproportionate representation of one language and cul-ture driving both the creation of and the market for operating systems,
databases, other reference materials, digital music, advertising, e-business,
and the range of services, the fear is that the content available on global
networks will primarily reflect that one culture.  To the extent that the

Internet, through its efficiency and ubiquity, begins to dominate the social
and intellectual life of a community or nation, this would be tantamount
to cultural hegemony.  If technological path dependence reinforces this

pattern, the hegemony could be long lasting.How realistic are the fears? With respect to the Western industrialnations, it appears that they are overdrawn.  Although a snapshot of the

present situation does, indeed, reveal the overwhelming dominance of
the English language and American content globally, there is little evi-
dence that other languages and cultures are being displaced now or are
likely to be so in the future.  In a de facto sense, language zones have

already been created in many parts of the developed world.  Most Ger-

man, French, and Japanese computer and Internet users can conduct all of
their day-to-day activities in their native languages, as content providers
have already translated information for local usage.  Furthermore, space

for new, culturally localized content is virtually unlimited; it can and will
be added as the penetration of networks and computers continues in the
countries of the industrialized world.  The growth in the flow of bits may

introduce information traffic problems, but existing content will not nec-
essarily have priority over new content.6Similarly, there is no overwhelming technical barrier to the localiza-tion of software, even when it has not been written specifically for a given
region.7 The major software firms separate the source code of program-
ming languages, operating systems, and applications from linguistically6This is not to say that priorities cannot and will not be established that affect access tocertain kinds of material or its effective speed of transmission.  Internet service providers
already have the technical capacity to do that, using filtering or blocking technologies to
create various degrees of transparency (a measure of the extent to which the network itselfexerts influence on the ability of individuals to access content).  The point here is that, unlike
broadcasting, the earlier content and service providers gain no great advantage that would
allow them to limit access to their services or exclude those who follow.7Localization refers to the rewriting of software programs from the original language inwhich they were developed to the language of the locality in which they will be used.  How-

ever, more than language is involved because cultural differences may well require thatcolors, numbers, box sizes, names, dates, and icons be changed for the program to work inthe new cultural setting.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.210GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESand culturally specific elements in order to allow them to be adapted tolocal circumstances.There is no reason to think that such adaptation will be difficult.  The
cultural barriers to applying information technology in a variety of every-
day activities in developed nations appear to be modest.  Although nei-

ther computer hardware and software nor networks have, in fact, spread
through most other industrial societies to the extent that they have in the
United States,8 they appear to have been widely accepted.  Indeed, in
some respects, other nations have led the United States in using informa-
tion technology in everyday life.For example, in 1981 France deployed Minitel, a national videotextsystem using telephone lines, to send text and graphics from mainframe
computers to home terminals.  By the late 1990s, Minitel had 15 million

users, or about 25 percent of the French population.  They use it for appli-

cations ranging from personal ads and pornography to online banking,
travel services, and directory assistanceÑall with online billing (charges
are added to a userÕs phone bill).  Furthermore, because Minitel is a Òpay-

by-the-minuteÓ service, some analysts argue that the transition from
Minitel to the Internet will be ÒgentlerÓ for Minitel users than the transi-
tion for most Internet users from ÒfreeÓ content to Òfor-payÓ content.9Thus it appears likely that the use of information networks will reflectlocal values rather than replace them wholesale with foreign ones.  To be
sure, they will provide a quite-new medium for the expression of those
values, much as electronic Òchat roomsÓ have replaced community-center
meetings and electronic auctions have replaced weekend antique-hunting

expeditions for some people in the United States.  The new forms will not

necessarily look like the old ones but will clearly be influenced by them, and
the result will be new patterns of interaction and new cultural forms that are
less indicative of cultural hegemony than of cultural evolution.The e-commerce approaches currently being adopted only reinforcethese conclusions.  A key element in the strategy of most firms has been

to attract prospective customers and to earn their loyalty by providing
them with free products and services of interest, and then to use the
attentionÑand potential loyaltyÑthus garnered to market other prod-
ucts and services.10 Clearly, this requires sensitivity and responsiveness
8The Scandinavian countries are an exception to this general statement, reflecting theirsmall size and economic and social homogeneity.  The city state of Singapore is another

special case.9See John Tagliabue, ÒOnline Cohabitation: Internet and Minitel; Videotex System inFrance Proves Unusually Resilient,Ó New York Times, June 2, 2001, Saturday.10The easy and wide availability of information on the Internet has created an environ-ment in which people are generally unwilling to pay for content except in very specific areasGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION NETWORKS AND CULTURE211on the part of e-firms to the cultures of the people whose attention the e-
firms are trying to attract.The situation is far more complex in the developing world, whichitself is hardly homogeneous.  In the newly industrialized countries of

East Asia, economic globalization is considered a key to development;
rather than being seen as a threat to local culture, global networks are
considered a tool that will be advantageous for those societies.  Moreover,

Asian leaders have often argued that their hierarchical societal structures
facilitate the kind of educational system and disciplined behavior that
make rapid adaptation of new technology relatively easy, without lead-
ing to social disruption or undesired changes in cultural values.The city-state of Singapore advertises itself as the most computerizedand networked nation in the world.  The homogenizing influence of the

Internet is of little concern because Singapore is already an extremely ho-
mogeneous society that has served as a major regional financial center
and home to multinational corporations for years.  Its authoritarian gov-

ernment has apparently been successful in convincing its population that
accepting the imposition of tight discipline is the price of prosperity.  In

such a society, heavy-handed measures can be used to control undesired
public manifestations of foreign cultural influences.China has undertaken the ambitious Golden Bridge project to pro-vide broadband networks throughout the densely populated regions of
the east and south of the country.  Fiber-optic backbones, microwave in-

termediate transmission, and local wired distribution systems are being
complemented by the development of multimedia software and the train-
ing of end users to build a network-based economy.  The official, centrally

defined standardizations of the written Chinese languageÑits ideo-
graphsÑand the ways of entering them from a keyboard are making it
possible to rapidly adapt Western software as well.  (Major U.S. software
vendors are also seeking to customize their software for users whose first
written language is Chinese.) Indeed, the reinforcement of language stan-
dardization, which is a by-product of information networks, is consistent
with ChinaÕs cultural agenda.Both Singapore and China have, of course, sought to exploit the use ofnetworks in support of their economies while, at the same time, prevent-
ing the distribution of other kinds of information and programming to
their people.  Their concern is a political rather than a cultural one: pre-

venting information networks from being used to encourage and enable
organized opposition to government authority.such as pornography or current business information.  Therefore ÒbundlingÓ is a common
practice, offering a good deal of free content in the hopes of attracting consumers to pur-chasable goods and services.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.212GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESIn the long run, it is likely to be impossible to achieve that goal.  The
technical structure of the Internet makes it relatively simple to track the
flow of information from one node to another, but interdicting that flow is
relatively difficult.  Although it is possible to block certain Web sites or

groups of Web sitesÑeven all of the material originating from a certain
countryÑthe ever-changing array of mirror sites, domain names, host ser-
vice providers, and transmission routes makes for a constantly moving
target and an increasingly challenging task, as Chinese authorities have
discovered.11Therefore, rather than being able to use the relatively benign (becauseessentially invisible) tool of preventing ÒundesirableÓ information distri-
bution, governments must use the more heavy-handed approach of sanc-
tion and punishment after the fact to discourage further distributions.  But

as the density of network nodes and the bandwidth of transmission lines
increases, the likelihood of ÒleakageÓ becomes greater and the sanctions
necessary to discourage it must be made increasingly severe.  The practi-

cal problem, which seems all but impossible to surmount, has become
that of preventing the severity of the sanctions from becoming the very
destabilizing force that the governments had sought to avoid through the
control of information flow.  Chapters 5 and 6, which deal with freedom

of speech and privacy, respectively, explore these issues in greater detail.The more difficult question to answer is whether the political changesthat information technology is likely to bring about in these countries over
the long run will also give rise to significant cultural changes.  It is a ques-

tion related to the much larger issue of the connection between political
structure and cultural values.  Many East Asian leaders have argued that
the proclaimed political agenda of Western nations, and of the United
States in particularÑencouraging the spread of democracyÑis in fact a
manifestation of cultural hegemony.  At issue is whether the self-

proclaimed hierarchical nature of many East Asian nations is a conse-

quence or a determinant of their political structure (as well as their educa-
tional systems, research goals and productivity, legal structures, and the
like).  Would political democratization change culturally determined

structures in the same way regardless of whether the stimulus for the
change were global networks (as might be the case in Singapore or China)
or economic failure and environmental degradation (as in the former

Warsaw Pact) or the failure of a military venture (as in Argentina)? These
are questions that future studies should examine.11See, for example, Jennifer Lee, ÒPunching Holes in Internet Walls,Ó New York Times,April 26, 2001.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION NETWORKS AND CULTURE213To the extent that cultural values do define political structures or arelinked to a societyÕs position on a variety of other issues from human
rights to child labor to environmental protection or the protection of reli-
gious and ethnic minorities, they are not necessarily neutral.  In that sense,

the protection and preservation of historic cultures is not an absolute im-
perative.  Thus, labeling attempts to change certain cultural values,

whether through global networks or by other means, as cultural hege-
mony may be accurate but not necessarily dispositive.India offers an example entirely different from the authoritarian re-gimes of East Asia in several respects.  As a democratic nation committed

to preserving the many traditional cultures of its several states, India re-
gards language diversity as an important cultural value.  In contrast to the

situation in China, the monolinguistic nature of the Internet works against
that value.  The problem is exacerbated by the fact that the InternetÕs lan-
guage is largely English, which has played a special role in India as the
link language of the nation and the language of power and wealth.  Thus,

rather than being a barrier to the penetration of Internet culture, the lan-
guage is a vehicle for bringing it into the society and skewing a delicate
balance.Because English is so accessible to the educated classes in India, in-cluding the large cadre of technically trained software developers, there is
little motivation to localize software.  Indeed, the dominance of the United

States in computer hardware and software, as well as in network content,
creates a ready market for the talents of Indian software engineers pre-
cisely because of their familiarity with the English language.  Thus it ap-

pears that software as well as network content oriented toward the En-
glish language and American culture is likely to continue to be the norm
for some time, setting the stage for possible long-term cultural hegemony
in IndiaÑat least for Internet-related activities.Are there factors that may ameliorate this trend? Two suggest them-selves.  First, although English has functioned as the link language across

the many cultures of India, only about 5 percent of its people are fluent in
it.  Tradition and legal structures have promoted the use of vernacular

languages in local commerce and even in government business.  There-

fore it is possible that the Internet will not penetrate the Indian society to
a significant extent.  The cost would be a loss of the economic and social

gains that the Internet promises; the gain would be the preservation of
cultural diversity.Second, through its long and rather special colonial history, Indianelites have learned to maintain a dual cultural identity, living in two
worlds simultaneously.  They functioned effectively in the English-domi-

nated governance structure and civil service of the country, while pre-
serving their historical cultures within their own communities.  If this
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.214GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESduality can be maintained for long enough, the market (possibly U.S. com-panies but more likely Indian ones) may awaken to the opportunity pre-
sented by a country the size of India, where the population of many of its
cultural subgroups exceeds by far that of most other entire nations.  We

may then see the kind of localization of software that would allow a posi-
tive social construction of global networks to fit local cultural needs and
desires.Nevertheless, a major unanswered question that needs to be continu-ally re-asked is whether the cultural duality will actually continue.  It is

possible, after all, that the very power of networks in shifting the modes
of business, education, entertainment, and communication will change
the pattern.In many ways, India is an interesting testing ground for the limits ofsocial and cultural construction.  Precisely because its technical and busi-
ness elites can function in either the hegemonic culture of the English-
speaking world or in the local and highly diverse cultures of the Indian
subcontinent, networks can penetrate India without requiring or even
bringing about change.  On the other hand, if the efficiencies and oppor-

tunities of networks encourage elites to shift more of their daily political,
social, and economic activities into the network-dominated culture even
without any localization, the shift may disrupt the delicate cultural bal-
ance on which Indian democracy is based.  In effect, the elites may be-

come the intermediaries that give electronic networks the leverage to alter
the culture of the society.There is still another scenario, different from the East Asian and SouthAsian examples.  It is essentially a reactive and narrow nationalismÑeven

a zealous isolationismÑbrought about by the perceived fear of the threat
to traditional cultures that economic globalization represents.  In the view

of those who lead this reaction, globalization is a juggernaut that carries
with it Western social and cultural values that are anathema to the Òin-
vadedÓ society.  What adds to the fear is that globalization has been so

successful, both as an economic strategy and as a dominant cultural force.Electronic networks play a role in this economic globalization, al-though the trend toward globalization was well under way before the
Internet had achieved any significant penetration.12 Nevertheless, they
not only play an important current role in globalization, they have come
to symbolize it.  They also reinforce the influence of English-speaking

elites.  Localization is not a solution in the view of reactionary national
12For example, international financial networks have been important to the global economyfor at least several decades.  See Walter B. Wriston, 1992, 
The Twilight of Sovereignty, NewYork: Charles ScribnerÕs Sons.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION NETWORKS AND CULTURE215leaders because the essence of these networksÑtheir egalitarian nature,tolerance of diversity, market-driven character, and rhythms of social in-
tercourseÑare values that cannot be changed merely by localizing soft-
ware.  The network culture itselfÑin which shared interests and attitudes

rather than familial connections establish group linkages and where ge-
ography, history, and connection to the land mean almost nothingÑis
unacceptable.Some have argued that the vigor of the reaction in these Asian societ-ies is driven by leadersÕ concerns that their culture will be perceived as
inferior because it cannot produce the same economic results as the in-
vading network-dominated culture.13 Challenged in this way, they seek
not to adapt the new technologies to their circumstances but to look in-
ward; their hope is that a purer adherence to their own cultural values not
only will be a successful strategy but also will demonstrate its superiority
to Western culture.This scenario, then, is not so much one in which cultural hegemony isat issue; instead, it is one of cultural conflict based on a clash of values.
Much has been written about this phenomenonÑfor example, BarberÕs
Jihad vs. McWorld, HuntingtonÕs Clash of Civilizations, and FriedmanÕs 
Lexusand the Olive Tree.14 These authors postulate that the clash of values arises
because of differences between Western cultures, with their push toward
globalization, and more traditional Middle Eastern cultures.  However,

there is also the possibility that the incompatibility is between the local
culture and the innate characteristics of the network.  The question is,

Does the Internet represent a technology that is just not sufficiently flex-
ible to be Òsocially constructedÓ to serve the values of these societies or
are local political and religious forces preventing them from getting to the
point where such a proposition could be tested?But certain real-world experiments now in progress could providesome preliminary answers to this question.  The migration of people from

the developing to the developed world is creating relatively cohesive

diasporas of various ethnic and religious groups that have not had a sig-
nificant presence in the Western world until now.  The ways in which

networks are adapted to the use of these communitiesÑfor example, to
preserve and transmit language and culture within and between these
communitiesÑmay indicate whether ÒlocalizedÓ networks might ulti-
13Bernard, Lewis. 1999. ÒThe West and the Middle East,Ó Foreign Affairs 76(1):114-130.
14Benjamin R. Barber, 1996, Jihad vs. McWorld, New York: Ballantine Books; Samuel P.Huntington, 1998, The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of the World Order, New York:
Touchstone Books; Thomas L.  Friedman, 
The Lexus and the Olive Tree, New York: Farrar,
Straus and Giroux.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.216GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESmately be a positive force in the nations that are, at present, actively ex-cluding them.9.3GLOBAL NETWORKS AND CLASS ISSUES
A rather different approach to examining the influence of electronicnetworks on cultural values is to consider their effects on different social
groupings within a given society.  The issue of education and level of

literacy was raised above in connection with India.  But it is hardly a situ-

ation unique to India.  In a world in which more than half of all people

have never made a telephone call, it is clear that networks penetrate most
societies in a highly skewed way.  The most benign consequence is that

global networks will be irrelevant to the groups not directly touched by
them, in much the same way that the formal economy and legal structure
of a number of countries can be irrelevant to the everyday economic and
cultural life of certain rural or ethnic groups within those countries.More worrisome, networks may give rise over time to increasing dis-parities between those with access to them and those without such accessÑ
the so-called Òdigital divide.Ó The most obvious potential effects have been
described: more economic activity mediated by networks means less activ-
ity in traditional markets and fewer linkages with traditional society.  Net-

works confer power to organize politically and to gain access to informa-
tion, education, and even health care, thereby increasing the autonomy of
the privileged relative to the less privileged and decreasing the interest of
the privileged in the institutions that serve the less privileged.The educational system in Latin America provides an interesting ex-ample of how the support of societal institutions can be skewed by the
interests of the privileged.  It is often noted that higher education in Latin

America is better funded relative to primary and secondary education
than in most parts of the world.  Indeed, in view of the inadequacy of that

regionÕs primary and secondary education funding, many would argue
its higher education is overfunded.  The reason for the investment dispar-
ity is relatively clear.  The middle and upper classes in most Latin Ameri-

can countries usually receive their primary and secondary education in
private schools but turn to public universities afterward.  Therefore they

have little motivation for supporting the former and an obvious interest
in supporting the latter.The educational system bears an obvious relationship to the preserva-tion of a societyÕs culture.  So, too, do many other institutions whose influ-

ence may be less direct.  Will network databases available to elites cut

down on the perceived need for public libraries? Will Web-distributed
music and film, available only to a subset of society, undercut support for
local entertainment venues? Will the intensity of telephone-line usage forGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION NETWORKS AND CULTURE217data transmission actually reverse the slow gains that have occurred inmaking telephone service available to a wider cross section of society?
Whether the effects are transitory or long lasting is a question that needs
study.  The answer depends on the extent to which initial network devel-

opments in a given society Òlock inÓ hardware and software, reducing
future flexibility in introducing more appropriately localized structures.Within Western industrialized societies, some have cast the problemin different terms.  Jacques Arlandis,
15 for example, has argued that in the
networked society the power and behavior of various professional groups

are being changed, thus shifting the relationships between them and al-
tering the values, modes of discourse, and structure of the society.  His

emphasis is on the interactive nature of the change.  The networkÕs poten-

tial resonates differently with each group in the society, revealing aspects
of the groupÕs values.  In turn, each group seeks to influence the networkÕs

development in different ways.Examples of these effects on professional groups abound.  In the prac-
tice of medicine, for example, the local physician is no longer the unques-
tioned expert for all patients.  The availability on the Internet of enormous

amounts of data (of widely varying quality) on the treatment of disease
has shifted the balance of power between patient and physician, dimin-
ishing the absolute authority that physicians long enjoyed in determining
what was best for a patient.  TelemedicineÑthe ability of specialists to

deliver treatment without being in the physical presence of the patientÑ
promises to offer patients a much higher degree of collaboration and con-
sultation between general practitioners and specialists in deciding on
treatments.  Both of these changes represent significant shifts in the na-

ture of a professional culture.Still another example: network-stimulated changes in copyright pro-tections and related fair-use exemptions have the potential to change long-
established patterns of sharing and using scientific dataÑthat is, the cul-
ture of the science community.  Whether this will shift the traditional

balance between open, Òpre-competitiveÓ scientific research and commer-
cialization of scientific applications remains to be seen.The proximity of computers and networks to the everyday life of thesociety gives rise to a resurgence of power for experts, creating a new elite
and enormous rewards for technological innovation.  And the ability of

many technologically literate professionals to master the new systems15Jacques Arlandis, 2000, ÒThe Clerk, the Merchant and the Politician,Ó in Governance ofGlobal Networks in the Light of Differing Local Values, Christoph Engel and Kenneth H.  Keller,
eds., Baden-Baden: Nomos.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.218GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESgives them access to sources of useful knowledge not available to others,and confers the advantages that come with such knowledge.  Journalists

and other intermediaries lose legitimacy as more people are connected
directly to sources of information.  At the same time, a new class of inter-
mediaries may arise from among those experts who have the skills to cre-
ate value-added products within the world of electronic databases and
services.To the extent that the cyberworld facilitates the formation of epistemicgroups without regard to geographic boundaries, it provides a lifeline to
individuals who live within geographic boundaries; thus cultural diver-
sity in real space is actually promoted by the anarchy of cyberspace.  On

the other hand, the virtual society of the network can become a substitute
for the geographically bounded society, drawing individuals away from
the real political and social world and leaving it even more homogeneous,
if somewhat reduced in richness.For merchants, it is not the anarchy of cyberspace that is attractive butits efficacy as a marketplace.  For this group, the value of the networked

world is its sameness; commerce looks the same across the world.  Thus

growth of global commerce shifts the relationship between merchants and

politicians, requiring them to form a partnership that changes the balance
in a society in which politicians had previously been the arbiters of com-
peting interests, only one of which was that of the merchants.  Politicians,

or at least governments, must now represent the interests of ÒtheirÓ mer-
chants in such issues as copyright, privacy protection, standards develop-
ment, and taxation, to cite just a few.Arlandis suggests that many of these issues can be understood, or atleast analyzed, in terms of the technical, economic, and social forces that
move a society.  All three are influenced by the cyberworld and all three,

in turn, influence the development of that world.  But crucial to the ar-

gument, and important to framing future research questions, is the fact
that these are not independent forces; they themselves interact, and lo-
cal society as well as the networked society depends on their collective
effect.9.4PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SPACES
Not all of the cultural phenomena affected by global networks relateto groups or classes.  The shifting relationship between public and private

spaces, essentially an issue concerning individuals in the society, is one of
the most interesting and complex brought about by the cyberworld.  That

boundary, in both principle and practice, has been largely determined by
cultural norms.  Which people know about us and what they know, what
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION NETWORKS AND CULTURE219they physically see of us, how we feel about it, and the extent to which wecontrol it differ widely from one culture to another.Some aspects of this issueÑin particular, those related to privacy,which refers rather specifically to the right to control the distribution and
use of information about oneselfÑare discussed in Chapter 6 of this re-
port.  It is noted there that even in cultures as closely similar as the United

States and Germany, there are deep differences in perspective.  In the

wider world, the differences are much more profound.  How and where

one entertains, the candor and directness with which one expresses ideas,
and how publicly and under what circumstances one displays oneÕs body
parts are all related to the boundary between public and private spheres
but follow no obvious, logical, or consistent pattern.In Japan, one is more likely to share a community bath with strangersthan to express an opinion directly to them.  In the United States, the use

of oneÕs social security number merely for purposes of identification has
become a major public issue, but it is widely expected that just about ev-
eryone in a small community will know who has visited you in the past
month and what you ate.The public/private space boundary may not be rational, but in thephysical world it is more or less clear how to maintain it.  If one does not

want a private conversation heard publicly, one does not carry it out
loudly on a bus.  If one wants to maintain a private living space, one does

not entertain there.  If one wants to discourage telephone calls, one does

not allow the listing of oneÕs telephone number in the directory.On the other hand, there are community norms that reject excessiveprotection of privacy.  A covered face might be reflective of modesty in a

Muslim society, but it would generate great suspicion on a street in Eu-
rope or the United States.  An unsigned letter to the editor would not be

published in most Western countries (although anonymity in voting is a
basic tenet of democracy).  For public officials in the United States, there is

almost no element of their lives that the public or the media is willing to
accept as private.Information networks present a challenge to these cultural norms in anumber of ways.  First, the technologies themselves have the potential to

shift the boundary between public and private space in either direction,
depending on circumstance and the sophistication of the user.  Encryp-

tion technologies can increase the effective domain of private space; on
the other hand, connecting to the Web can, in itself, expose the contents of
oneÕs computer to inspection or alteration and thus provide a public in-
cursion into previously private space.  Most discussions of this issue have

emphasized the latter point rather than the former, in large part because
of the threat posed by the naivet” of Web users and the surreptitious na-
ture of information-gathering technologies.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.220GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESTechnological sophistication and aggressiveness enter the picture be-cause the actual shift is affected by the vigor of attempts to penetrate the
boundary and the defenses mounted to prevent it.  In certain circum-

stances, a code name may be sufficient to prevent a personÕs identity from
being known in a chat room; in other cases, a so-called secure encrypted
message may be intercepted and decoded by a person or organization
with sufficiently advanced decryption technology.But the larger cultural question concerns the effect of decoupling oneÕsphysical presence and geographical location from the world of bits, in
which ideas, opinions, and virtual intimacy can flourish disembodied.  An

often-referenced New Yorker cartoon shows two dogs conversing in front
of a computer monitor with one saying, ÒYes, but on the Internet, they
donÕt know youÕre a dog.Ó16  This is a world in which Òlocal spaceÓ is not
equivalent to Òprivate space,Ó where the safe expression of candor in
speech or the embarrassment-free expression of intimacy to strangers is
possible.A question for future study is whether the existence and experienceof such a world will shift behavior patterns within oneÕs local setting or
merely provide an alternative space in which values and behavior can
differ from those of everyday life.  If the former scenario prevails, global

networks will provide a means for relaxing culturally imposed confor-
mity and for encouraging individuality.  Whether this is viewed as a good

or bad thing will, of course, depend on the local cultures in which the new
behavior patterns arise.  If the latter scenario more accurately captures the

reality, the question is whether those already inclined to seek such a dis-
sociation of body from thought will selectively populate the world of bits
or whether the cyberworld will, in itself, create the motivation to change
patterns of behavior for those who choose to become ÒNetizens.ÓThe concept of Netizens, of course, carries with it the idea that therereally is a distinct cyberculture composed of individuals, drawn from

many different local cultures, who share a number of characteristics and
values.  In this view, the significant divide is between this group and es-

sentially all geographically centered (and hence locally centered) cultures.

Within the cyberworld, there is no requirement to meet anyoneÕs physical
needs, ideas are more easily dissociated from any specific individuals,
and tangible consequences of ideas are limited.  This leads to a culture

that places a great deal of value on removing any restriction to the flow of16Cartoon by Peter Steiner, The New Yorker, July 5, 1993, p. 61.
17See, for example, John Perry Barlow, ÒA Declaration on the Independence ofCyberspace,Ó available online at <http://www.eff.org/pub/Publications/John_Perry_Barlow/barlow_0296 .declaration>.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION NETWORKS AND CULTURE221ideas, much less value on their critical assessment, and an absolute an-tipathy to any hierarchical structure that might be superimposed on a
world entirely defined by ideas.17This kind of cyberculture is, in many ways, a utopian anarchy; itclearly offers a strong contrast to locally centered cultures of almost any
kind.  But is it necessarily a threat to those local cultures? And is it an

ineluctable prototype of global networks? In the committeeÕs view, these

two questions are related, and the answer to both is no.  The rapid

growth of the Internet as a source of information and services, and as a
medium for commerce, continues to increase the diversity of individu-
als who use it, as well as their purposes in using it and the extent to
which they use it.  The Netizens who pioneered these networks and cre-

ated for a period of time a fairly well-defined epistemic group, now
constitute a rather small minority of Net users much as they constitute

a rather small minority of each of the many societies from which they
come.  These pioneers embraced an 
absence of structure, which has
meant that the evolution of network culture has not been controllable
by any group; the resulting culture is, and will continue to be, far from
homogeneous.9.5GENERATIONAL PHENOMENA
To what extent are other cultural conflicts primarily issues of transi-tion that will resolve themselves over time? Edward McCracken, former
president and CEO of Silicon Graphics, Inc., describes an intriguing gen-
erational phenomenon that is apparent even within his high-technology,
information-based company.18Members of the most senior generationÑthose who trained and be-gan their careers before digitized information technology had emergedÑ
never become completely comfortable with the gestalt of modern infor-
mation technology: its opportunities and the altered ways of thinking and
working that it entails.  For the middle generationÑthose who grew up

with the new technologyÑcomputers and networks are overwhelming
objects of interest.  Many of these individuals are the computer ÒnerdsÓ

and Òhackers,Ó the creative people who treat the optimization of hard-
ware and software, and the development of new ways of doing old things,

as fascinating and satisfying ends in themselves.  They are also the

Netizens discussed in the previous section.18Edward McCracken, ÒInnovation and Information Technology in the 21st Century,ÓKeynote speech, Science and Technology Day, University of Minnesota, April 3, 1997.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.222GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESFor the younger generation, information technology in all of its mani-festations appears to be viewed primarily as a set of tools, taken almost as
much for granted as hammers and screwdrivers.  To be sure, the analogy
can be overdrawn.  Information technology continues to develop at an

extraordinary rate, while hammers and screwdrivers work much as they
have for hundreds of years.  Therefore the improvement of these new

tools remains a creative enterprise, a fact that makes them objects of con-
tinuing attention.  But the trend seems clear: they are moving toward be-

coming transparent systems, simply the means for carrying out the activi-
ties of a society and achieving its goals.Can this observation be generalized to the connection between globalnetworks and culture? Cultural resistance may be a phenomenon of the
ÒseniorÓ generation, cultural distortion a characteristic of the ÒmiddleÓ
generation, and social and cultural construction the final stage in the tran-
sition.  That optimistic scenario would be constrained by two phenomena:

Òtechnological lock-in,Ó the phenomenon of path dependence in which
initial technological choices limit future flexibility, and Òtechnological
unsuitability,Ó the essential conflict between the structure and dynamics
of a new technology and the cultural/social system on which it is being
imposed.The concept of transition is important in another respect.  Some cast
the issue of information technology and culture as a choice between the
preservation or loss of existing cultural values.  This seems to the commit-

tee a false dichotomy in that it conveys the notion that cultural norms are
static.  In fact, it is difficult to conceive of a dynamic society in which

natural and social history, demographics, and intersocietal intercourse do
not alter cultural norms.  Technological change is clearly one, but only

one, of the factors that bring about evolutionary change.  These include

language, art, myths, and music, as well as political and economic struc-
ture, occupations, housing, food, educationÑindeed, the totality of hu-
man activity.But the pathway of change is very much affected by existing culturaltraditions, and the outcome of change is largely defined by those tradi-
tions.  A McDonaldÕs restaurant in Beijing does not make Beijing into Peo-

ria, even though it makes Beijing something different from what it was.
The challenge in the development of new technologies, as Thompson has
noted, is to emphasize Òinflexibility reduction.Ó19 The premise is that it is
impossible to predict all of the social and cultural effects of a new technol-19Michael Thompson, ÒCultural Theory and Technology Assessment,Ó manuscript pre-pared for European Parliament, Office of Scientific and Technological Options Assessment,Luxembourg, October 1995.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION NETWORKS AND CULTURE223ogy on the institutions of society; those institutions themselves include amixture of individuals and groups that fall into different Òsocial solidari-
ties,Ó each of which will affect and react differently to the technology.
There is therefore a need for experimentation and iteration in the con-
struction of technological applications.  This requires both attention to the

interactive effects as they occur and the capacity to make adjustments in
response.Examining the impact of global networks on local cultural values musttherefore be viewed as an ongoing challenge.  Ability to predict the

changes is less important than alertness in observing them and creativity
in responding with altered designsÑnot with the goal or expectation that
global networks should not or will not alter detailed local cultural pat-
terns of behavior, but to ensure that the changes do not disconnect the
cultural present and future from the past, or alter the balance of solidari-
ties in a way that is unacceptable to the society they affect.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10Principles and ConclusionsFor reasons outlined in Chapter 1, the committee came to the conclu-sion early on that an exhaustive study of the impact of global networks on
local values was not possible within the constraints of time, focus, and
group composition under which it was operating. Nevertheless, in the
course of the symposia it hosted and the discussions it held, the commit-
tee was able to make some tentative judgments about some of the perti-
nent issues that may serve as a starting point for later studies.10.1GOVERNMENTS AND THE EVOLUTION
OF LOCAL VALUESAs noted in Chapter 3, the values of a society are both formal andsubstantive. Because the world is increasingly diverse and interconnected,

the committee believes that modern societies are better served by values
that emphasize process and mutual respect than by those that seek to
establish orthodoxies. Such an emphasis would give priority to formal
values over substantive ones, though substantive values continue to have
importance in defining a society or culture.Considerable historical evidence suggests that the values of a societychange over time. Thus, rather than seeking an unchanging status quo in
which social and cultural values are frozen for all time, governments of
modern societies might well choose a role in guiding such evolution, while
ensuring the existence of a healthy process that is conducive to such change.Governments could choose to intervene directly in the process. How-224Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRINCIPLES AND CONCLUSIONS225ever, direct government intervention is hard to legitimate in a liberal statewhere value formation is a social rather than a governmental process. In
addition, a coherent plan is hard to design, especially if it seeks to change
the overall balance among values. Governments may be able to implant a
single new value in the minds of the citizens or erase a single older value,
as totalitarian governments have shown. But affecting the processes as
values evolve is a much more ambitious task, the pursuit of which would
necessarily aim at controlling thought rather than action; such an attempt
would be inappropriate for democratic societies striving to maintain the
rule of law.A second approach is to regulate the mechanisms that affect the pro-cess. Consider, for example, the Internet as a possible influence on the
evolution of local values. Governments do have a continuing and long-
term role in ensuring that, on balance and in aggregate, communication
informs rather than manipulates, and that it serves the purposes of demo-
cratic society with respect to universal access and the balance of social
and political power.Nevertheless, the Internet is not the only influence on the evolution ofvalues; there is a multitude of other influences. Thus the Internet policy of
government should be part of a larger strategy aimed at promoting the
healthy evolution of a societyÕs value set, in response to the many changes
occurring as that society becomes better educated, more diverse, and more
fully connected to the wider world around it.10.2DEMOCRACY
Policy interventions to channel or direct the impact of global networkson democracy and political institutions are fraught with difficulty, and it
would be naive to expect that political leaders would make neutral deci-
sions where their own future power base is concerned. Even if that were
not the case, it would still make sense to be cautious, even modest, about
making explicit recommendations. The fact is that the structure and influ-
ence of global networks are constantly evolving, and the normative goals
that would presumably be served by such policy efforts continue, as they
have been for centuries, to be in dispute.  Nevertheless, or perhaps with

these caveats in mind, the committee concludes the following:¥To the extent that policymakers believe that action is necessary,
their focus should be on outcomes rather than on tools or modalities. Thus
they should seek to define what outcomes are desirable and undesirable
rather than seek to regulate one particular instrumentality such as the
Internet. The Internet is only one factor, albeit an important one, in global-
ization and modernization.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.226GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUES¥Networks such as the Internet (that is, systems capable of multi-
node generation and receipt of information) and broadcast media (that is,
few generators to many recipients) each have, in principle, advantages
and disadvantages in promoting democratic goals.  Network-based infor-

mation resources are probably more effective in providing access to infor-
mation and to political forums, and to the maintenance of a plurality of
ideas, although network users have the ability to determine what infor-
mation reaches them, thus limiting what ideas can reach people. Broad-
cast media do a better job of integrating a society because they expose the
broad population to a relatively common pool of information.  Acting

together, they can facilitate plurality with integration; they also provide
certain checks and balances in the polity.¥Global networks create new opportunities for direct democracy,
and policymakers in each country should consider how these opportuni-
ties might best be used. They should decide howÑand whetherÑdirect
and representative processes should be rebalanced to maximize legitimacy

in both ÒinputÓ (the voices of citizens) and ÒoutputÓ(policy actions result-
ing from those processes).¥Policymakers should assess whether the postulated disintegrating
effect of global networks is actually felt in their polities. Has there, for
example, been a recent trend toward single-issue constituencies?¥If global networks are seen as competing with established mecha-
nisms for the provision of public goods, it becomes clear that research is
needed into what one might call antitrust rules. The goal is to devise work-able competition among the variety of political arenas.
¥Despite a host of pressures toward greater internationalization and
multilateral activity (especially in the European Union), actual change
may be slow and painful. Countries give up previously sovereign rights
and powers only grudgingly, if at all.10.3REGULATORY STRUCTURE
An alternative to command-and-control regulation is the use of self-regulation and intermediation within a statutory framework.  With hy-

brid regulation, a credible threat of state intervention stimulates self-regu-
latory activities, and overt state involvement is unnecessary once the
self-regulatory activities are under way. (A supranational entity, an inter-
national organization, or well-organized societal forces may also have the
same effect.)  Because global networks are characterized by a complex

system of private, public, and quasi-public forces, a stable system is easier
to achieve when stakeholders can take an active part in shaping their roles.
Command-and-control regulation often attacks a well-balanced statusGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRINCIPLES AND CONCLUSIONS227quo; because hybrid regulation builds on the status quo, it is more likelyto be successful.Improved prospects for a new hybrid system of governance for globalnetworks are consistent with the shifting boundary between public and
private international law. Policy statements by national governments, and

the actual establishment of a number of hybrid regulatory approaches,
are promising signs that new forms of international governance will help
implement the recommendations of this report.10.4FREE SPEECH
As noted in Chapter 5, the United States and Germany both recognizea constitutional right to freedom of expression. However, the interpreta-
tions of that right in the two countries are significantly different. As im-
portantly, the weights given to that right, in comparison with other values,
are different in the two societies as well. As a result, the legal structures
and protections that have developed to implement the right are also dif-
ferent, exemplifying why harmonization of nationsÕ laws related to free-
dom of expression on the Internet is likely to remain quite difficult.The nature of todayÕs Internet is a significant impediment for nationalauthorities who wish to unilaterally implement laws and regulations that
reflect national substantive values. At the same time, national pride and
substantive cultural values are unlikely to be abandoned, so that a ho-
mogenization of values among nationsÑparticularly with respect to the
most restrictive or the leastÑis also unlikely to occur.There are some areas, such as child pornography, where there is more-
or-less universal agreement on the substantive values to be protected. In-
ternational treaties that harmonize rules appear to be well within reach
for these few, but important, areas. Generally, the more homogeneous the
group of nations, the more likely it is that treaty solutions covering con-
tent will be practical. Even if the group of nations is small, it can still be
useful in providing a model for harmonization and a bloc for bringing
pressure on nonsignatory nations to respect the treatyÕs provisions.To reduce the tensions and chaos that national differences create for aglobal activity, governments could cooperate in a number of ways. Na-
tions could work together to discourage content providers from using the
regulatory environment of one country to circumvent the regulations of
another. They could establish an international information agency (or sup-
port private or quasi-public organizations) to help providers understand
each nationÕs regulatory standards and structures. Finally, they could
update and extend to the networked world the mechanisms that currently
exist for dealing with circumstances in which domestic laws conflict.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.228GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESGiven the limited effectiveness of unilateral command-and-control
rules regulating content, commercial law, self-regulation, and encourage-
ment of intermediation (perhaps driven by the threat of imposing regula-
tion) are options for national action in the appropriate circumstances.¥Commercial law is a useful tool when material on the network in-
jures a clearly identifiable party (e.g., a Web site has published libelous
material about a person or has violated a personÕs legally protected pri-
vacy). However, ccommercial law does not work well if large groups are
indirectly or only potentially affectedÑfor example, when child pornog-
raphy endangers children, hate speech intimidates minority groups, or
Nazi ideology threatens democratic government.¥Voluntary self-regulation on the part of the parties directly exposed
to material on the InternetÑthrough site-identification and labeling
schemes, age-verification software, or the provision of filtering software,
for exampleÑis attractive in some ways, because it offers the potential for
greater diversity of material to be accessible through the Internet, en-
hanced freedom of expression, and customization of controls to fit the
needs and desires of the individuals involved.¥Intermediaries, such as host providers, can play a useful role in
offering the public a regulating or authenticating service. That is, host
providers can market their Internet access software by promising to in-
clude certain kinds and quality of content and exclude others. Hosts
would compete with each other on the basis of the cluster of options they
offer as well as over their software-based filtering systems (although the
rigidity of these latter technical tools is a clear disadvantage).Finally, government should provide means for improving the mediacompetence of the users. An oversight function for government will re-
main important in striking a balance between the preservation of the indi-
vidual right of freedom of expression and other legitimate goals of a
democratic society.10.5PRIVACY
Privacy regulation must cover both online and offline transactions,either through the Internet or private networks, and must include com-
prehensive and consistent protection regardless of whether data are col-
lected, held, manipulated, or disseminated by public sector or private sec-
tor entities. The United States faces particular challenges in this respect
because its many sector-specific regulatory approaches are so different
from (and indeed often inconsistent with) each other.The existence of transborder data flows creates a strong need for har-Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRINCIPLES AND CONCLUSIONS229monization, or at least convergence, of national legislative regimes, par-ticularly among developed countries. Because the United States and Ger-
many, as well as Europe more generally, share a number of values con-
cerning privacy rights, harmonization is not out of the realm of possibility.
However, subtle but important differences in cultural views about the
appropriate role of the government make it unlikely that explicit, uni-
form, legislatively based regulations will ever be agreed on.Hybrid approaches that combine self-regulation with a legislativeframework that establishes general principlesÑas well as mechanisms for
monitoring and enforcementÑappear much more likely to provide flex-
ibility, customization, and quick-response capability in the dynamic world
of global networks.10.6FREEDOM OF INFORMATION
There are few international tensions related to inconsistencies in na-tional freedom-of-information laws, as this is an area in which individual
nations can control compliance with their own statutes. However, free-
dom of information is so vital to the proper functioning of a democracy
that it is reasonable to endorse an upward harmonization of national stan-
dards toward the comprehensive law-based regime in place in the United
States. That regime takes as a premise the right of citizens to access virtu-
ally all public documents (with narrowly drawn exceptions), though in
practice the extent to which U.S. government agencies adhere to this re-
gime varies widely.  Among the few exceptions, in addition to national-

security matters or judicial proceedings, are the privacy rights of indi-
viduals. Advances in technology make it generally easier to anonymize
data in government records, thereby allowing their release without com-
promising privacy.Primary legal informationÑincluding laws, judicial opinions, andadministrative rulingsÑshould not be excluded from freedom-of-infor-
mation regimes merely to protect a property interest of a private entity
that uses the data to create value-added databases. If copyright protection
is granted to such entities, it should not cover the raw data on which the
information product is based.Government institutions should encourage the trend of using Web sites
and the Internet to increase the availability of public information.10.7TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT
The network of networks appears to be what The Economist, in July1995, called Òthe accidental superhighway.Ó In its early stages the Internet
was promoted and funded, but not designed, by the U.S. government. AtGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.230GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESno time did some kind of master plan exist to guide the InternetÕs evolu-tion. The history of the InternetÕs technology suggests that it would be a
mistake for governments to seek to control the future development
through comprehensive action plans. There are alternatives to centralized
approaches, such as coordination and self-regulation, though these pose
challenges both within particular countries and globally. Such approaches
require accommodating new forms of hybrid public-private international
regimes, which may be experimental in the near term (as discussed in
Section 10.3).The core of the InternetÕs technologyÑthe TCP/IP protocol stackÑdeveloped in a niche that sheltered it from market selection for many

years. This incubation was very useful, and it suggests that creating and
protecting other niches may be beneficial in keeping options for techno-
logical development open. The challenge will be to provide suitable,
timely exposure to market realities while avoiding the propping up of
what might not be viable.10.8CULTURE AND TECHNOLOGY
Generally speaking, cultural hegemony arising from global networksdoes not appear to be a major concern for developed nations. Technolo-
gies are available that allow localization of the language and culture of
networks, the cost of entry of information providers of all kinds is low,
and saturation of available bandwidth by early users does not appear to
be a serious problem.There is more reason for concern about cultural hegemony with re-spect to nations in the developing world. Here, too, the technological ca-
pacity exists to localize networks, but the incentives to do so are often
marginal. Moreover, in certain of these societies, networks may exacer-
bate social stratification, reinforcing the power of elites and upsetting cul-
tural balances that have developed over time. Of particular concern is the
possibility of Òtechnological lock-inÓ during these next several years as
the structure and use patterns of the Internet develop.An untested postulate, put forward by a number of East Asian andMiddle Eastern countries, is that there is a strong connection between their
cultural values and their political structuresÑand that global networks
can be a threat to both. An examination of how electronic networks have
been adopted in the growing diasporas of ethnic groups from these coun-
tries might provide further insights on this question.Global networks appear more likely to change the culture of and rela-tionships between various groups within societies, as defined by profes-
sion and level of education rather than by national identity. These changes
result from the groupsÕ different ways of using the Internet, the differentGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRINCIPLES AND CONCLUSIONS231interdependencies among groups that thereby occur, and the consequentchanges in the modes of operation of certain professionals that affect ac-
tivities unrelated to electronic networks as well as those directly related to
the networks.Networks are profoundly challenging the traditional and culturallydefined conceptions of public and private spaces. It is not yet clear
whether this will lead to two worldsÑreal space and cyberspaceÑwith
different rules and mores concerning privacy, or whether there will be
spillover effects that create tensions or changes in local cultural practices.
A separate cyberworld of ÒNetizensÓ is not likely to achieve any perma-
nence, even as electronic network penetration and use grow over the years
to come.Finally, many of the observations about the cultural effects of globalnetworks are likely to be transitory. Global electronic networks will cause
a sea change resulting more from continual, dynamic evolution than from
any one-time adjustment that remains fixed. Thus, long-term changes in
the nature of local culture are certainly probable, but not predictable on
the basis of phenomena currently being observed.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix Biographies
233A.1COMMITTEE MEMBERS
KENNETH H. KELLER, Chair, directs the Center for Science, Technol-
ogy, and Public Affairs at the University of Minnesota. He also holds an
appointment in the Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials
Science. His research examines the intersection of science and technology
with international politics and economics. His recent writings have dealt
with technology and national sovereignty, the environment, the global-
ization of research and development, and policy issues in high technol-
ogy medicine. He has spent most of his career at the University of Minne-
sota where he joined the faculty in 1964, became vice president for
academic affairs in 1980, and University president in 1985. He was senior
fellow for science and technology at the Council on Foreign Relations from
1990 to 1996. He has chaired and served on a number of public and pri-
vate boards and advisory groups and is a member of the Commission on
Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and Applications of the National Re-
search Council, and the boards of RANDÕs Institute for Education and
Training and the Science Museum of Minnesota. He chairs the Medical
Technology Leadership Forum and is vice chair of the board of LASPAU:
Academic and Professional Programs for the Americas. He earned a
masterÕs degree and doctorate in chemical engineering from Johns
Hopkins University, and was named a distinguished Johns Hopkins alum-
nus in 1996.KENNETH W. DAM is Max Pam Professor of American and Foreign Law
at the University of Chicago Law School.   Mr. Dam was elected to the
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.234GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESOrder of the Coif while at the Law School; he was also a managing editorof the Law Review. In 1964, he was visiting professor at the University of
Freiburg. Mr. Dam has published five books: Federal Tax Treatment of For-eign Income (with Lawrence Krause); 
The GATT: Law and International Eco-nomic Organization; Oil Resources: Who Gets What How?; Economic PolicyBeyond the Headlines (with George Shultz); and 
The Rules of the Game: Re-form and Evolution in the International Monetary System. He was law clerk toSupreme Court Justice Whittaker and then an associate with the New York
firm of Cravath, Swaine and Moore. He joined the Law School faculty in
1960, but in 1971 he left to become assistant director of the Office of Man-
agement and Budget, where he was concerned with national security and
international affairs. In 1973, he was executive director of the Council on
Economic Policy, which was responsible for coordination of U.S. domes-
tic and international economic policy. He returned to the University of
Chicago Law School in 1974. He served as provost of the university from
1980 to 1982. He served as deputy secretary of state from 1982 to 1985 and
then as vice president for law and external relations with IBM from 1985
to 1992. In 1992, he took leave from IBM to serve, on an interim basis, as
president and CEO of the United Way of America in order to clean up a
scandal in that organization and to put into place a new system of con-
trols and governance. In early 2001 he was nominated by President Bush
to be Deputy Secretary of the Treasury, and he is currently on a leave of
absence from the Law School.PAUL A. DAVID is professor of Economics at Stanford University, and,
since 1994, also holds a Senior Research Fellowship at All Souls College,
Oxford. He currently is Extraordinary Professor of the Economics of Sci-
ence and Technology in the Faculty of Economics and Business Adminis-
tration at the University of Maastricht. Paul David is known internation-
ally for his contributions in several fields, including economic history,
economic and historical demography, and the economics of science and
technology. The development of Òthe new economics of scienceÓ has been
a focal point of his most recent research and writings, and he continues to
direct the High Technology Impact Program of the Center for Economic
Policy Research at Stanford. He has served as a consultant to the U.S.
National Academy of Sciences, the United Nations Commission on Trade
and Development, the United Nations University Institute on New Tech-
nologies, the World Bank, the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development, and other public organizations.KENNETH KENISTON is Andrew W. Mellon Professor of Human De-
velopment and Director of Projects in the Program in Science, Technol-
ogy, and Society at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.   He is the
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX235author of seven books and more than 100 articles and chapters. His most
recent works are, with D. Guston, The Fragile Contract (1994), and with J.
Ker Conway and L. Marx, Earth, Air, Fire, Water: Humanistic Studies of theEnvironment. He is the Director of the MIT India Project at MIT, a part ofthe MIT International Science and Technology Initiative (MISTI).  In re-

cent years, Professor KenistonÕs research focused on information tech-
nology and development in India. His research in India focuses on such
topics as Indic language software (or the absence therof), and on Indian
projects and research to close the Òdigital divideÓ within India and be-
tween India and the so-called Northern nations. In the fall of 1999, he
was Sir Ashutosh Mukerjee Visiting Professor at the National Institute
of Advanced Studies at the Indian Institute of Science in Bangalore; he
has lectured at a number of Indian institutions including IIT-Chennai,
IIT-Mumbai, the Confederation of Indian Industries, and private firms.
He was a member, Carnegie Commission on Higher Education (1964-
1971); director, Behavioral Sciences Study Center, Yale Medical School

(1967-1971); chairman and director, Carnegie Council on Children (1971-
1977), author of its report, All Our Children; and member, Board of Over-

seers of Harvard University (1973-1979); Guggenheim Fellow for study
of engineering education (1982); evaluator, Guggenheim Foundation for
Latin American applicants (1988-); member, Committee of Selection for
the MacArthur Prize Fellowships (1973-1979); member, Committee of
Selection for the Guggenheim Fellowships (1991-1994). He has been a
Visiting Scholar at the Ecole des Mines (Paris); Visiting Professor at the
University of ParisV (Sorbonne); Visiting Professor at the Centro de
Estudios Avanzados de Ciencias Sociales (Madrid). He has been a con-
sultant on a number of projects in Venezuela, Kuwait, Mendoza (Argen-
tina), Malaysia, Politecnico of Torino, Italy, Petroleum Institute in
Dhahran, Saudi Arabia. He is currently a member of the National Re-
search Council/Max-Planck-Institute (American-German) working

group on Global Networks and Local Values. He is a member of the
Council on Foreign Relations and the American Academy of Arts and
Sciences.  Keniston was educated in part at the Colegio Nacional de

Buenos Aires (Central). He graduated magna cum laude from Harvard
College, with a thesis on the political philosophy of Jos” Ortega y Gasset.
He received his D. Phil. in Social Studies from Oxford University, where
he was a Rhodes Scholar at Balliol College. He has taught at Harvard
University, where he was a Junior Fellow; in the Departments of Psy-
chology and Psychiatry at Yale University; and at the Massachusetts In-
stitute of Technology, where he has been Director (1986-1992) and Di-
rector of Graduate Studies (1992-1996) of the Program in Science,
Technology, and Society.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.236GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESHENRY H. PERRITT, JR., is dean of Chicago-Kent College of Law andvice president of the Downtown Campus of Illinois Institute of Technol-
ogy.  He is the author of more than 70 law review articles and 15 books on

technology and law and employment law, including the 730-page Lawand the Information Superhighway. He served on President ClintonÕs Transi-tion Team, working on telecommunications issues, and drafted principles
for electronic dissemination of public information, which formed the core
of the Electronic Freedom of Information Act Amendments adopted by
Congress in 1996. During the Ford Administration, he served on the White
House staff and as deputy under secretary of labor. He serves on the Com-
puter Science and Telecommunications Policy Board of the National Re-
search Council.   He was a member of the interprofes-sional team that

evaluated the FBIÕs Carnivore system. He is a member of the Bars of Vir-
ginia, Pennsylvania, the District of Columbia, Maryland, Illinois and the
United States Supreme Court. He is a member of the Council of Foreign
Relations and of the Economic Club and is secretary of the Section on
Labor and Employment Law of the American Bar Association. He earned
his B.S. in engineering from MIT in 1966, a masterÕs degree in manage-
ment from MITÕs Sloan School in 1970, and a J.D. from Georgetown Uni-
versity Law Center in 1975.ROBERT SPINRAD retired from XEROX Corporation, as Vice Presidentof Technology Strategy in 1998. He joined Xerox in 1968, and over the
years has held a variety of computer science positions, including that of
Director of Xerox PARC (Palo Alto Research Center). Before his career
with Xerox, Spinrad was a Senior Scientist at Brookhaven National Labo-
ratory and Project Engineer at Bulova Research and Development Labo-
ratory.  Spinrad received a Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering from the Mas-

sachusetts Institute of Technology. He received his M.S. in Electrical
Engineering, and B.S. in Engineering from Columbia University. Spinrad

was a Bridgham Fellow at Columbia and a Whitney Fellow at MIT.

Spinrad has served in various advisory and oversight roles at Harvard
University, Stanford University, the Massachusetts Institute of Technol-
ogy, the University of California, EDUCOM, the National Science Foun-
dation, the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of En-
gineering, the National Research Council, the American Association for
the Advancement of Science, the Council on Library and Information
Resources, the Council on Foreign Relations, Bell Telephone Laboratory,
the Defense DepartmentÕs Advanced Research Projects Agency,
Livermore National Laboratory, the RAND Corporation, the Interna-

tional Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Digital Pathways, Inc.,

the McGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of Science and Technology, and The In-
formation Society. Spinrad is on the Board of Advisors for the BerkeleyGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX237Center for Law and Technology and on the National ReconnaissanceOffice Advisory Council. He is also a member of the National Academy
of Engineering and the National Research CouncilÕs United States/Ja-

pan Task Force on Corporate Innovation.A.2THE GERMAN DELEGATION
CHRISTOPH ENGEL, Chair of the German Delegation, was born in 1956,and he took the first state exam for lawyers in 1981 at Tuebingen Univer-
sity. After 2 years as assistant at the Tuebingen Law Faculty, he was for 9
years a research fellow of the Hamburg Max-Planck-Institute on foreign
private law and conflicts of law. He took his second state exam for law-
yers in 1987 and received a degree of doctor juris in 1988. In 1992, the
University of Hamburg gave him tenure (habilitation) for public law, eco-
nomic law, European law, and public international law. From 1992
through 1997, he held a chair for media and communications law at

Osnabrueck University. Since 1997 he is co-director of a newly founded
institution within the Max-Planck-Society, the Project Group on the Law
of Common Goods at Bonn. His main fields are public law, economic law,
media law, environmental law, and the impact of social sciences, in par-
ticular economics, on law. He is a member of the Scientific Council with
the German Minister of Economics.KLAUS W. GREWLICH is a professor in the European General and In-terdisciplinary Department at the College of Europe/Bruges.  From 1990

to 1995 he served as Executive Vice President (Director General) Busi-
ness Development and Board Representative at Deutsche Telekom, Bonn
and from 1996 to 1997 as Director General and Member of the Board of

an Industrial Confederation in Brussels.  Dr.  Grewlich has held posi-

tions in the European Space Agency and in the OECD Madrid, in the
Cabinet of the EC Commission in Brussels, and was Member of the For-
eign Policy Planning Group and Director for International Technology
and Telecommunications Policy in the Federal Foreign Office, Bonn.  He

received his Dr. Jur. from the University of Freiburg, his Dr.sc.econ. from

the University of Lausanne/HEC, and his LL.M. from the University of
California, Berkeley. Dr Grewlich is the author of various publications,

particularly in the field of international economic relations, public inter-
national and European law, international technology policy, govern-

ment-business relations, and communications, including the books 
Di-rect Investment in the OECD-Countries (1978), 
Transnational Enterprises ina New International System
 (1980), 
Europe in the Global Technology Race(1992), Conflict and Order in Global Communications (1997), and 
Governancein Cyberspace (1999).
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.238GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESBERND HOLZNAGEL is a professor of law and director of the Institute
for Information, Telecommunication and Media Law at the University of

the Free University in Berlin in 1984, he participated in a post-graduate
law program at McGill University in Montreal where he received a Mas-
ter of Laws (LL.M.) degree in 1985. After receiving his Ph.D. from the
University of Hamburg on Dispute Resolution through Negotiation in 1990
and passing the second state exam in law in 1991, he began to write his
thesis, ÒBroadcasting Law in Europe,Ó which was completed in 1996 and
received a special award from the European Group at Public Law.  In 1997

he was announced as professor for constitutional and administrative law


for Information, Telecommunication and Media Law.  His involvement in

research projects covers areas such as access problems in the multimedia
age, legal frameworks of data protection and data security, and new me-
dia in university teaching. In 1998 he was a visiting professor at the Uni-
versity of Virginia (Charlottesville) teaching ÒEuropean Community LawÓ

in the fall term.  Since 1999, he has been a faculty member of Oxford

UniversityÕs summer school for incoming law students.  His consulting

work on the international level includes media law courses in Moscow
and Ljubljana (with the Council of Europe), as well as working as an ex-
pert on the legal problems concerning Bosnian election law, residence law,
data protection and I.D. cards (with the Phare Project financed by the Eu-
ropean Commission).  Furthermore, he was a member of the European

Expert Group for the preparation of the Working Group ÒThe Right Regu-
latory Framework for a Creative Media EconomyÓ at the April 1998 Bir-
mingham Conference organised by the European Community. Currently
he is a co-editor of the Law Journal ÒMultimedia and LawÓ and co-initia-
tor of the ÒInternational Journal of Communications Law and Policy,Ó

and Yale. In addition, he has published numerous articles in several Ger-
man law journals relating to various problems concerning German ad-
ministrative law.MICHAEL HUTTER is professor of economic theory and director of the
Institute for Economy and Culture at Witten/Herdecke University, the
first private university in Germany. He received his Dr. rer.pol. with a
summa-cum-laude thesis on the logical structure of property rights and
his Dr. rer. pol. habil. with a study on the production of pharmaceutical
patent law in Germany, Italy, and the United States. His current research
interests focus on the role of communication in economic theory, and on
applications of social systems theory on the economics of the Arts, media
industries and networks, and monetary systems. Dr. Hutter was educatedGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX239at Portland State University (B.A. Math., 1970), University of Washington(M.A. Econ., 1971), and the University of Munich (Dr. rer. pol., 1976, and
Dr. rer. pol. habil., 1986). He taught at Claremont McKenna College and at
the University of Munich before joining the faculty of Business Adminis-
tration and Economics at Witten/Herdecke University in 1987. He was
dean of the faculty from 1992-95, and he was president of the Association
for Cultural Economics. He serves on the editorial board of the Journal of
Cultural Economics, the European Journal of Law and Economics, and
Soziale Systeme. He has published in the areas of cultural economics, his-
tory and theory of money, history of economic thought and economic

methodology.RAYMUND WERLE is principal research associate with the Max-Planck-
Study of Societies, Cologne). He is head of the MPI Research Group on
Network Development and Standardization in Telecommunications. His
research is focused on the institutional conditions and the structural con-
sequences of technological and scientific innovations, in particular in the
information and telecommunications technology industry. It includes the
development of telecommunications and data networks, the Internet in
particular, and their structural and societal consequences. He has pub-
lished in the area of science and technology studies, development and
governance of large technical systems, but also in the sociology of law
and the legal profession and research methodology.  He received a Di-

ploma (M.A.) in Economics and Sociology and a Ph.D. in Political Science.
He was educated at the Universities of Bonn, Cologne, Mannheim and at
the State University of New York at Stony Brook (postgraduate DAAD
fellow). He held research and teaching positions at the Universities of
Bielefeld, Mannheim and Heidelberg and at the Research Center on
Nuclear Energy in Karlsruhe. In 1997 he was Visiting Scholar at the Cen-
ter for Technology, Policy and Industrial Development (Research Program

on Communications Policy) at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(MIT).  He is chair of the Coordination Committee of the Research Net-

work ÒSociology of Science and TechnologyÓ (SSTNET) of the European
Sociological Association.A.3STAFF
JOACHIM D–LKEN is a research assistant with the Max-Planck-Project
Group on the Law of Common Goods at Bonn and currently enrolled in
the preparatory program (ÒRechtsreferendariatÓ) for the second state
exam for lawyers. He received his first law degree (J.D. equivalent) with a
Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.240GLOBAL NETWORKS AND LOCAL VALUESUniversity. Since 1992, he was a junior research assistant with the chairfor the Law of the New Media at Osnabrueck University. From 1995-1996,
he was a visiting scholar at the University of Chicago Law School (ERP-
scholarship of the Ministry of Economics and the National Scholarship
Foundation). His work is on antitrust law related to convergence in multi-
media markets.HERBERT LIN is senior scientist and senior staff officer at the Com-
puter Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research
Council of the National Academies, where he has been study director
of major projects on public policy and information technology. These
studies include a 1996 study on national cryptography policy
(CryptographyÕs Role in Securing the Information Society), a 1991 study onthe future of computer science (Computing the Future), a 1999 study ofDefense Department systems for command, control, communications,
computing, and intelligence (Realizing the Potential of C4I: FundamentalChallenges), and a 2000 study on workforce issues in high-technology(Building a Workforce for the Information Economy). Prior to his NRC ser-vice, he was a professional staff member and staff scientist for the
House Armed Services Committee (1986-1990), where his portfolio in-
cluded defense policy and arms control issues. He also has significant
expertise in math and science education. He received his Ph.D. in phys-
ics from MIT in 1979.  Apart from his CSTB work, he is published in

cognitive science, science education, biophysics, and arms control and
defense policy.LORENZ MƒLLER is Higher Executive Officer in the administration ofthe German Bundestag on temporary leave of absence. He was Research
Assistant of the Parliamentary Study Commission ÓFuture of the Media
in the Economy and SocietyÑGermany«s Road into the Information Soci-
ety,Ó which finished his work in June 1998. After 4 years as a journalist, he
studied law and arabic and islamic studies in Hamburg and Damascus.
He took his first and second state exam for lawyers in 1991 and 1995 in
Hamburg and received a degree of doctor juris in 1996 with a thesis on the
relationship between modern islamic theory and the idea of human rights.

Currently he is a Research Assistant with the Max-Planck-Project Group
on the Law of Common Goods at Bonn.WOLF OSTHAUS, born in 1971, received his first law degree (J.D. equiva-lent) with a focus on international private law and comparison of law in
1997 from Osnabrueck University after studying at the Universities of
Osnabrueck, Paris (XII), and Florence. He is a research assistant with theGlobal Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX241Max-Planck-Project Group on the Law of Common Goods at Bonn andalso a member of the Graduate College ÒInternationalization of private
lawÓ at the University of Freiburg/Germany (DFG scholarship). His Ph.D.
thesis, which is supervised by Prof. von Bar, Osnabrueck, will be on the
rights to information in the international tort law.Global Networks and Local Values: A Comparative Look at Germany and the United StatesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.