DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/10057Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency:Second Edition72 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-07314-1 | DOI 10.17226/10057Margaret E. Martin, Miron L. Straf, and Constance F. Citro, Editors; Committeeon National Statistics, National Research CouncilPrinciples and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Principles and Practices
for a Federal Statistical Agency
SECOND EDITIONCommittee on National StatisticsMargaret E. Martin, Miron L. Straf, and Constance F. Citro, 
editorsCommission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and EducationNational Research CouncilNATIONAL ACADEMY PRESS
Washington, D.C.Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESS   2101 Constitution Avenue, N.W.   Washington, D.C. 20418
NOTICE:  The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the
Governing Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from
the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineer-

ing, and the Institute of Medicine.  The members of the committee responsible for the
report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate bal-
ance.The study was supported by Contract/Grant No. SBR-9709489 between the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences and the National Science Foundation.  Any opinions, find-

ings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the view of the organizations or agencies that
provided support for this project.
International Standard Book Number 0-309-07314-6
Additional copies of this report are available from National Academy Press, 2101 Con-
stitution Avenue, N.W., Lockbox 285, Washington, D.C. 20055
Call (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area)
This report is also available online at http://www.nap.edu
Printed in the United States of America
Copyright 2001 by the National Academy of Sciences.  All rights reserved.
Suggested citation:  National Research Council (2001).  
Principles and Practices for a
Federal Statistical Agency, Second Edition
.  Committee on National Statistics.  Margaret
E. Martin, Miron L. Straf, and Constance F. Citro, Editors.  Commission on Behavioral

and Social Sciences and Education.  Washington, DC:  National Academy Press.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of
distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the

furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare.  Upon the
authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a
mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical

matters.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts is president of the National Academy of Sciences.
The National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the charter ofthe National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers.

It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing withthe National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federal govern-
ment.  The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed

at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the supe-

rior achievements of engineers.  Dr. William A. Wulf is president of the National Acad-
emy of Engineering.
The Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sci-
ences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the ex-
amination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public.  The Institute acts
under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congressional

charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to
identify issues of medical care, research, and education.  Dr. Kenneth I. Shine is presi-
dent of the Institute of Medicine.
The National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of Sciences
in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with theAcademyÕs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government.
Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the
Council has become the principal operating agency of both the National Academy of
Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in providing services to the gov-

ernment, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities.  The Council is
administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Bruce M.
Alberts and Dr. William A. Wulf are chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the

National Research Council.
National Academy of SciencesNational Academy of Engineering
Institute of Medicine
National Research Council
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL STATISTICS
2000-2001JOHN E. ROLPH (
Chair), Marshall School of Business, University of
Southern CaliforniaJOSEPH G. ALTONJI, Institute of Policy Research, Northwestern
UniversityLAWRENCE D. BROWN, Department of Statistics, University of
Pennsylvania
JULIE DAVANZO, RAND, Santa Monica, California

WILLIAM F. EDDY, Department of Statistics, Carnegie Mellon
UniversityROBERT M. GROVES, University of Michigan and Joint Program in
Survey Methodology, University of Maryland
HERMANN HABERMANN, Statistics Division, United Nations,
New York
JOEL L. HOROWITZ, Department of Economics, University of Iowa
WILLIAM KALSBEEK, Department of Biostatistics, University of North
Carolina
RODERICK J.A. LITTLE, School of Public Health, University of
MichiganTHOMAS A. LOUIS, RAND, Washington, DC
CHARLES F. MANSKI, Department of Economics, Northwestern
UniversityEDWARD B. PERRIN, Department of Health Services, University of
WashingtonDARYL PREGIBON, AT&T Laboratories-Research, Florham Park,
New Jersey
FRANCISCO J. SAMANIEGO, Division of Statistics, University of
California, Davis
RICHARD SCHMALENSEE, Sloan School of Management,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
MATTHEW D. SHAPIRO, Department of Economics, University of
MichiganANDREW A. WHITE, 
Director
, Committee on National Statistics
MARGARET E. MARTIN, 
ConsultantMIRON L. STRAF, 
Deputy Director
, Commission on Behavioral and
Social Sciences and Education
vPrinciples and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONSTANCE F. CITRO, 
Senior Study Director
, Committee on National
StatisticsCARRIE L. MUNTEAN, Research Assistant
, Committee on National
Statisticshttp://www.nationalacademies.org/cnstat
viPrinciples and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Acknowledgments
The Committee on National Statistics thanks the many people who
contributed their time and expertise to the preparation of this report.  We
are most appreciative of their cooperation and assistance.
In expressing our gratitude to the staff, a special measure of recogni-
tion is due to Margaret Martin and Miron Straf, who were coeditors of the
original edition of this report.  In revising the report, they were joined as

editors of the second edition by Constance Citro.  Linda Ingram and Flossie
Wolf assisted the committee in preparing the original report, and Carrie
Muntean, Andrew White, and Thomas Jabine assisted in preparing this
second edition.  Eugenia Grohman offered comments and guidance in ed-
iting the first edition.  This second edition benefited from the editing of
Christine McShane.  We also are indebted to many others who offered

valuable comments and suggestions.This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for
their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with proce-

dures approved by the Report Review Committee of the National Research
Council (NRC).  The purpose of this independent review is to provide
candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in making thepublished report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets
institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the
study charge.  The review comments and draft manuscript remain confi-

dential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process.
We thank the following individuals for their participation in the re-
viiPrinciples and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.view of this report: Mary Ann Baily, Hastings Center, Garrison, NY;
Vincent P. Barabba, General Motors Corporation, Detroit, MI; Ivan Fellegi,
Statistics Canada, Ottawa, Canada; Joel Greenhouse, Department of Sta-
tistics, Carnegie Mellon University; Jay Hakes, Jimmy Carter Library, At-
lanta, GA; Janet L. Norwood, Chevy Chase, MD; Alice Robbin, School of

Library and Information Science, Indiana University; and Stephen Stigler,
Department of Statistics, University of Chicago.
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive
comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions
or recommendations nor did they see the final draft of the report before its
release.  The review of this report was overseen by
 John T. Bailar,
 ProfessorEmeritus, Department of Health Studies, University of Chicago.  Ap-
pointed by the NRCÕs Report Review Committee, he was responsible for
making certain that an independent examination of this report was carried

out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all review com-
ments were carefully considered.  Responsibility for the final content of this
report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.
Finally, we recognize the many federal agencies that support the Com-
mittee on National Statistics directly and through a grant from the Na-
tional Science Foundation.  Without their support and their commitment
to improving the national statistical system, the committee work that is the
basis of this report would not have been possible.
viiiACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ContentsPREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITIONxi
PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITIONxiii

PART I:  PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A
FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY  1
PART II:  COMMENTARY13
REFERENCES39
APPENDICES
AFundamental Principles of Official Statistics of the
Statistical Commission of the United Nations45
BSelected Federal Statistical World Wide Web Sites,
May 2000, and Index of Federal Statistical Sites Listed48
ixPrinciples and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Preface to the Second Edition
In 1992 the Committee on National Statistics (CNSTAT) issued a
white paper on principles and practices for a federal statistical agency.  The
paper responded to requests from Congress and others for advice on what

constitutes an effective statistical agency.  It identified and commented on
three basic principles:  relevance to policy issues, credibility among data
users, and trust among data providers.  It also discussed 11 important prac-

tices, including a strong measure of independence and commitment to qual-
ity and professional practice (National Research Council, 1992).
The CNSTAT report has been used by federal statistical agencies to
inform department officials, advisory committees, and others.  It has also
been used in a congressionally mandated study by the U.S. General Ac-
counting Office (1995) to evaluate the performance of major statistical

agencies and in a review of the federal statistical system by a former com-
missioner of the Bureau of Labor Statistics (Norwood, 1995).  Its prin-
ciples informed the establishment and later assessment of a new statistical
agency, the Bureau of Transportation Statistics (see National Research
Council, 1997b).Eight years have passed since the white paper was first issued, and the
committee decided that it would be useful to release a revised and updated
version at this time.  This second edition does not change the basic 
prin-ciples for federal statistical agencies, because the committee believes these
principles are and will continue to be important guides for effective prac-
tice.  The second edition does revise and expand the discussion of some of
xiPrinciples and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the practices
 that characterize an effective federal statistical agency and brings
the discussion up to date with references to recent reports by the committee

and others.Driving the revisions is our recognition of the need for statistical agen-
cies to keep up to date and to meet the challenges for their missions that are

posed by such technological, social, and economic changes as the wide-
spread use of the Internet for the dissemination and, increasingly, the col-
lection of data, the heightened concern about safeguards for confidential

information, and the information requirements of a changing economy.
New and revised text addresses the reasons for establishing a federal statisti-
cal agency, the necessity for and characteristics of independence of a federal

statistical agency, the need for continual development of more useful data,
for example, by integrating data from multiple sources, practices for fair
treatment of data providers, the role of the Internet in the release of data,

and the need for effective coordination and cooperation among statistical
agencies to ensure that policy makers and citizens receive data that are ac-
curate, relevant, and timely for their needs.
We stress that the principles and practices for a federal statistical agency
articulated here are guidelines, not prescriptions.  We intend them to be
helpful not only to the agencies, from whose experience we benefited in
preparing this revised edition, but also to inform others of the characteris-
tics of effective statistical agencies that can serve policy makers in the execu-

tive and legislative branches, other data users, and the public well.
John E. Rolph, Chair
Committee on National Statistics, 2001
xiiPREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Preface to the First Edition
From time to time the Committee on National Statistics (CNSTAT) is
asked for advice on what constitutes an effective federal statistical agency.
For example, congressional staff raised the question as they were formulat-
ing legislation for a Bureau of Environmental Statistics, and the Secretary
of the U.S. Department of Transportation asked CNSTAT for advice on
establishing a new Bureau of Transportation Statistics, called for in the

Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act of 1991.  The National
Research CouncilÕs Transportation Research Board had earlier turned to
CNSTAT for information on common elements of the organization and

responsibilities of federal statistical agencies for its study on strategic trans-portation data needs.  Of interest in all of these requests are the fundamen-
tal characteristics that define a statistical agency and its operation.Statistical agencies sometimes face situations that tax acceptable stan-dards for professional behavior.  Examples occur when policy makers, regu-
lators, or enforcement officials seek access to data on individual respon-

dents from a statistics agency or when policy interpretations are added to
press releases announcing statistical data.  Because the federal statistical
system is highly decentralized, statistical agencies must operate under the

policies and guidance of officials in many departments of government.  Not
all of these officials are knowledgeable about what is generally accepted as
proper for a federal statistical agency, and issues involving judgments about

conflicting objectives also arise.
In response to these situations, CNSTAT has prepared this Òwhite pa-
xiiiPrinciples and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xivPREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION
perÓ on principles and practices for a federal statistical agency.  This paper
brings together conclusions and recommendations made in many CNSTAT

reports on specific agencies, programs, and topics, and it includes a discus-
sion of what is meant by independence of a federal statistical agency and of
the roles of research and analysis in a statistical agency.  The commentary

section contains supplementary information to further explain or illustrate
the principles and practices.In preparing this paper, CNSTAT and its staff solicited suggestions
from many involved with federal statistical agencies.  A draft of the paper
was discussed by the heads of some federal statistical agencies at an open
meeting of CNSTAT, and a draft was also discussed at a meeting of the

Council of Professional Associations on Federal Statistics.  The committee
is grateful for the many suggestions and comments it received.  When the
report is published, CNSTAT plans to seek an even wider discussion of it at
meetings of professional societies and to encourage reviews and commen-
taries.  We hope that, in this way, the paper may evolve further and possibly
influence legislation, regulations, and standards affecting federal statistical

agencies.As we were completing our work on this report, the Conference of
European Statisticians drafted a resolution on the fundamental principles
of official statistics in the region of the Economic Commission for Europe
(ECE).  Although the two documents were done independently, there is a

large amount of agreement between them.  We note particularly the em-
phasis the ECE resolution places on the need for independence for official
statistics agencies (United Nations Statistical Commission and Economic

Commission for Europe, 1991).
1Although focused on federal statistical agencies, many of the principlesand practices presented here also apply to statistical activities elsewhere,

particularly to those in state and local government agencies and other sta-
tistical organizations.  In addition, this paper and the ECE resolution may
be useful to emerging democracies that seek to establish statistical organiza-
tions in their governments.
The principles and practices articulated here are statements of best
1The ECE resolution was later adopted by the Statistical Commission of the United
Nations (United Nations Statistical Commission, 1994).  See Appendix A.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION
xvpractice rather than legal or scientific rules.  They are based on experience
rather than law or experiment. Some of them may need to be changed as

laws change, society changes, or the practice of statistics changes. They are
thus intended as guidelines, not prescriptions.
Burton H. Singer, Chair
Committee on National Statistics, 1992
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Part I:
Principles and Practices
for a Federal Statistical Agency
Definition of a Federal Statistical Agency
Establishment of a Federal Statistical Agency

Principles for a Federal Statistical Agency
¥Relevance to Policy Issues¥Credibility Among Data Users
¥Trust Among Data Providers
Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency
¥A Clearly Defined and Well-Accepted Mission
¥A Strong Position of Independence¥Continual Development of More Useful Data¥Openness About the Data Provided
¥Wide Dissemination of Data¥Cooperation with Data Users¥Fair Treatment of Data Providers
¥Commitment to Quality and Professional Standards ofPractice¥An Active Research Program
¥Professional Advancement of Staff
¥Coordination and Cooperation with Other Statistical Agencies
Note:  Part I is a summary statement of principles and practices for
an effective statistical agency.  Part II, ÒCommentary,Ó further ex-

plains, defines, and illustrates the topics in Part I.Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
DEFINITION OF A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
A federal statistical agency is a unit of the federal government
whose principal function is the compilation and analysis of data
and the dissemination of information for statistical purposes.
The theory and methods of the discipline of statistics and related fields
and the practice of the profession of statistics are brought to bear on the
compilation of data, on producing information from the data, and on dis-
seminating that information.¥The unit must be generally recognized as a distinct entity.  It may be
located within either a cabinet department or an independent agency, or it

could itself be an independent agency.
¥Compilation may include direct collection of data from individuals,
organizations, or establishments or the use of administrative records.  It

may include assembling information from a variety of sources, including
other statistical agencies, in order to produce an integrated data series, such
as the national income and product accounts.
¥Analysis may take various forms, such as developing indicators, mod-
eling, making projections, and interpreting data.  It may include research

and explanations of relationships between survey statistics at various levels
of aggregation and other variables.  Analysis by a statistical agency does not
advocate policies or take partisan positions.
¥Dissemination means making information available to the public, toothers in the executive branch, and to Congress.
¥Statistical purposes include description, evaluation, analysis, infer-ence, and research.  For these purposes, a statistical agency may collect data
from individuals, establishments, or other organizations directly, or it may
obtain data from administrative records, but it does not do so for adminis-

trative, regulatory, or enforcement purposes.  Statistical purposes exclude
any interest in an individual person or economic unit.  The data are used
solely to describe and analyze statistical patterns, trends, and relationships

involving groups of persons or other units.
ESTABLISHMENT OF A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
Statistics that are publicly available from government agencies are es-
sential for a nation to advance the economic well-being and quality of life
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART I:  PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES
3of its people.  Its public policy makers are best served by statistics that are
accurate, timely, and relevant for policy decisions.  Even more, the opera-

tion of a democratic system of government depends on the unhindered
flow of statistical information that citizens can use to assess government
actions and for other purposes.  Federal statistical agencies are established

to be a credible source of useful, accurate statistics in one or more subject
areas that are available to the public and policy makers on a timely basis.
Accuracy requires proper concern for consistency across geographic
areas and across time, as well as statistical measures of errors in the data.
Timeliness requires concern for issuing data as frequently as is needed to
reflect important changes in what is being studied, as well as disseminating
data as soon as practicable after they are collected.  Relevance requires con-
cern for providing data that help users meet their current needs for decision
making and analysis, as well as anticipating future data needs.  And cred-

ibility requires concern for both the reality and appearance of impartiality,
and of independence from political control.  It is the primary mission of
agencies in the federal statistical system to work to ensure the goals of accu-

racy, timeliness, relevance, and credibility of statistical information.
One reason to establish a separate statistical agency is the need for data
series to be independent of control by policy makers or regulatory or en-
forcement agencies.  Other reasons include:
¥the need for information in a subject area that is updated on a con-
tinuing basis and that extends beyond the scope of individual oper-
ating units, possibly involving other departments or agencies,
¥the need to protect the confidentiality of responses, and
¥the opportunity to achieve greater efficiency or higher quality
through a consolidated and more highly professional activity.
The principles and practices for a federal statistical agency that are
reviewed in this report pertain to individual agencies as separate organiza-
tional entities in the context of a decentralized system for providing federal
statistics.  Historically, the response of the U.S. government to new infor-
mation needs has been to create separate statistical units, so that the United

States now has one of the most decentralized statistical systems of any mod-
ern nation.  This report does not comment on the advantages or disadvan-
tages of the U.S. system compared with other models for organizing gov-

ernment statistics.  It discusses the need for federal statistical agencies to
coordinate their work and cooperate with other agencies on a range of
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
activities, describes the coordinating role of the Office of Management and
Budget, and reviews some mechanisms for interagency collaboration.
PRINCIPLES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
Relevance to Policy Issues
A federal statistical agency must be in a position to provide infor-
mation relevant to issues of public policy.
A statistical agency must be knowledgeable about the issues and re-
quirements of public policy and federal programs and able to provide ob-
jective information that is relevant to policy and program needs.  In estab-
lishing priorities for statistical programs for this purpose, a statistical agency

must work closely with the users of such information in the executive
branch, the Congress, and interested nongovernmental groups.
Often, the provision of statistics concerning a particular subject area is
itself a public policy, with the goal of serving a broad range of information
needs of private- and public-sector users as well as the public.  To establish
priorities for such statistics, a statistical agency must maintain contact witha broad spectrum of users in the business sector, academia, state and local
governments, and elsewhere.
Credibility Among Data Users
A federal statistical agency must have a relationship of mutual
respect and trust with those who use its data and information.It is essential that a statistical agency strive to maintain credibility for
itself and for its data.  Few data users are in a position to verify the com-
pleteness and accuracy of statistical information; they must rely on an

agencyÕs reputation as a credible source of accurate and useful statistics.
To have credibility, an agency must be and must be perceived to be free
of political interference and policy advocacy.  Also important for credibility

is that an agency follow such practices as wide dissemination of data, open-
ness about the quality of the data provided, commitment to quality, and
fair treatment of data providers.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART I:  PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES
5Trust Among Data Providers
A federal statistical agency must have a relationship of mutual
respect and trust with respondents who provide data and with all
data subjects whose information it obtains.
Data providers must be able to rely on the word of a statistical agency.
An agency achieves credibility with its providers by ensuring appropriate
confidentiality of responses.  Maintaining confidentiality, in particular, pre-
cludes the use of individually identifiable information for any administra-
tive, regulatory, or enforcement purpose.
Trust with respondents is also achieved by respecting individual pri-
vacy.  Such respect requires that an agency minimize to the extent possible
the time and effort of respondents to provide information and fairly inform
respondents of the intended uses of their information.PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
The effective operation of a federal statistical agency must begin with
two related elements:  a clearly defined and well-accepted mission together
with a strong position of independence.  With these prerequisites, effective

operation involves a wide range of practices:  continual development of
more useful data, openness about the data provided, wide dissemination of
data, cooperation with data users, fair treatment of data providers, commit-

ment to quality and professional practice, an active research program, pro-
fessional advancement of staff, and coordination and cooperation with other
statistical agencies.A Clearly Defined and Well-Accepted Mission
An agencyÕs mission should include responsibility for all elements of its
programs for providing statistical information:  determining sources of data,
measurement methods, efficient methods of data collection and process-

ing, and appropriate methods of analysis; and ensuring the public availabil-
ity not only of the data, but also of documentation of the methods used toobtain the data and their quality.  The mission should include the responsi-

bility for assessing information needs and priorities and ways to meet thoseneeds, which could include the establishment of a data collection program
or the modification or discontinuance of an existing program.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
A Strong Position of Independence
A widely acknowledged position of independence is necessary for a
statistical agency to have credibility and to carry out its function to provide

an unhindered flow of useful, high-quality information for the public and
policy makers.  Without the credibility that comes from a strong degree of
independence, users may lose trust in the accuracy and objectivity of the

agencyÕs data, and data providers may become less willing to cooperate with
agency requests.
In essence, a statistical agency must be distinct from those parts of the
department that carry out enforcement and policy-making activities.  It
must be impartial and avoid even the appearance that its collection, analy-
sis, and reporting processes might be manipulated for political purposes or

that individually identifiable data might be turned over for administrative,
regulatory, or enforcement purposes.
The circumstances of different agencies may govern the form that in-
dependence takes.  In some cases, the legislation that establishes the agency
may specify that the agency head be professionally qualified, be appointed
by the President and confirmed by the Senate, serve for a specific term not
coincident with that of the administration, and have direct access to the
secretary of the department in which the agency is located.  These organiza-

tional requirements are associated with and facilitate the ability of a statisti-
cal agency to achieve a strong position of independence and credibility, but
they are neither necessary nor sufficient.
Other characteristics related to independence are that the statistical
agency have:
¥ authority for professional decisions over the scope, content, and
frequency of data  compiled, analyzed, or published.  Most statistical agen-
cies have such broad authority, limited by budgetary constraints, depart-

mental requirements, Office of Management and Budget (OMB) review,
and congressional mandates.
¥  authority for selection and promotion of professional, technical,
and operational staff.
¥ recognition by policy officials outside the statistical agency of its
authority to release statistical information without prior clearance.
¥ authority for statistical agency heads and qualified staff to speakabout the agencyÕs statistics before Congress, with congressional staff, and
before public bodies.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART I:  PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES
7¥ adherence to predetermined schedules in public release of impor-
tant economic or other indicator data to prevent even the appearance of

manipulation of release dates for political purposes.
¥ maintenance of a clear distinction between the release of statistical
information and policy interpretations of such information by the Presi-

dent, the secretary of the department, or others in the executive branch.
¥ dissemination policies that foster regular, frequent release of major
findings from an agencyÕs statistical programs to the public via the media,

the Internet, and other means.
Continual Development of More Useful Data
Statistical agencies must continually look to improve their data sys-
tems to provide information that is accurate, timely, and relevant for chang-

ing public policy needs.  They must also continually seek to improve the
efficiency of their programs for collecting, analyzing, and disseminating
statistical information.Ways for an agency to achieve these goals include:¥ seeking opportunities to integrate data from more than one survey,
or to integrate data from surveys with data from administrative records,
with appropriate safeguards for confidentiality.  When separate data sets are

collected and analyzed in such a manner that they may be used together,
the value of the resulting information and the efficiency of obtaining it can
be greatly enhanced.
¥ sharing technical information and ideas with other statistical agen-cies.  Such sharing can stimulate the development of innovative data collec-
tion, analysis, and dissemination methods that improve the accuracy and

timeliness of information and the efficiency of data operations.¥ establishing a balanced data collection program to provide relevant
information for different types of data needs.  Such a program could in-

clude one-time surveys on special topics, repeated surveys of cross-sections
of the population that provide regularly updated statistics, and longitudinal
surveys that track people, firms, and institutions over time and make it

possible to analyze the causes and effects of changes in their circumstances.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
Openness About the Data Provided
A statistical agency should be open about its data and their strengths
and limitations.  Data releases from a statistical program should be accom-

panied by a full description of the purpose of the program, the methods
and assumptions used for data collection, processing, and reporting, what
is known (and not known) about the quality and relevance of the data,

appropriate methods for analysis that take account of variability and other
sources of error in the data, and the results of research on the methods and
data.When problems are found in a previously released statistic that could
affect its use, an agency should issue a correction promptly and publicly.
An agency should be proactive in seeking ways to alert known and likely

users of the data about the nature of the problem and the appropriate cor-
rective action.
Wide Dissemination of Data
A statistical agency should strive for the widest possible dissemina-tion of the data it compiles.  Data dissemination should be timely and
public.  Also, measures should be taken to ensure that data are preserved

and accessible to the public for use in future years.
Elements of an effective dissemination program include:
¥ an established publications policy that describes, for a data collec-tion program, the types of reports and other data releases to be made avail-
able, the audience to be served, and the frequency of release.
¥ a variety of avenues for data dissemination, chosen to reach as broad
a public as reasonably possible.  Channels of dissemination include, but are
not limited to, an agencyÕs Internet web site, government depository librar-

ies, and the media for regular communication of major findings.
¥ release of data in a variety of formats (e.g., printed reports, various
kinds of computer-readable data files), so that the information can

be accessed by users with varying skills and needs for data retrieval and
analysis.¥ procedures for release of information that preclude actual or per-
ceived political interference.  In particular, the timing of the public release
of data should be the responsibility of the statistical agency.  As noted ear-
lier, adherence to predetermined release schedules for important economic
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART I:  PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES
9or other indicator data serves to prevent even the appearance of manipula-
tion of release dates for political purposes.
¥ policies for the preservation of data that guide what data to retain
and how they are to be archived for future secondary analysis.
Cooperation with Data Users
A statistical agency should consult with a broad spectrum of users of its
data in order to make its products more useful.  It should:
¥ seek advice on data concepts, methods, and products from data
users as well as from other professional and technical subject-matter and
methodological experts, using a variety of formal and informal means of
communication that are appropriate to the types of input sought.
¥ seek advice from external groups, including those with relevant sub-
ject-matter and technical expertise, on its statistical program as a whole, on
setting statistical priorities, and on the statistical methodologies it uses.¥ endeavor to meet the needs for access to data while maintaining
appropriate safeguards for the confidentiality of individual responses.
¥ provide equal access to data to all users.
Fair Treatment of Data Providers
To maintain credibility and a relationship of respect and trust with
data subjects and other data providers, a statistical agency must observe fair

information practices.  Such practices include:
¥ policies and procedures to maintain the confidentiality of data,
whether collected directly or obtained from administrative record sources.
¥ policies and procedures to respect the privacy of respondents, which
include informing them of the purposes of data collection and the antici-
pated uses of the information, whether their participation is mandatory or
voluntary, and, if voluntary, using appropriate informed consent proce-
dures to obtain their information.
¥ further respecting privacy by minimizing the contribution of time
and effort asked of respondents, consistent with the purposes of the data
collection activity.
¥recognizing the value of respondentsÕ participation in data collec-
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
tion programs by accurately representing the statistical information they
provide and by making it widely available.
¥seeking the advice of respondents, as well as others, in planning the
scope and content of the agencyÕs statistical programs, designing its data
collection procedures, and determining its data products.
Commitment to Quality and Professional Standards of Practice
A statistical agency should:¥ use modern statistical theory and sound statistical practice in all
technical work.
¥develop strong staff expertise in the disciplines relevant to its mis-
sion, in the theory and practice of statistics, and in data collection, process-

ing, analysis, and dissemination techniques.¥develop an understanding of the validity and accuracy of its data
and convey the resulting measures of uncertainty to users.
¥undertake ongoing quality assurance programs to improve data va-
lidity and reliability and to improve the processes of compiling, editing,
and analyzing data.¥develop a strong and continuous relationship with appropriate pro-
fessional organizations in the fields of statistics and relevant subject-matter

areas.
¥follow good practice, in reports and other data releases, in docu-
menting concepts, definitions, data collection methodology, and measures

of uncertainty, and in discussing possible sources of error.
An Active Research Program
An effective statistical agency should have a research program that is
integral to its activities.  Because smaller agencies may not be able to afford

as extensive a research program as larger agencies, ways should be sought to
foster sharing of research results and methods among agencies.  Agencies
can also augment their staff resources for research by obtaining the services

of experts not on the agencyÕs staff through consulting or other arrange-
ments as appropriate.
The research program of a statistical agency should include:
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART I:  PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES
11¥ research on the substantive issues for which the data were com-
piled.  Such research should be conducted not only to provide useful objec-

tive analytical results, but also as a means to identify potential improve-
ments to the content of the data, suggest improvements in the design and
operation of the data collection, and provide fuller understanding of the

limitations of the data.¥ research to evaluate and improve statistical methodology, in par-
ticular the identification and creation of new statistical measures and the

development of improved methods for analyzing errors in data that are due
not only to sampling variability, but also to other sources.  Research should
also be conducted on ways to reduce the time and effort requested of re-

spondents and to improve the timeliness, accuracy, and efficiency of data
collection, analysis, and dissemination procedures.
¥ research to understand the policy uses of the agencyÕs information,
in order to make the data more relevant to policy concerns and more useful
for policy analysis and decision making.Professional Advancement of Staff
A statistical agencyÕs professional staff should be committed to the high-
est standards of quality work and professional practice.  They should also
be committed to the highest standards of professional ethics with regard to

maintaining the agencyÕs credibility as an objective, independent source of
accurate and useful information obtained through fair information prac-
tices.To develop a high-caliber staff, a statistical agency must recruit and
retain qualified statisticians, analysts in fields relevant to its mission, and
other staff with skills that are needed for its efficient and effective opera-

tion.   An agencyÕs personnel policies should encourage staff to maintain
and extend their technical capabilities through appropriate professional and
developmental activities, such as attendance at professional meetings, par-

ticipation in relevant training programs, and rotation of assignments.  An
agency should also seek opportunities to reinforce the commitment of its
staff to ethical standards of practice.
Coordination and Cooperation with Other Statistical Agencies
A statistical agency must seek opportunities to cooperate with otherstatistical agencies to enhance the value of its own information and that of
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
other agencies in the federal statistical system.  Although agencies differ in
their subject-matter focus, there is overlap in their missions and a common

interest in serving the public need for credible, high-quality statistics gath-
ered as efficiently as possible.
When possible and appropriate, federal statistical agencies should co-
operate not only with each other, but also with state and local statistical
agencies in the provision of data for subnational areas.  Federal statistical
agencies should also cooperate with foreign and international statistical

agencies to exchange information on both data and methods and to de-
velop common classifications and procedures to promote international
comparability of information.Such cooperative activities as integrating data compiled by different
statistical agencies invariably require much effort to overcome differences
in agency missions and operations.  But the rewards are data more relevant

to policy concerns and a stronger statistical system as a whole.  For these
reasons, statistical agencies must act as partners to one another, not only in
the development of data, but also for the entire panoply of statistical activi-

ties, including definitions, concepts, measurement methods, analytical
tools, professional practice, dissemination modes, means to protect the con-
fidentiality of responses, and ways to advance the effective use of statistical
information.Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.13Part II
Commentary
This part of the report comments on most of the topics in the prin-
ciples and practices; the comments are offered to explain, illustrate, or fur-
ther define the statement of principle in Part I.
DEFINITION OF A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
A federal statistical agency is a unit of the federal government
whose principal function is the compilation and analysis of dataand the dissemination of information for statistical purposes.A statistical agency may be labeled a bureau, center, division, or office
or similar title, so long as it is recognized as a distinct entity.  Statistical

agencies have been established for several reasons:  (1) to develop new in-
formation for an area of public concern (e.g., the Bureau of Labor Statis-
tics, the National Center for Health Statistics); (2) to conduct large statisti-

cal collection and dissemination operations (e.g., the Bureau of the Census);
(3) to compile and analyze statistics from sets of administrative records for
policy purposes and public use (e.g., units in the Internal Revenue Service

and the Social Security Administration); and (4) to develop broad and con-
sistent estimates from a variety of statistical and administrative sources in
accordance with a prespecified conceptual framework (e.g., the Bureau of

Economic Analysis in the Department of Commerce and the Economic
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
Research Service in the Department of Agriculture).  Once established,
many statistical agencies engage in all these functions to varying degrees.
This definition of a federal statistical agency does not include manystatistical activities of the federal government because they are not per-
formed by distinct units, or because they do not result in the dissemination

of statistics to othersÑfor example, statistics compiled by the Postal Service
to set rates or by the Department of Defense to test weapons (see, e.g.,
National Research Council, 1998b, on statistics and testing for defense
acquisition).  Nor does it include agencies whose primary functions are the
conduct or support of problem-oriented research, although much of the
research may be based on information gathered by statistical means, for
example, by the Department of EnergyÕs national laboratories and by the
National Institutes of Health.
Finally, this definition of a statistical agency does not usually include
agencies whose primary function is policy analysis and planning (e.g., the
Office of Tax Analysis in the Department of the Treasury, the Office of the
Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation in the Department of

Health and Human Services).  Such agencies may collect and analyze statis-
tical information, and statistical agencies, in turn, may perform somepolicy-related analysis functions for their department.  However, to main-
tain credibility as an objective source of accurate, useful information, statis-
tical agencies must be separate from units that are involved in developing

policy and assessing policy alternatives.
The work of federal statistical agencies is coordinated through the In-
teragency Council on Statistical Policy (ICSP), created by the 1995 reau-

thorization of the Paperwork Reduction Act.  The ICSP currently includes
representation from 10 principal statistical agencies and from the statistical
units in the Environmental Protection Agency, the Internal Revenue Ser-

vice, the National Science Foundation, and the Social Security Administra-
tion (see Box II-1).
Throughout the federal government, the Office of Management and
Budget recognizes more than 70 units and agencies that are not statistical
agencies but that have annual budgets of $500,000 or more for statistical
activities (U.S. Office of Management and Budget, 2000).  Many of the

considerations in the principles and practices presented here may be perti-
nent to these agencies.  Similarly, the principles and practices may be rel-
evant to statistical units in state and local government agencies, and inter-

national audiences may find them useful as well.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART II:  COMMENTARY
15ESTABLISHMENT OF A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
One of the most important reasons for establishing a statistical agency
is to provide information that will allow for an informed citizenry.  A de-
mocracy depends on an informed electorate.  A citizen has a right to infor-
mation that is relevant, accurate, and timely.  Timely information of high

quality is also critical to policy analysts and decision makers in both thepublic and private sectors. (For more information on the purposes of offi-
cial statistics, see the Fundamental Principles of Official Statistics of the

United Nations Statistical Commission in Appendix A.)  Federal statistical
agencies serve the key functions of providing a broad array of information
to the public and policy makers and of ensuring the necessary quality and

credibility of the data.
BOX II-1Federal Agencies Represented on the Interagency
Council on Statistical Policy as of 2000Office of Management and Budget (OMB), Chair
Bureau of the Census, Department of CommerceBureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), Department of Commerce
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS), Department of Justice
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), Department of LaborBureau of Transportation Statistics (BTS), Department of
TransportationEconomic Research Service (ERS), Department of Agriculture
Energy Information Administration (EIA), Department of Energy
National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS), Department of
AgricultureNational Center for Education Statistics (NCES), Department ofEducationNational Center for Health Statistics (NCHS), Department ofHealth and Human ServicesOffice of Environmental Information, Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA)
Office of Research, Evaluation, and Statistics, Social Security
Administration (SSA)Science Resources Studies Division, National ScienceFoundation (NSF)Statistics of Income Division (SOI), Internal Revenue ServicePrinciples and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
Private-sector organizations also provide useful statistical information,
including data they compile and data collected by government agencies

and others to which they add value.  However, because the benefits of
statistical information are shared widely throughout society and because it
is difficult to collect payments for these benefits, private markets are not

likely to provide all of the data that are needed for public and private deci-
sion making or to make data as widely available as needed for important
public purposes.  Government statistical agencies are established to ensure

that a broad range of information is publicly available.  (See National Re-
search Council, 1999b, for a discussion of the governmental role in provid-
ing public goods, or near-public goods, such as research and data.)
The United States collected and published statistics long before any
distinct federal statistical agency was formed (see Duncan and Shelton,
1978; Norwood, 1995).  The U.S. Constitution mandated the conduct of

a decennial census of population beginning in 1790, and the census enu-meration was originally conducted by U.S. marshals as just one of their
many duties.  Legislation providing for the compilation of statistics on

agriculture, education, and income was enacted by Congress in the 1860s.
The Bureau of Labor (forerunner of the Bureau of Labor Statistics) was
established by law in 1884 as a separate agency with a general mandate to
respond to widespread public demand for information on the conditions of
industrial workers.  The Bureau of the Census was established as a perma-

nent agency in 1902 to conduct the decennial census and related statistical
activities.Many federal statistical agencies that can trace their roots back to the
19th or early 20th century, such as the National Center for Education
Statistics and the National Center for Health Statistics, were organized in
their current form following World War II.  Several new agencies were also

established, such as the Energy Information Administration and the Bu-
reau of Justice Statistics.  In every case, the agency itself, in consultation
with users of its information, has major responsibility for determining its

specific statistical programs and for setting priorities.  Initially, many of
these agencies also had responsibilities for certain policy analysis functions
for their department heads.  More recently, policy analysis has generally

been located in separate units that are not themselves considered to be
statistical agencies.A statistical agency has at least two roles:  (1) provider of the statistical
information and analysis needed for policy and program administration by
its own department and (2) source of national statistics for the public in its
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART II:  COMMENTARY
17area of concern.  It is sometimes difficult to keep these two roles distinct on
policy-relevant statistics.  An effective statistical agency, nevertheless, will

frequently play a creative, not just reactive, role in the development of data
needed for policy analysis.  Sometimes federal statistical agencies play addi-
tional roles, such as monitor and consultant on statistical matters to other

units within the same department (see, e.g., National Research Council,
1985a) and collector of data on a reimbursable basis for other agencies.
There is no set rule or guideline for when it is appropriate to establish a
separate federal statistical agency, carry on statistical activities within the
operating units of departments and independent agencies, or contract forstatistical services from existing federal statistical agencies or other organi-

zations.  Establishment of a federal statistical agency may be considered
when one or more of the following conditions prevail:
¥There is a need for information extending beyond one-time uses
and the scope of individual operating units, possibly involving other de-
partments and agencies.  Such needs may require coordinating data from

various sources, initiating new data collection programs to fill gaps, or de-
veloping regularly updated time series of estimates.
¥ There is a need, in fact or as a matter of credibility, to ensure that
major data series are independent of policy makersÕ control.
¥There is a need to establish confidentiality of data by law or regula-
tion covering a distinct organizational unit.  When a separate statistical
unit is established, the data it collects that could identify individual report-
ing units can be more easily protected by law or regulation from disclosure.

Statistical agencies disseminate statistical data for statistical purposes; theydo not disseminate identifiable data for administrative, regulatory, or en-
forcement uses.  The functional separation of statistical data, recommended

by the Privacy Protection Study Commission (1977), is easier to maintain
when the data are compiled in a unit separate from operating units.  At the
same time, functional separation makes the promise of confidentiality more

credible.
¥There is a need to emphasize the principles and practices of an ef-
fective statistical agency, for example, professional practice, openness about

the data provided, and wide dissemination of data.
¥There is a need to encourage research and development of a broad
range of statistics in a particular area of public interest or of government

activity or responsibility.
¥There is a need to consolidate compilation, analysis, and dissemina-
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
tion of statistics in one unit to encourage high-quality performance, elimi-nate duplication, and streamline operations.
PRINCIPLES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
A federal statistical agency must be in a position to provide infor-
mation relevant to issues of public policy.
A statistical agency supplies information not only for the use of imme-diate managers and policy makers in the executive branch and for legisla-
tive designers and overseers in Congress, but also to all those who require

statistical information on public issues, whether the information is neededfor purposes of production, trade, consumption, or participation in civic
affairs.  Just as a free enterprise economic system depends on the availability

of economic information to all participants, a democratic political systemdepends on wide access to information on education, health, transporta-tion, the economy, the environment, criminal justice, and other social

concerns.Federal statistical agencies are responsible for providing statistics on
conditions in a variety of areas.  The resulting information is used both
inside and outside the government not only to delineate problems and
sometimes to suggest courses of action, but also to evaluate the results of

government activity or lack of activity.  The statistics provide much of the
basis on which the government itself is judged.  This role places a heavy
responsibility on federal statistical agencies for impartiality and objectivity.
In order to provide information that is relevant for public policy, statis-
tical agencies need to reach out to users of the data.  Federal statistical
agencies usually are in touch with the primary users in their own depart-

ments.  Considerable energy and initiative are required to open avenues of
communication more broadly to other current and potential users, includ-
ing analysts and policy makers in other federal departments, state and local
government agencies, academic researchers, private-sector organizations,
organized constituent groups, the media, and Congress.  Advisory commit-
tees representing major users are frequently employed and are recom-

mended as a means to obtain usersÕ views (see, e.g., National Research
Council, 1993a).One frequently recommended method for alerting statistical agencies
to emerging statistical information needs is for the agencyÕs own staff to
engage in analysis of its data (Norwood, 1975; Martin, 1981; Triplett,
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART II:  COMMENTARY
191991).  For example, relevant analysis may use the agencyÕs data to examine
correlates of key social or economic phenomena or to study the statistical

error properties of the data.  Such in-house analysis can lead to improve-
ments in the statistics, to identification of new needs, to a reordering of
priorities, and to closer cooperation and mutual understanding with policy
analysis units.  In its work for a policy analysis unit, a statistical agency
describes conditions and possibly measures progress toward some previ-
ously identified goal, but it refrains from making policy recommendations.

The distinction between statistical analysis and policy analysis is not always
clear, and a statistical agency will need to consider carefully the extent of
policy-related activities that are appropriate for it to undertake.
A federal statistical agency must have a relationship of mutual
respect and trust with those who use its data and information.Users of a statistical agencyÕs data must be able to trust that the data
were collected and analyzed in an objective, impartial manner and that they
are as reliable as the agency can make them.  An agency should make every
effort to provide accurate and credible statistics that will permit policy de-
bates to be concerned about policy, not about the credibility of the data.
Credibility is enhanced when an agency fully informs users of the strengths
and weaknesses of the data, makes data available widely, and consults with

users about priorities for data collection and analysis.A federal statistical agency must have a relationship of mutual
respect and trust with respondents who provide data and all data
subjects whose information it obtains.The statistics program of the federal government relies in large part on
information supplied by individuals and by organizations outside the fed-
eral government, such as state and local governments, businesses, and other

organizations.  Some of this information is required by law or regulation
(such as employersÕ wage reports), some of it is related to administration of
government programs (such as information provided by benefit recipients),

but much of it is obtained through the voluntary cooperation of respon-
dents in statistical surveys.  Even when response is mandatory, the coopera-
tion of respondents reduces costs and is likely to promote accuracy (see

National Research Council, 1995).  Important elements in encouraging
such cooperation are that respondents believe that the data requested are
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
important, that they are being collected in an impartial, competent man-
ner, and that the confidentiality of their responses will be protected.
In brief, trust in a statistical agency must be maintained.  The agency
must not be perceived as being swayed by political considerations.  It must
be perceived as working in the national interest, not the interest of a par-

ticular administration, and as taking a long view, balancing new data needs
against the need for consistency with past data (Ryten, 1990).  Respondent
trust also depends on providing respondents with realistic promises of con-

fidentiality that the agency can reasonably expect to honor and then scru-
pulously honoring those promises.
PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
A Clearly Defined and Well-Accepted Mission
A clear understanding of the mission of an agency, the scope of its
statistical programs, and its authority and responsibilities is basic to plan-

ning and evaluating its programs and to maintaining credibility and inde-
pendence from political control (National Research Council, 1986).  Some
agency missions are clearly spelled out in legislation; other agencies have
only very general legislative authority.  On occasion, very specific require-
ments may be set by legislation or regulation.
Agencies should communicate their mission clearly to others.  The use
of the Internet is one means to publicize an agencyÕs mission to a broad
audience and to provide related information, including enabling legisla-

tion, the scope of the agencyÕs statistical program, confidentiality provi-
sions, and operating procedures.
An agencyÕs mission should focus on the compilation, evaluation,
analysis, and dissemination of statistical information.  In addition, consid-
erable and formal attention must be paid to setting statistical priorities(National Research Council, 1976).  Advice from outside groups should be

sought on the agencyÕs statistical program, on setting statistical priorities,
on the statistical methods used, and on data products.  Such advice may be
sought in a variety of formal and informal ways, and it should be obtained

from data users and providers as well as professional or technical experts in
the subject-matter area and in statistical methods and procedures.  A strong
research program in the agencyÕs subject-matter field can assist in setting
priorities and identifying ways to improve an agencyÕs statistical programs
(Triplett, 1991).Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART II:  COMMENTARY
21A Strong Position of Independence
A statistical agency must be able to provide credible information that
may be used to evaluate the program and policies of its own department or

the government as a whole.  More broadly, a statistical agency must be a
trustworthy source of objective, reliable information for decision makers,
analysts, and others inside and outside the government who want to use

statistics to understand current conditions, draw comparisons with the past,
and help guide plans for the future.  For these purposes, a strong position of
independence for a statistical agency is essential.  (See the Fundamental

Principles of Official Statistics of the United Nations Statistical Commis-
sion in Appendix A.)
Statistical agency independence must be exercised in a broader frame-
work.  Legislative authority usually gives ultimate responsibility to the de-
partment rather than the statistical agency head.  In addition, an agency is
subject to the normal budgetary processes and to various coordinating and

review functions of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), as well
as the legislative mandates, oversight, and informal guidance of Congress.
Within this broader framework, a statistical agency must work to main-
tain its credibility as an impartial purveyor of information.  In the long run,
the effectiveness of an agency depends on its maintaining a reputation for

impartiality; thus, an agency must be continually alert to possible infringe-
ments on its credibility and be prepared to argue strenuously against such
infringements.Independence of an agency head is usually encouraged when the headis appointed by the President with approval by the Senate.  Examples of
agencies with such an arrangement are the Bureau of the Census, the Bu-

reau of Justice Statistics, the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the Bureau of Trans-
portation Statistics, the Energy Information Administration, and the Na-
tional Center for Education Statistics.  A further safeguard is provided when

such a head is appointed for a fixed term, as is currently the case with the
Bureau of Labor Statistics, the Bureau of Transportation Statistics, and the
National Center for Education Statistics.  It is desirable that the term not
coincide with the presidential term, so that incumbents need not end their
leadership with changes of administration and professional considerations
may more easily predominate over political aims in the appointment pro-

cess.It is also desirable that a statistical agency head have direct access to the
secretary of the department or the head of the independent agency in which
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
it is located.  Such access allows the head to inform new secretaries about
the appropriate role of a statistical agency and present the case for new

statistical initiatives to the secretary directly.  Among the agency heads with
presidential appointments, such direct access currently is provided by legis-
lation only for the Bureau of Labor Statistics and the Bureau of Transporta-

tion Statistics.
These organizational aspectsÑappointment by the President with ap-
proval by the Senate, a fixed term not coincident with that of the adminis-

tration, and direct access to the secretary of the agencyÕs departmentÑ
facilitate a strong position of independence for a statistical agency.
However, they are neither necessary nor sufficient.
Control over personnel actions, especially the selection and appoint-
ment of qualified professional staff, including senior executive career staff,
is another aspect of independence.  Agency staff reporting directly to the

agency head should have formal education and deep experience in the sub-
stantive, methodological, operational, or management issues facing the
agency as appropriate for their positions.  In addition, professional qualifi-

cations are of the utmost importance for statistical agency heads, whether
the profession is that of statistician or the subject-matter field of the statis-tical agency (National Research Council, 1997b).  The American Statistical
Association has, when requested, assisted in the development of a list of
suitable candidates for heads of statistical agencies.Authority to decide the scope and content of the data collected orcompiled is an important element of independence.  Most statistical agen-
cies have broad authority, limited by budgetary constraints, departmental

interests, OMB review, and congressional mandates.  In addition, the courts
sometimes become involved in interpreting laws and regulations that affect
statistical agencies, as in a number of issues concerning confidentiality and
freedom of information, as well as in the issue of adjusting the census popu-
lation counts.Congress frequently specifies particular data that it wishes to be col-
lected (e.g., by the National Agricultural Statistics Service in the Depart-
ment of Agriculture, the National Center for Health Statistics in the De-
partment of Health and Human Services) and, in the case of the decennial

census, requires an opportunity to review the proposed questions before
the forms are printed.  The OMB Office of Information and Regulatory
Affairs, under the Paperwork Reduction Act (and under the preceding Fed-

eral Reports Act), has the responsibility for designating a single data collec-
tion instrument for information wanted by two or more agencies.  It also
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART II:  COMMENTARY
23has the responsibility under the same act for reviewing all questionnaires
and other instruments for the collection of data from 10 or more respon-

dents.The budgetary constraints on statistical agencies and OMB review of
data collections are ongoing; the other pressures depend, in part at least, on

the relations between a statistical agency and those who have supervisory or
oversight functions.  Agencies need to develop skills in communicating to
oversight groups the need for statistical series and credibility in assessing
the costs of statistical work.  In turn, although it is standard practice for the
secretary of a department or the head of an independent agency to have
ultimate responsibility for all matters within the department or agency, for

credibility, the head of a statistical agency should be allowed full authority
in professional and technical matters.Other aspects of independence that underscore a statistical agencyÕs
credibility are also important.  These aspects include authority to release
statistical information without prior clearance and authority for the statisti-cal agency head and qualified staff to speak about the agencyÕs statistics

before Congress, with congressional staff, and before public bodies.
It is important, when a statistical agency releases information publicly,
that a clear distinction be made between the statistical information and any
policy interpretations of such information by the secretary of the depart-
ment, the President, or others.  Not even the appearance of manipulation

for political purposes should be allowed.  This is one reason why statistical
agencies adhere to predetermined schedules for the public release of impor-
tant economic indicators and take steps to ensure that no person outside

the agency can gain access to such indicators before the official release time
(see U.S. Office of Management and Budget, 1985).
Continual Development of More Useful Data
Federal statistical agencies cannot be static.  To provide information of
continued relevance for public and policy use, they must continually an-
ticipate data needs for future policy considerations and look for ways to
develop data systems that can serve broad purposes.  To improve the quality

and timeliness of their information, they must keep abreast of method-
ological and technical advances and be prepared to implement new proce-
dures in a timely manner.  They must also continually seek ways to make

their operations more efficient.   Preparing for the future requires that agen-
cies reevaluate existing data series, plan new data series as required, and be
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
innovative and open in their consideration of ways to improve their pro-
grams.Because of the decentralized nature of the federal statistical system,
innovation often requires cross-agency collaboration.  For example, an ef-
fective way to increase the usefulness of survey data is to integrate them

with data from other surveys or with data from administrative records, such
as social program records.  Such integration typically requires that several
agencies work together.  For example, in the area of health care statistics, a

study by a panel of the Committee on National Statistics concluded that
no single survey was likely ever to meet all the criteria, address all the tech-
nical problems, or meet all usersÕ needs for data.  In order to provide ad-

equate information on the availability, financing, and quality of health care,
a coordinated and integrated system of data collection activities involving
several organizational entities was required (National Research Council and

Institute of Medicine, 1992).
Innovation also implies a willingness to implement different kinds of
data collection efforts to answer different needs.  For example, the need to

understand temporal changes in important social or economic events may
call for the development of longitudinal surveys that track people, institu-
tions, or firms over time.  Statistical agencies have developed useful longi-
tudinal surveys.  However, because agencies are oriented toward the mis-
sion of their particular department, such surveys (and cross-sectional data

activities as well) are typically focused on population groups (or other enti-
ties) that the department serves.  So information is available on the health
status of infants and young children, on the educational performance of

children in schools, and on participation in the labor force by working age
adults.  But the health status of young children affects educational perfor-
mance, and educational performance affects labor force outcomes.  Longi-

tudinal surveys that track population groups across the important transi-
tions from early childhood to school and from school to the labor force are
important to consider (National Research Council, 1998a).
Developing longitudinal data often requires much coordination with
policy research agencies and with academic researchers and, especially in
the case of children, requires coordination across many departments of gov-

ernment.  Longitudinal data are often more expensive to collect than cross-
sectional data and generally require more sophisticated methods for collec-
tion and analysis.  In addition, more time may be needed to produce useful

data products from longitudinal surveys.  Yet data from longitudinal sur-
veys are potentially very usefulÑsometimes they are the only means to
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART II:  COMMENTARY
25answer important policy questions (see, e.g., National Research Council,
1997a, on data needs to inform retirement income policy).
Another area in which it is important for statistical agencies to be in-
novative concerns the methods used for data collection, analysis, and dis-
semination.  Agencies need to investigate new or modified methods that

have the potential to improve the accuracy and timeliness of their data and
the efficiency of their operations.  Careful evaluation of new methods is
required to assess their benefits and costs in comparison to current methods
and to determine effective implementation strategies.
For example, experience with the use of computer-assisted interview-
ing techniques, which many agencies have adopted for data collection, has

identified benefits.  It has also identified challenges for the timely provision
of data and documentation that require continued research to develop so-
lutions that maximize the gains from these techniques.  Similarly, agencies

need to carefully evaluate their growing use of the Internet, which has be-
come a standard vehicle for data dissemination and is increasingly being
used for data collection.  Internet dissemination facilitates the timely avail-

ability of data to a broad audience and provides a valuable tool for users to
learn of related data sets from other agencies.  However, it poses challenges
in several areas, such as how best to provide information on data quality
and appropriate use of the data to an audience that spans a wide range of
analytical skills and understanding.Openness About the Data Provided
An important means to instill credibility and trust among data users
and data providers is for an agency to operate in an open manner with
regard to the limitations of its data.  Openness requires that an agency
provide a full description of its data with acknowledgment of any uncer-
tainty and a description of the methods used and assumptions made.  Agen-
cies should provide to users reliable indications of the kinds and amounts

of statistical error to which the data are subject (PresidentÕs Commission on
Federal Statistics, 1971).  Some statistical agencies have developed detailed
quality profiles for some of their major series.  These have proved helpful to

experienced users and agency personnel responsible for the design and op-
eration of major surveys and data series.
Openness about data limitations requires much more than estimates of
sampling error.  In addition to a discussion of aspects that statisticians rec-
ognize as nonsampling errors, such as coverage errors, nonresponse, mea-
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
surement errors, and processing errors, a description of the concepts used
and how they relate to the major uses of the data is desirable.  Descriptions

of the shortcomings of and problems with the data should be provided in
sufficient detail to permit the user to take them into account in the analysisand interpretation of the data.
Openness also means that a statistical agency should describe how de-
cisions on methods and procedures were made for a data collection pro-
gram.  It is important to be open about research conducted on methods

and data and other factors that were weighed in a decision.
Openness means as well that when mistakes are discovered after a sta-
tistic is released, the agency has an obligation to issue a correction publicly

and in a timely manner.  It should not only use the same dissemination
vehicles to announce corrections that it used to release the original statistic,
but also use additional vehicles, as appropriate, to alert the widest possible

audience of current and potential users.
In summary, agencies should make an effort to provide information on
the quality, limitations, and appropriate use of their data that is as frank

and complete as possible.  Such information, which is sometimes termed
Òmetadata,Ó should be made available in ways that are easy for users to
access and understand, recognizing that users differ in their level of under-
standing of statistical data (see National Research Council, 1993a, 1997b).
Agencies need to work to educate users that all data contain some uncer-
tainty and error, which does not mean the data are wrong but that they
must be used with care.
Wide Dissemination of Data
A statistical agency must have vigorous and well-planned dissemina-
tion programs to get information into the hands of users who need it on a
timely basis.  Planning should be undertaken from the viewpoint that the
public has contributed the data elements, has paid for the data collection
and processing, and should in return have access to the information in ways
that make it as useful as possible to the largest number of users.A good dissemination program provides data to users in forms that are
suited to their needs.  Data release may take the form of regularly updated
time series, cross-tabulations of aggregate characteristics of respondents,
and analytical reports that are made available in printed publications, on

computer-readable media (e.g., CD-ROM), and on the Internet.  (See Ap-
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART II:  COMMENTARY
27pendix B for a number of federal statistical agency web sites, many of which
are accessible from a single source: 
 www.fedstats.gov).
Yet another form of dissemination involves access to microdata files,
which make it possible to conduct in-depth research in ways that are not
possible with aggregate data.  Public-use microdata files may be developed

for general release.  Such files contain data for individual respondents that
have been processed to protect confidentiality by such means as deleting or
aggregating any information that might permit individual identification.

Or an agency may provide a facility on the Internet to allow users to aggre-
gate survey data to suit their purposes, with safeguards so that the data
cannot be retabulated in ways that could identify individual respondents.

Or access to data may be restricted in some cases to secure sites to which
researchers must come to conduct their analysis and follow stringent proce-
dures for protecting confidentiality.  Agencies should consider all forms of

dissemination in order to gain the most use of their data consistent with
protecting the confidentiality of responses.
A good dissemination program also uses a variety of channels to in-
form the broadest possible audience of potential users about available data
products and how to obtain them.  Such channels may include providing
direct access to data on the Internet, depositing data products in libraries,
establishing a network of data centers (such as the Census BureauÕs state
data centers), and maintaining lists of individuals and organizations to no-
tify about new data.  Agencies should also arrange for archiving of data
with the National Archives and Records Administration and other data
archives, as appropriate, so that data are available for historical research in

future years.
An effective dissemination program provides not only the data, but
also information about the strengths and weaknesses of the data in ways

that can be comprehended by diverse audiences.  Information about the
limitations of the data should be included in every form of data release,
whether in a printed report, on a computer-readable data file, or on the

Internet.On occasion, the objective of presenting the most accurate data pos-
sible may require more time than is consistent with the needs of users for

the information.  The tension between frequency and promptness of re-
lease on one hand and accuracy on the other should be explicitly consid-ered.  When concerns for timeliness prompt the release of preliminary esti-

mates (as in some economic indicators), consideration should be given to
the frequency of revisions and the mode of presentation of revised figures
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
from the point of view of the users as well as the issuers of the data.  Agen-
cies that release preliminary estimates must educate the public about differ-

ences among preliminary, revised, and final estimates.
Cooperation with Data Users
Users of federal statistical data span a broad spectrum of interests and
needs.  They include policy makers, planners, administrators, and research-

ers in federal agencies, state and local governments, the business sector, and
academia.  They also include activists, citizens, students, and media repre-
sentatives.  An effective statistical agency endeavors to learn about its data

users and to obtain input from them on the agencyÕs statistical programs.
The needs of users can be explored by forming advisory committees,
holding focus groups, analyzing requests and Internet activity, or by under-

taking formal surveys of users.  The task requires continual alertness to the
changing composition and needs of users and the existence of potentialusers.  An agency should cooperate with professional associations, insti-

tutes, universities, and scholars in the relevant fields to determine the needs
of the research community and obtain their insight on potential uses.  An
agency should also work with relevant associations and other organizations
to determine the needs of business and industry for its data.
Within the limitations of its confidentiality procedures as noted above,
an agency should seek to provide maximum access to its data, including
making the data available to external researchers for secondary analysis (Na-
tional Research Council, 1985b).  Having data accessible for a wide range

of analyses increases the return on the investment in data collection and
provides support for an agencyÕs program.  Once statistical data are made
public, they may be used in numerous ways not originally envisaged.  An

agency should attempt to monitor the major uses of its data as part of itsefforts to keep abreast of user needs.
Researchers and other users of data frequently request data from statis-
tical agencies for specific purposes.  The agency should have procedures in
place for referring users to professionals within the agency who can com-
prehend the userÕs purposes and needs and who have a thorough knowledge

of the agencyÕs data.  Statistical agencies should view these services as a part
of their dissemination activities.Ensuring equal access requires avoiding release of data to selected indi-
viduals, organizations, or news media in advance of other users.  Agencies
that prepare special tabulations of their data on request for external groups
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART II:  COMMENTARY
29must be alert to the proposed uses.  If the data are to be used in court cases,
administrative proceedings, or collective bargaining negotiations, it is wise

to have a known policy ensuring that all sides receive the special tabula-
tions, regardless of which side requested them or paid the cost of the tabu-
lation.Fair Treatment of Data Providers
Protecting ConfidentialityData providers must believe that the data they give to an agency can-
not be used to harm them.  For statistical data collection programs, protect-
ing the confidentiality of individual responses is considered essential to
encourage high response rates and accuracy of response.  Some agencies

have legislative mandates supporting promises of confidentiality; others rely
on strong statements of policy, legal precedents in court cases, or custom.
The latter agencies risk having their policies overturned by judicial inter-

pretations of legislation or executive decisions that may require the agency
to disclose identifiable data collected under a pledge of confidentiality.
Agencies that lack strong legal protection for confidentiality should be es-
pecially careful not to give data providers stronger promises of confidential-
ity than they can reasonably expect to honor.
To give additional weight and stature to policies that statistical agen-
cies have pursued for decades, OMB issued a Federal Statistical Confidenti-
ality Order on June 27, 1997.  This order assures respondents who provide

statistical information to specified agencies that their responses will be held
in confidence and will not be used against them in any government action,
Òunless otherwise compelled by lawÓ (U.S. Office of Management and Bud-
get, 1997).The heads of statistical agencies must be prepared to deal with requests
from other units in their own department, from other agencies and organi-

zations, and from the courts wanting to use individually identifiable data.
When such uses would be contrary to confidentiality pledges to data pro-
viders, agency heads should do everything in their power under the law to

deny access to the data.  In all such circumstances, agencies must be pre-
pared to stand firm and to justify the importance of a strong commitment
to confidentiality for maintaining credibility and trust with the public, in

particular with data providers, and therefore in maintaining the future qual-
ity and credibility of their statistics.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
Statistical agencies devote much time and effort to avoid inadvertent
disclosure of confidential information in disseminating data.  Recently, the

widespread dissemination of statistical data via the Internet has heightened
attention by agencies to effective safeguards for confidential information.
Risks are increased when data for small groups are tabulated, when the

same data are tabulated in a variety of ways, or when public-use microdata
files (samples of records for unidentified individuals or units) are released
with highly detailed geographic or other characteristics.  Because of the

disclosure risks associated with detailed tabulations and public-use
microdata files, there is always a tension between the desire to safeguard
confidentiality and the desire to provide broader public access to data.  This

dilemma is an important one to federal statistical agencies, and it has stimu-lated ongoing efforts to develop new statistical and administrative proce-
dures to safeguard confidentiality while permitting more extensive access.

An effective federal statistical agency will exercise judgment in determining
which of these procedures are best suited to its requirements to serve data
users while protecting confidentiality.  (For discussion of these issues and

alternative procedures, see the report of the Panel on Confidentiality and
Data Access [National Research Council, 1993b] and the report of the
Workshop on Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data
[National Research Council, 2000].)
Respecting Privacy
To promote trust and encourage accurate response, it is important that
statistical agencies respect the privacy of respondents to the extent possible.
When data providers are asked to participate in a survey, they should be
told whether the survey is mandatory or voluntary, how the data will be

used, and who will have access to the data.  In the case of voluntary surveys,
information on these matters is necessary in order for data providers to give
their informed consent to participate.Respondents invest time and effort in replying to surveys.  The amount
of effort varies considerably from survey to survey, depending on such fac-
tors as the complexity of the information that is requested.  Statistical agen-

cies should attempt to minimize such effort, to the extent possible, by us-
ing concepts and definitions that fit respondentsÕ common understanding;
by simplifying questionnaires; by allowing alternative modes of response

(e.g., via the Internet) when appropriate; and by using administrative
records or other data sources, if they are sufficiently complete and accurate
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART II:  COMMENTARY
31to provide some or all of the needed information.  In surveys of businesses
or other institutions, agencies should seek innovative ways to obtain infor-

mation from the institutionÕs records and minimize the need for respon-
dents to reprocess and reclassify information.  It is also the responsibility of
agencies to use qualified, well-trained interviewers.  As provided in OMB

directives, respondents should be informed of the likely duration of a sur-
vey interview and, if the survey involves more than one interview, how
many times they will be contacted over the life of the survey.  This informa-

tion is particularly important when respondents are asked to cooperate in
extensive interviews, search for records, or participate in longitudinal sur-
veys.Ways in which participation in surveys can be made easier for respon-
dents and result in more accurate data can be explored by such means as
focus group discussions or surveys.  Many agencies apply the principles of

cognitive psychology to questionnaire design, not only to make the result-
ing data more accurate, but also to make the time and effort of respondents
more efficient (National Research Council, 1984).  Some agencies thank

respondents for their cooperation by providing them with brief summaries
of the information after the survey is compiled.
A reason that respondents reply to statistical surveys is because they
have been persuaded that their answers will be useful to the government or
to society generally.  Statistical agencies should respect this contribution by

compiling the data and making them accessible to users in convenient
forms.  A statistical agency has an obligation to publish statistical informa-
tion from the data it has collected unless it finds the results invalid.
Commitment to Quality and Professional Standards of Practice
The best guarantee of high-quality results is a strong professional staff
that includes experts in the subject-matter fields covered by the agencyÕs
program, experts in statistical methods and techniques, and experts in data
collection, processing, and other operations.  A major function of an
agencyÕs managers is to strike a balance among these groups and promote
working relationships that make the agencyÕs program as productive as pos-

sible, with each group of experts contributing to the work of the others.
An effective statistical agency keeps up to date on developments in
theory and practice that might be relevant to its program.  An effective

agency is also alert to changes in the economy or in society that may call for
changes in the concepts or methods used in particular data sets.  Often the
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
need for change conflicts with the need for comparability with past dataseries, and this issue can easily dominate consideration of proposals for

change.  Agencies have the responsibility to manage this conflict by initiat-
ing more relevant data series while producing statistical bridges between
old and new series.An Active Research Program
Substantive Research and Analysis
There are strong arguments for a statistical agency to have staff whose
responsibility is to conduct objective substantive analyses of the data that
the agency compiles, such as analyses that assess trends over time or com-
pare population groups:
¥Agency analysts are in a position to understand the need for and
purposes of the data and know how the statistics will be used.  Such infor-

mation must be available to the agency and understood thoroughly if the
survey design is to produce the data required.
¥Those involved in analysis can best articulate the concepts that
should form the basic framework of a statistical series.  Agency analysts are
well situated to understand and transmit the views of external users andresearchers; at the same time, close working relationships between analysts
and data producers are needed for the translation of the conceptual frame-
work into the design and operation of the survey.
¥Agency analysts have access to the microdata and so are in a better
position than analysts outside the agency to understand and describe thelimitations of the data for analysis purposes.¥Substantive research by analysts on an agencyÕs staff will have cred-
ibility because of the agencyÕs commitment to openness about the data
provided and maintaining independence from political control.
¥Substantive research by analysts on an agencyÕs staff can assist in
formulating the agencyÕs data program, suggesting changes in priorities,
concepts, and needs for new data or discontinuance of outmoded or little-
used series.As with descriptive analyses provided by the agency, substantive analy-
ses must be designed to be relevant to policy but not take positions on
policy options or be designed with any particular policy agenda in mind.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART II:  COMMENTARY
33These issues are discussed in Norwood (1975), Martin (1981), and Triplett
(1991).Methodological Research
For statistical agencies to be innovative in methods for data collection,
analysis, and dissemination, methodological research must be ongoing.
Such research may be directed toward improving survey design; measuring
and, when possible, reducing error from such sources as nonresponse and
reporting errors; making data collection, processing, and dissemination
operations more efficient; reducing the time and effort asked of respon-

dents; or developing new and improved summary measures and estimation
techniques.Much of what is current practice in statistical agencies was developed
through research they conducted or obtained from other agencies.  Federal
statistical agencies, frequently in partnership with academic researchers, pio-
neered the applications of statistical probability sampling, the national eco-

nomic accounts, input-output models, and other analytic methods.  The
U.S. Census Bureau pioneered the use of computers for processing the
census, and research on data collection, processing, and dissemination op-
erations continues to lead to creative uses of automated procedures and
equipment in these areas.  Several federal statistical agencies sponsor re-

search using principles of cognitive psychology to improve the design of
questionnaires, the clarity of data presentation, and the ease of use of elec-
tronic data collection and dissemination tools such as the Internet.  Such

research has been furthered by interactions between statistical agencies and
the academic community.  The history of the statistical agencies has shown
repeatedly that methodological research can lead to large productivity gains
in statistical activities at relatively low cost.
Research on Policy Uses
Much more needs to be known on how statistics are actually used in
the policy-making process, both inside and outside the government.  Re-

search on how the information produced by a statistical agency is used in
practice should contribute to future improvements in the design, concepts,
and format of data products.  For example, public-use files of statistical

microdata were developed in response to the growing analytic needs of
government and academic researchers.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
Gaining an understanding of the variety of uses and users of an agencyÕs
data is only a first step.  More in-depth research on the policy uses of an

agencyÕs information might, for example, explore the use of data in
microsimulation or other economic models, or go further to examine how
the information from such models and other sources is used in decision

making  (see National Research Council, 1991a, 1991b).  The focus of
such research should be on ways to improve the relevance and accuracy of
an agencyÕs data for use in policy analysis and decision making, indepen-

dent of any particular policy agenda.
Professional Advancement of Staff
An effective federal statistical agency has personnel policies that en-courage the development and retention of a strong professional staff who

are committed to the highest standards of quality work.  There are several
key elements of such a policy:¥The required levels of technical and professional qualifications for
positions in the agency are identified, and the agency adheres to these re-
quirements in recruitment and professional development of staff.  Position
requirements take account of the different kinds of technical and other
skills, such as supervisory skills, that are necessary for an agency to have a

full range of qualified staff, including not only statisticians, but also experts
in relevant subject-matter areas, data collection, processing, and dissemina-
tion processes, and management of complex, technical operations.
¥Continuing technical education and training of staff, appropriate to
the needs of their positions, are provided by sponsoring in-house training
programs and providing opportunities for external education and training.
¥Professional activities, such as publication in refereed journals and
presentations at conferences, are encouraged and recognized.  Participation
in relevant statistical and other scientific associations is encouraged to pro-

mote interactions with academic researchers and other data users.  Such
participation is also a mechanism for openness about the data provided.
¥Interaction with other professionals is increased through technical
advisory committees, supervision of contract research and research consult-
ants, fellowship programs of visiting researchers, exchange of staff with rel-
evant statistical, policy, or research organizations, and opportunities for

new assignments within the agency.
¥Accomplishment is rewarded by appropriate recognition and by af-
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART II:  COMMENTARY
35fording opportunity for further professional development.  The prestige
and credibility of a statistical agency is enhanced by the professional visibil-

ity of its staff, which may include establishing high-level nonmanagement
positions for highly qualified technical experts.An effective statistical agency also has policies and practices to instill
the highest possible commitment to professional ethics among its staff.
When an agency comes under pressure to act against its principlesÑfor

example, if it is asked to disclose confidential information for an enforce-
ment purpose or to support an inaccurate interpretation of its dataÑit
must be able to rely on its staff to resist such actions as contrary to the

ethical principles of their profession.  An effective agency will refer its staff
to such statements of professional practice as the guidelines published by
the American Statistical Association and the International Statistical Insti-

tute on their Internet web sites (www.amstat.org/profession; www.cbs.nl/
isi/ethics.htm), as well as to the agencyÕs own statements about protection
of confidentiality and similar matters.  It will endeavor in other ways to

ensure that its staff are fully cognizant of the ethics that must guide their
actions in order for the agency to maintain its credibility as a source of
objective, reliable information for use by all.
Coordination and Cooperation with Other Statistical Agencies
The U.S. federal statistical system consists of many agencies in differ-ent departments, each with its own mission.  Nonetheless, statistical agen-

cies do not and should not conduct their activities in isolation.  An effective
statistical agency will actively explore ways to work with other agencies to
meet current information needs, for example, by seeking ways to integrate

the designs of existing data systems to provide new or more useful data than
a single system can provide.  An effective agency will also be alert for occa-
sions when it can provide technical assistance to other agenciesÑincluding

not only other statistical agencies, but also program agencies in its depart-
mentÑas well as occasions on which it can receive such assistance in turn.
Efforts to standardize definitions further contribute to effective coordina-
tion of statistical agency endeavors, as does the development of broad macro
models, such as the system of national accounts.  Initiatives for sharing data
among statistical agencies (possibly including individual data and address

lists when permitted by law and when sharing does not violate confidenti-
ality promises) can also be helpful for such purposes as achieving greater
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
efficiency in drawing samples or reducing duplication among statistical
programs.
The responsibility for coordinating statistical work in the federal gov-
ernment is specifically assigned to the Office of Information and Regula-
tory Affairs (OIRA) in the Office of Management and Budget by the Pa-

perwork Reduction Act (previously, the Federal Reports Act and the Budget
and Accounting Procedures Act).  Some functions are undertaken by OIRA
desk officers; others, by the OMB Statistical Policy Office.  Under the Pa-

perwork Reduction Act, OIRA desk officers review proposed data collec-
tion instruments.  The Statistical Policy Office, generally working with the
assistance of interagency committees, reviews concepts of interest to more

than one agency; issues standard classification systems (of industries, met-
ropolitan areas, etc.) and oversees their periodic revision; consults with other
parts of OMB on statistical budgets; and, by reviewing the statistical pro-

gram of the government as a whole, identifies gaps in statistical data, pro-
grams that may be duplicative, and areas in which interagency cooperation
might lead to greater efficiency and added utility of data.  The Statistical

Policy Office also is responsible for coordinating U.S. participation in in-
ternational statistical activities.The Statistical Policy Office encourages the use of administrative data
for statistical purposes, when feasible, and works to establish common goals
and norms on major statistical issues, such as confidentiality.  It sponsors

and heads the interagency Federal Committee on Statistical Methodology,
which issues guidelines and recommendations on statistical issues common
to a number of agencies (see Federal Committee on Statistical Methodol-

ogy, 1978a-2000; see also www.fcsm.gov). It has encouraged the Commit-
tee on National Statistics at the National Academies to serve as an indepen-
dent adviser and reviewer of federal statistical activities.  The 1995

reauthorization of the Paperwork Reduction Act created the Interagency
Council on Statistical Policy (ICSP), formalizing an arrangement whereby
statistical agency heads participate with OMB to coordinate federal statisti-

cal activities.  (See Box II-1 for a list of agencies represented on the ICSP.)
There are many forms of interagency cooperation and coordination.
Some efforts are multilateral, some bilateral.  Many result from common
interests in specific subject areas, such as economic statistics, statistics on
people with disabilities, or statistics on children or the elderly.  (See U.S.
Office of Management and Budget, 2000, for a description of several cur-
rent interagency collaborative efforts.)
A common type of bilateral arrangement is the agreement of a pro-
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART II:  COMMENTARY
37gram agency to provide administrative data to a statistical agency to be used
as a sampling frame, a source of classification information, or a summary

compilation to check (and possibly revise) preliminary sample results.  The
Bureau of Labor Statistics, for example, benchmarks its monthly establish-
ment employment reports to data supplied by state employment security

agencies.  Such practices improve statistical estimates, reduce costs, and
eliminate duplicate requests for information from the same respondents.
In other cases, federal statistical agencies engage in cooperative data collec-
tion with state counterparts to let one collection system satisfy the needs ofboth.  A number of such joint systems have been developed, notably by the
Bureau of Labor Statistics, the National Agricultural Statistics Service, the
National Center for Education Statistics, and the National Center for
Health Statistics.
Another example of a joint arrangement is the case in which one statis-tical agency contracts with another to conduct a survey, compile special
tabulations, or develop models.  Such arrangements make use of the special
skills of the supplying agency and facilitate use of common concepts and
methods.  The Bureau of the Census conducts many surveys for other agen-
cies, as do the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the National Center for Health
Statistics, and the National Agricultural Statistics Service.  (See U.S. Office
of Management and Budget, 2000, for a discussion of these and other
reimbursable arrangements.)The major federal statistical agencies are also concerned with interna-
tional comparability of statistics.  Under the overall guidance of OMBÕs
Statistical Policy Office, they contribute to the deliberations of the United
Nations Statistical Commission and other international organizations, par-
ticipate in the development of international standard classifications and
systems, and support educational activities that promote improved statis-

tics in developing countries.  Several statistical agencies run educational
programs for government statisticians in developing countries.  Some sta-
tistical agencies have had long-term cooperative relationships with interna-

tional groups, for example, the Bureau of Labor Statistics with the Interna-
tional Labor Organization, the National Agricultural Statistics Service with
the Food and Agriculture Organization, and the National Center for Health

Statistics with the World Health Organization.
To be of most value, the efforts of statistical agencies to cooperate as
partners with one another should involve the full range of their activities,

including definitions, concepts, measurement methods, analytical tools,
professional practice, dissemination modes, and disclosure limitation tech-
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
niques.  Such efforts should also extend to the development of data, espe-
cially for emerging policy issues (National Research Council, 1999a).  In

some cases, it may be not only more efficient, but also productive of needed
new data for agencies to fully integrate the designs of existing data systems,
such as when one survey provides the sampling frame for a related survey.

In other instances, cooperative efforts may identify ways for agencies to
improve their individual data systems so that they are more useful for a
wide range of purposes. Two of the more effective continuing cooperative efforts in this regard
have been the Federal Interagency Forum on Aging-Related Statistics and
the Federal Interagency Forum on Child and Family Statistics.  The former

was established in the mid-1980s by the National Institute on Aging, in
cooperation with the National Center for Health Statistics and the Census
Bureau.  The forumÕs goals include coordinating the development and use
of statistical data bases among federal agencies, identifying information gapsand data inconsistencies, and encouraging cross-national research and data
collection for the aging population. The forum was reorganized in 1998 to

include six new member agencies, and the reconfigured forum decided at
its first meeting in March 1999 to focus on developing an indicators chart
book, which was published the following year (Federal Interagency Forum
on Aging-Related Statistics, 2000).
The Federal Interagency Forum on Child and Family Statistics was
formalized in a 1994 executive order to foster coordination and collabora-
tion in the collection and reporting of federal data on children and families.
It includes many relevant statistical and program agencies.  Its annual re-
ports (e.g., Federal Interagency Forum on Child and Family Statistics,
2000) describe the condition of AmericaÕs children, including changing
population, family characteristics, and the context in which children are

living and indicators of well-being in the areas of economic security, health,
behavior, social environment, and education.
No single agency, whether a statistical or program agency, could have
produced the forum reports alone.  Working together in this way, federal
statistical agencies contribute to data more relevant to policy concerns and
to a stronger statistical system overall.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.39References
Duncan, Joseph W., and William C. Shelton
1978Revolution in United States Government Statistics, 1926-1976
.  Office of Federal
Statistical Policy and Standards.  Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Department of
Commerce.
Federal Committee on Statistical Methodology
1978aReport on Statistics for Allocation of Funds
.  Statistical Policy Working Paper 1.
(NTIS PB86-211521/AS)  Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Department of Commerce.
1978bReport on Statistical Disclosure and Disclosure-Avoidance Techniques
. Statistical
Policy Working Paper 2.  (NTIS PB86-211539/AS)  Washington, D.C.:  U.S.
Department of Commerce.1978cAn Error Profile:  Employment as Measured by the Current Population Survey
.Statistical Policy Working Paper 3.  (NTIS PB86-214269/AS)  Washington, D.C.:
U.S. Department of Commerce.
1978dGlossary of Nonsampling Error Terms:  An Illustration of a Semantic Problem in
Statistics.  Statistical Policy Working Paper 4.  (NTIS PB86-211547/AS)
Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Department of Commerce.
1980aReport on Exact and Statistical Matching Techniques
.  Statistical Policy Working
Paper 5.  (NTIS PB86-215829/AS)  Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Department of
Commerce.
1980bReport on Statistical Uses of Administrative Records
.  Statistical Policy Working Paper
6.  (NTIS PB86-214285/AS)  Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Department of
Commerce.
1982aAn Interagency Review of Time-Series Revision Policies
.  Statistical Policy Working
Paper 7.  (NTIS PB86-232451/AS)  Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Office of
Management and Budget.
1982bStatistical Interagency Agreements
.  Statistical Policy Working Paper 8.  (NTIS
PB86-230570/AS)  Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
1983aContracting for Surveys
.  Statistical Policy Working Paper 9.  (NTIS PB83-233148)
Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
1983bApproaches to Developing Questionnaires
.  Statistical Policy Working Paper 10.
(NTIS PB84-105055)  Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Office of Management and
Budget.1984aA Review of Industry Coding Systems
.  Statistical Policy Working Paper 11.
  (NTISPB84-135276)  Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
1984bThe Role of Telephone Data Collection in Federal Statistics
.  Statistical Policy Working
Paper 12.  (NTIS PB85-105971)  Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Office of Management
and Budget.
1986Federal Longitudinal Surveys
.  Statistical Policy Working Paper 13.  (NTIS PB86-
139730)  Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
1987Workshop on Statistical Uses of Microcomputers in Federal Agencies
.  Statistical Policy
Working Paper 14.  (NTIS PB87-166393)  Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Office of
Management and Budget.
1988Quality in Establishment Surveys
.  Statistical Policy Working Paper 15. (NTIS
PB88-232921)  Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
1990aA Comparative Study of Reporting Units in Selected Employer Data Systems
. Statistical
Policy Working Paper 16.  (NTIS PB90-205238)  Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Office
of Management and Budget.
1990bSurv
ey Coverage
.  Statistical Policy Working Paper 17.  (NTIS PB90-205246)
Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
1990cData Editing in Federal Statistical Agencies
.  Statistical Policy Working Paper 18.
(NTIS PB90-205253)  Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Office of Management and

Budget.1990dComputer Assisted Survey Information
.  Statistical Policy Working Paper 19.  (NTIS
PB90-205261)  Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
1991Seminar on Quality of Federal Data
.  Statistical Policy Working Paper 20.  (NTIS
PB91-142414)  Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
1993Indirect Estimators in Federal Programs
.  Statistical Policy Working Paper 21. (NTIS
PB93-209294)  Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
1994Report on Statistical Disclosure Limitation Methodology
.  Statistical Policy Working
Paper 22. (NTIS PB94-165305)  Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Office of Management
and Budget.
1995aSeminar on New Directions in Statistical Methodology
.  Statistical Policy Working
Paper 23.  (NTIS PB95-182978)  Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Office of Management
and Budget.
1995bElectronic Dissemination of Statistical Data
.  Statistical Policy Working Paper 24.
(NTIS PB96-121629)  Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Office of Management and

Budget.1996Data Editing Workshop and Exposition
.  Statistical Policy Working Paper 25.  (NTIS
PB97-104624)  Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
1997Seminar on Statistical Methodology in the Public Service
.  Statistical Policy Working
Paper 26.  (NTIS PB97-162580)  Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Office of Management
and Budget.
1998Training for the Future:  Addressing TomorrowÕs Survey Tasks
.  Statistical Policy
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REFERENCES41Working Paper 27.  (NTIS PB99-102576)  Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Office of
Management and Budget.
1999aSeminar on Interagency Coordination and Cooperation
.  Statistical Policy Working
Paper 28.  (NTIS PB99-132029)  Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Office of Management
and Budget.
1999bFederal Committee on Statistical Methodology Research Conference (Conference
Papers).  Statistical Policy Working Paper 29.  (NTIS PB99-166795)  Washington,
D.C.:  U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
20001999 Federal Committee on Statistical Methodology Research Conference:  Complete
Proceedings.  Statistical Policy Working Paper 30.  (NTIS PB2000-105886)
Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
Federal Interagency Forum on Aging-Related Statistics
2000Older Americans 2000:  Key Indicators of Well-Being
.  Available online  (http://
www.agingstats.gov).
Federal Interagency Forum on Child and Family Statistics
2000AmericaÕs Children:  Key National Indicators of Well-Being, 2000
.  Washington,
D.C.:  U.S. Government Printing Office.
Martin, Margaret E.
1981Statistical practice in bureaucracies.  
Journal of the American Statistical Association
76(373):1-8.National Research Council
1976Setting Statistical Priorities: Report of the Panel on Methodology for Statistical
Priorities of the Committee on National Statistics
.  Assembly of Mathematical and
Physical Sciences, Committee on National Statistics.  Washington, D.C.: National

Academy Press.
1984Cognitive Aspects of Survey Methodology: Building a Bridge Between Disciplines
.Report of the Advanced Research Seminar on Cognitive Aspects of Survey
Methodology, Thomas B. Jabine, Miron L. Straf, Judith M. Tanur, and Roger
Tourangeau, eds.  Committee on National Statistics.  Washington, D.C.: National
Academy Press.
1985aImmigration Statistics: A Story of Neglect
.  Panel on Immigration Statistics, Daniel
B. Levine, Kenneth Hill, and Robert Warren, eds.  Committee on National
Statistics.  Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
1985bSharing Research Data
.  Stephen E. Fienberg, Margaret E. Martin, and Miron L.
Straf, eds.  Committee on National Statistics.  Washington, D.C.: National
Academy Press.
1986Creating a Center for Education Statistics: A Time for Action
.  Panel to Evaluate the
National Center for Education Statistics, Daniel B. Levine, ed.  Committee on
National Statistics.  Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
1991aImproving Information for Social Policy Decisions:  The Uses of Microsimulation
Modeling, Volume I:  Review and Recommendations
.  Panel to Evaluate
Microsimulation Models for Social Welfare Programs, Constance F. Citro and
Eric A. Hanushek, eds.  Committee on National Statistics.  Washington, D.C.:
National Academy Press.
1991bImproving Information for Social Policy Decisions:  The Uses of Microsimulation
Modeling, Volume II:  Technical Papers
.  Panel to Evaluate Microsimulation Models
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
for Social Welfare Programs, Constance F. Citro and Eric A. Hanushek, eds.
Committee on National Statistics.  Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
1992Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency
.  Margaret E. Martin and
Miron L. Straf, eds.  Committee on National Statistics.  Washington, D.C.:
National Academy Press.
1993aThe Future of the Survey of Income and Program Participation
.  Panel to Evaluate
the Survey of Income and Program Participation, Constance F. Citro and Graham
Kalton, eds.  Committee on National Statistics.  Washington, D.C.: National

Academy Press.
1993bPrivate Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government
Statistics.  Panel on Confidentiality and Data Access, George T. Duncan, Thomas
B. Jabine, and Virginia A. de Wolf, eds.  Committee on National Statistics.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
1995Modernizing the U.S. Census
.  Panel on Census Requirements in the Year 2000
and Beyond.  Barry Edmonston and Charles Schultze, eds.  Committee on
National Statistics.  Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
1997aAssessing Policies for Retirement Income:  Needs for Data, Research, and Models
.  Panel
on Retirement Income Modeling, Constance F. Citro and Eric A. Hanushek, eds.
Committee on National Statistics.  Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
1997bThe Bureau of Transportation Statistics:  Priorities for the Future
.  Panel on Statistical
Programs and Practices of the Bureau of Transportation Statistics, Constance F.
Citro and Janet L. Norwood, eds.  Committee on National Statistics and
Transportation Research Board.  Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
1998aLongitudinal Surveys of Children
.  Committee on National Statistics and Board on
Children, Youth, and Families, Kirsten K. West, Robert M. Hauser, and Terri M.
Scanlan, eds.  Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
1998bStatistics, Testing, and Defense Acquisition:  New Approaches and Methodological
Improvements
.  Panel on Statistical Methods for Testing and Evaluating Defense
Systems, Michael L. Cohen, John E. Rolph, and Duane L. Steffey, eds.
Committee on National Statistics.  Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
1999aHealth Performance Measurement in the Public Sector:  Principles and Policies for
Implementing an Information Network
.  Panel on Performance Measures and Data
for Public Health Performance Partnership Grants, Edward B. Perrin, Jane S.

Durch, and Susan M. Skillman, eds.  Committee on National Statistics.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
1999bSowing Seeds of Change:  Informing Public Policy in the Economic Research Service of
USDA.  Panel to Study the Research Program of the Economic Research Service,
John F. Geweke, James T. Bonnen, Andrew A. White, and Jeffrey J. Koshel, eds.
Committee on National Statistics.  Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
2000Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data:  Report of a Workshop
.Christopher Mackie and Norman Bradburn, eds.  Committee on National
Statistics.  Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Research Council and Institute of Medicine
1992Toward a National Health Care Survey: A Data System for the 21st Century
.  Panel
on the National Health Care Survey, Gooloo S. Wunderlich, ed.  Committee on
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REFERENCES43National Statistics and Division of Health Care Services.  Washington, D.C.:
National Academy Press.
Norwood, Janet L.
1975Should those who produce statistics analyze them?  How far should analysis go?
An American view.  
Bulletin of the International Statistical Institute
, Proceedings of
the 40th session, 46:420-432.1995Organizing to Count:  Change in the Federal Statistical System
.  Washington, D.C.:
The Urban Institute Press.
PresidentÕs Commission on Federal Statistics
1971Federal Statistics. Vol. I
.  Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Privacy Protection Study Commission
1977Personal Privacy in an Information Society
.  Washington, D.C: U.S. Government
Printing Office.Ryten, Jacob
1990Statistical organization criteria for inter-country comparisons and their application
to Canada.  Journal of Official Statistics
 6(3):319-332.Triplett, Jack
1991The federal statistical systemÕs response to emerging data needs.  
Journal of
Economic and Social Measurement
 17(3,4):155-201.United Nations Statistical Commission
1994Fundamental Principles of Official Statistics.  In Official Records of the Economic
and Social Council, 1994, Supplement No. 9.
United Nations Statistical Commission and Economic Commission for Europe
1991D
raft of a Resolution on fundamental principles of official statistics in the
Economic Commission for Europe. In 
Report of the Thirty-Ninth Plenary Session
,June 17-21, 1991.U.S. General Accounting Office
1995Statistical Agencies:  Adherence to Guidelines and Coordination of Budgets
.Washington, D.C.U.S. Office of Management and Budget
1985Statistical policy directive on compilation, release, and evaluation of principal
federal economic indicators.  Federal Register
 50(186):932-934.1997Order providing for the confidentiality of statistical information.  
Federal Register
62(124):35044-35050.2000Statistical Programs of the United States Government, Fiscal Year 2001
.  Statistical
Policy Office, Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, U.S. Office of
Management and Budget.  Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Government Printing Office.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.45APPENDIX
 AFundamental Principles of
Official Statistics of the Statistical
Commission of the United Nations
[Excerpted from the report of the Statistical Commission on its Special
Session, held in New York 11-15 April 1994.  Official Records of the Eco-
nomic and Social Council, 1994, Supplement No. 9.]
Action taken by the Commission59.  The Commission adopted the fundamental principles of official statis-
tics as set out in ECE decision C (47), but incorporating a revised pre-
amble.  The preamble and principles, as adopted, are set out below:
FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF OFFICIAL STATISTICS
The Statistical Commission,Bearing in mind that official statistical information is an essential basis
for development in the economic, demographic, social and environ-
mental fields and for mutual knowledge and trade among the States
and peoples of the world,Bearing in mind that the essential trust of the public in official statisti-
cal information depends to a large extent on respect for the fundamen-

tal values and principles which are the basis of any society which seeks
to understand itself and to respect the rights of its members,
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
Bearing in mind that the quality of official statistics, and thus the qual-
ity of the information available to the Government, the economy and

the public depends largely on the cooperation of citizens, enterprises,
and other respondents in providing appropriate and reliable data
needed for necessary statistical compilations and on the cooperation

between users and producers of statistics in order to meet usersÕ needs,
Recalling the efforts of governmental and non-governmental organiza-
tions active in statistics to establish standards and concepts to allow
comparisons among countries,Recalling also the International Statistical Institute Declaration of Pro-
fessional Ethics,
Having expressed the opinion that resolution C (47), adopted by the
Economic Commission for Europe on 15 April 1992, is of universal
significance,Noting that, at its eighth session, held at Bangkok in November 1993,
the Working Group of Statistical Experts, assigned by the Committee
on Statistics of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the
Pacific to examine the Fundamental Principles, had agreed in principle
to the ECE version and had emphasized that those principles were
applicable to all nations,Noting also that, at its eighth session, held at Addis Ababa in March
1994, the Joint Conference of African Planners, Statisticians and De-
mographers, considered that the Fundamental Principles of Official

Statistics are of universal significance,
Adopts the present principles of official statistics:
1.  Official statistics provide an indispensable element in the informa-
tion system of a democratic society, serving the Government, the

economy and the public with data about the economic, demographic,social and environmental situation.  To this end, official statistics that
meet the test of practical utility are to be compiled and made available

on an impartial basis by official statistical agencies to honour citizensÕ
entitlement to public information.Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
472.  To retain trust in official statistics, the statistical agencies need to
decide according to strictly professional considerations, including sci-

entific principles and professional ethics, on the methods and proce-
dures for the collection, processing, storage and presentation of statis-
tical data.3.  To facilitate a correct interpretation of the data, the statistical agen-
cies are to present information according to scientific standards on the

sources, methods and procedures of the statistics.
4.  The statistical agencies are entitled to comment on erroneous inter-
pretation and misuse of statistics.
5.  Data for statistical purposes may be drawn from all types of sources,
be they statistical surveys or administrative records.  Statistical agencies
are to choose the source with regard to quality, timeliness, costs and
the burden on respondents.
6.  Individual data collected by statistical agencies for statistical compi-
lation, whether they refer to natural or legal persons, are to be strictly
confidential and used exclusively for statistical purposes.
7.  The laws, regulations and measures under which the statistical sys-
tems operate are to be made public.
8.  Coordination among statistical agencies within countries is essen-
tial to achieve consistency and efficiency in the statistical system.
9.  The use by statistical agencies in each country of international con-
cepts, classifications and methods promotes the consistency and effi-
ciency of statistical systems at all official levels.
10.  Bilateral and multilateral cooperation in statistics contributes to
the improvement of systems of official statistics in all countries.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48APPENDIX
 BSelected Federal Statistical World Wide
Web Sites, May 2000
Executive Office of the President
Federal Statistics Briefing Rooms
Economic Statistics (ESBR): www.whitehouse.gov/fsbr/esbr.html
Social Statistics (SSBR): www.whitehouse.gov/fsbr/ssbr.html
Office of Management and Budget (OMB): www.whitehouse.gov/
OMBFederal Committee on Statistical Methodology: www.fcsm.gov
Federal Interagency Council on Statistical Policy, Federal Statistics:
www.fedstats.gov
Federal Interagency Forum on Aging-Related Statistics:
www.agingstats.gov
Federal Interagency Forum on Child and Family Statistics:
childstats.gov
Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC): www.cpsc.gov

Department of Agriculture (USDA): www.usda.gov
Agricultural Research Service (ARS): www.ars.usda.gov
Note: This list is adapted from a listing in U.S. Office of Management and Budget
(2000) and includes federal statistical agencies, as well as other federal agencies that produce
statistical information.Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
49Economic Research Service (ERS): www.ers.usda.gov
Food and Nutrition Service (FNS): www.fns.usda.gov/fns
Foreign Agricultural Service (FAS): www.fas.usda.gov
Forest Service (FS): www.fs.fed.us
National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS): www.usda.gov/nass
Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS): www.nrcs.usda.gov
Department of Commerce: www.doc.gov
Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA): www.bea.doc.gov
Census Bureau: www.census.gov
Economics and Statistics Administration (ESA): www.esa.doc.gov
International Trade Administration (ITA): www.ita.doc.gov
National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS): www.nmfs.gov
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA):
www.noaa.gov
Department of Defense: www.defenselink.mil
Army Corps of Engineers (CORPS):
www.environmental.usace.army.mil
Defense Manpower Data Center (DMDC): www.dmdc.osd.mil
Directorate for Information Operations and Reports (DIOR):
web1.whs.osd.mil/diorhome.htmDepartment of Education: www.ed.gov
National Center for Education Statistics (NCES): nces.ed.gov
Department of Energy: www.doe.gov
Energy Information Administration (EIA): www.eia.doe.gov
Office of Environment, Safety and Health (EH): www.eh.doe.gov
Department of Health and Human Services: www.dhhs.gov
Administration for Children and Families (ACF): www.acf.dhhs.gov
Agency for Health Care Research and Quality (AHRQ):
www.ahcpr.gov
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR):
www.atsdr.cde.gov
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC): www.cdc.gov

Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA): www.hcfa.gov
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA):
www.hrsa.dhhs.gov
Indian Health Service (IHS): www.ihs.gov
National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS): www.cdc.gov/nchs
National Institute on Aging (NIA): www.nih.gov/nia
National Institutes of Health (NIH): www.nih.gov
Office of Population Affairs (OPA): www.dhhs.gov/progorg/opa
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation (ASPE):
aspe.os.dhhs.gov
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMHSA): www.samhsa.gov
Department of Housing and Urban Development: www.hud.gov
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Policy Development and
Research (PD&R): www.huduser.org
Department of the Interior: www.doi.gov
Bureau of Reclamation: www.usbr.gov
Minerals Management Service (MMS): www.mms.gov
National Park Service (NPS): www.nps.gov
United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS): www.fws.gov
United States Geological Survey (USGS): www.usgs.gov
Department of Justice: www.usdoj.gov
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS): www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs
Bureau of Prisons (BoP): www.bop.gov
Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA): www.usdoj.gov/dea
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI): www.fbi.gov
Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS): www.ins.usdoj.gov
Department of Labor: www.dol.gov
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS): www.bls.gov
Employment and Training Administration (ETA): www.doleta.gov
Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA): www.msha.gov
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA):
www.osha.gov
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Policy (OASP): www.dol.gov/
dol/aspPrinciples and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
51Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration (PWBA): www.dol.gov/
dol/pwba
Department of State: www.state.gov
Agency for International Development (AID): www.usaid.gov
Department of Transportation: www.dot.gov
Bureau of Transportation Statistics (BTS): www.bts.gov
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA): www.faa.gov
Federal Highway Administration (FHWA): www.fhwa.dot.gov
Federal Railroad Administration (FRA): www.fra.dot.gov
Federal Transit Administration (FTA): www.fta.dot.gov
Maritime Administration (MARAD): www.marad.dot.gov
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA):
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/ncsa
Department of the Treasury: www.ustreas.gov
Internal Revenue Service (IRS): www.irs.ustreas.gov
Statistics of Income (SOI): www.irs.ustreas.gov/tax_stats/index.html
United States Customs Service: www.customs.treas.gov
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA): www.va.gov

Environmental Protection Agency (EPA): www.epa.gov
Office of Environmental Information: www.epa.gov/oei
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA): www.fema.gov
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA): www.nasa.gov
National Science Foundation: www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs
Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences:
www.nsf.gov/sbe
Methodology, Measurement, and Statistics Program: www.nsf.gov/
sbe/ses/mms/start.htmScience Resources Studies Division: www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/stats.htm
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
Small Business Administration (SBA): www.sba.gov/advo/stats
Social Security Administration (SSA): www.ssa.gov
Office of Research, Evaluation, and Statistics: www.ssa.gov/statistics/
ores_home.html
INDEX OF FEDERAL STATISTICAL SITES LISTED
Administration for Children and FamiliesÑsee Department of Health
and Human Services
Agency for Health Care Research and QualityÑsee Department of
Health and Human Services
Agency for International DevelopmentÑsee Department of State
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease RegistryÑsee Department of
Health and Human Services
Agricultural Research ServiceÑsee Department of Agriculture
Army Corps of EngineersÑsee Department of Defense

Bureau of Economic AnalysisÑsee Department of Commerce
Bureau of Justice StatisticsÑsee Department of Justice
Bureau of Labor StatisticsÑsee Department of Labor
Bureau of PrisonsÑsee Department of Justice
Bureau of ReclamationÑsee Department of the Interior
Bureau of Transportation StatisticsÑsee Department of Transportation
Census BureauÑsee Department of Commerce
Centers for Disease Control and PreventionÑsee Department of Health
and Human Services
Consumer Product Safety CommissionÑsee Consumer Product Safety
CommissionDefense Manpower Data CenterÑsee Department of Defense
Directorate for Information Operations and ReportsÑsee Department of
DefenseDirectorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic SciencesÑsee National
Science Foundation
Drug Enforcement AdministrationÑsee Department of Justice
Economic Research ServiceÑsee Department of Agriculture
Economic Statistics Briefing RoomÑsee Executive Office of the
President, Federal Statistics Briefing Rooms
Economics and Statistics AdministrationÑsee Department of Commerce
Employment and Training AdministrationÑsee Department of Labor
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
53Energy Information AdministrationÑsee Department of Energy
Environmental Protection AgencyÑsee Environmental Protection
AgencyFederal Aviation AdministrationÑsee Department of Transportation
Federal Bureau of InvestigationÑsee Department of Justice
Federal Committee on Statistical MethodologyÑsee Executive Office of
the President, Office of Management and Budget
Federal Emergency Management AgencyÑsee Federal Emergency
Management AgencyFederal Highway AdministrationÑsee Department of Transportation
Federal Interagency Council on Statistical Policy, Federal StatisticsÑsee
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget
Federal Interagency Forum on Aging-Related StatisticsÑsee Executive
Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget
Federal Interagency Forum on Child and Family StatisticsÑsee Executive
Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget
Federal Railroad AdministrationÑsee Department of Transportation
Federal Statistics Briefing RoomsÑsee Executive Office of the President
Federal Transit AdministrationÑsee Department of Transportation
Food and Nutrition ServiceÑsee Department of Agriculture
Foreign Agricultural ServiceÑsee Department of Agriculture
Forest ServiceÑsee Department of Agriculture
Health Care Financing AdministrationÑsee Department of Health and
Human Services
Health Resources and Services AdministrationÑsee Department of
Health and Human Services Immigration and Naturalization
ServiceÑsee Department of Justice
Indian Health ServiceÑsee Department of Health and Human Services
Internal Revenue ServiceÑsee Department of the Treasury
International Trade AdministrationÑsee Department of Commerce
Maritime AdministrationÑsee Department of Transportation
Methodology, Measurement, and Statistics ProgramÑsee National
Science Foundation, Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and
Economic SciencesMine Safety and Health AdministrationÑsee Department of Labor
Minerals Management ServiceÑsee Department of the Interior
National Aeronautics and Space AdministrationÑsee National
Aeronautics and Space Administration
National Agricultural Statistics ServiceÑsee Department of Agriculture
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
National Center for Education StatisticsÑsee Department of Education
National Center for Health StatisticsÑsee Department of Health and
Human Services
National Highway Traffic Safety AdministrationÑsee Department of
TransportationNational Institute on AgingÑsee Department of Health and Human
ServicesNational Institutes of HealthÑsee Department of Health and Human
ServicesNational Marine Fisheries ServiceÑsee Department of Commerce
National Oceanic and Atmospheric AdministrationÑsee Department of
Commerce
National Park ServiceÑsee Department of the Interior
National Science FoundationÑsee National Science Foundation
Natural Resources Conservation ServiceÑsee Department of Agriculture
Occupational Safety and Health AdministrationÑsee Department of
LaborOffice of Environmental InformationÑsee Environmental Protection
AgencyOffice of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and EvaluationÑsee
Department of Health and Human Services
Office of the Assistant Secretary for PolicyÑsee Department of Labor
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Policy Development and ResearchÑ
see Department of Housing and Urban Development
Office of Environment, Safety and HealthÑsee Department of Energy
Office of Environmental InformationÑsee Environmental Protection
AgencyOffice of Management and BudgetÑsee Executive Office of the President
Office of Population AffairsÑsee Department of Health and Human
ServicesOffice of Research, Evaluation, and StatisticsÑsee Social Security
AdministrationPension and Welfare Benefits AdministrationÑsee Department of Labor
Science Resources Studies DivisionÑsee National Science Foundation,
Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences
Small Business AdministrationÑsee Small Business Administration
Social Security AdministrationÑsee Social Security Administration
Social Statistics Briefing RoomÑsee Executive Office of the President,
Federal Statistics Briefing Rooms
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
55Statistics of Income DivisionÑsee Department of the Treasury
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services AdministrationÑsee
Department of Health and Human Services
United States Customs ServiceÑsee Department of the Treasury
United States Fish and Wildlife ServiceÑsee Department of the Interior
United States Geological SurveyÑsee Department of the Interior
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.