DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/10261Youth, Pornography, and the Internet480 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-08274-7 | DOI 10.17226/10261Dick Thornburgh and Herbert S. Lin, Editors, Committee to Study Tools andStrategies for Protecting Kids from Pornography and Their Applicability toOther Inappropriate Internet Content, National Research CouncilYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Dick Thornburgh and Herbert S. Lin, EditorsCommittee to Study Tools and Strategies for ProtectingKids from Pornography and Their Applicability
to Other Inappropriate Internet ContentComputer Science and Telecommunications BoardNational Research CouncilNATIONAL ACADEMY PRESSWashington, D.C.
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESS ¥ 2101 Constitution Avenue, N.W. ¥ Washington, D.C. 20418
NOTICE:  The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board
of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of theNational Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of
Medicine.  The members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their
special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.This study was supported by Grant No. 1999-JN-FX-0071 between the National Academy ofSciences and the U.S. Departments of Justice and Education; Grant No. P0073380 betweenthe National Academy of Sciences and the W.K. Kellogg Foundation; awards (unnumbered)
from the Microsoft Corporation and IBM; and internal funds of the National Research Coun-cil.  Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publicationare those of the authoring committee and do not necessarily reflect the views of the organi-
zations or agencies that provided support for this project.International Standard Book Number 0-309-08274-9
Library of Congress Control Number 2002110219Additional copies of this report are available from the National Academy Press, 2101 Consti-tution Avenue, N.W., Lock Box 285, Washington, DC 20055, (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313(in the Washington metropolitan area).This report is also available online at <http://www.nap.edu>.Copyright 2002 by the National Academy of Sciences.  All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of AmericaYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating soci-
ety of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedi-cated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general
welfare.  Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863,
the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government onscientific and technical matters.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts is president of the National
Academy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter
of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding
engineers.  It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its mem-
bers, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advis-ing the federal government.  The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors

engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages educationand research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers.  Dr. Wm. A.
Wulf is president of the National Academy of Engineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions inthe examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public.  The

Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciencesby its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, uponits own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education.
Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sci-
ences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with
the AcademyÕs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal gov-ernment.  Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the
Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the
National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in pro-viding services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineeringcommunities.  The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the

Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts and Dr. Wm. A. Wulf are chairman
and vice chairman, respectively, of the National Research Council.National Academy of SciencesNational Academy of Engineering
Institute of Medicine
National Research Council
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ivCOMMITTEE TO STUDY TOOLS AND STRATEGIESFOR PROTECTING KIDS FROM PORNOGRAPHYAND THEIR APPLICABILITY TO OTHERINAPPROPRIATE INTERNET CONTENTDICK THORNBURGH, Kirkpatrick & Lockhart LLP, Washington,D.C., ChairNICHOLAS J. BELKIN, Rutgers University
WILLIAM J. BYRON, Holy Trinity Parish
SANDRA L. CALVERT, Georgetown University
DAVID FORSYTH, University of California, Berkeley
DANIEL GEER, @Stake Inc.
LINDA HODGE, Parent Teacher Association
MARILYN GELL MASON, Tallahassee, Florida
MILO MEDIN, Excite@Home
JOHN B. RABUN, National Center for Missing and ExploitedChildrenROBIN RASKIN, Ziff Davis Media
ROBERT J. SCHLOSS, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
JANET WARD SCHOFIELD, University of Pittsburgh
GEOFFREY R. STONE, University of Chicago
WINIFRED B. WECHSLER, Santa Monica, CaliforniaHERBERT S. LIN, Senior Scientist and Study DirectorGAIL PRITCHARD, Program Officer (through June 2001)
JOAH G. IANOTTA, Research Assistant
JANICE M. SABUDA, Senior Project Assistant
DANIEL D. LLATA, Senior Project Assistant (through May 2001)
MICKELLE RODRIGUEZ, Senior Project Assistant (throughFebruary 2001)Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARDDAVID D. CLARK, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, ChairDAVID BORTH, Motorola Labs
JAMES CHIDDIX, AOL Time Warner
JOHN M. CIOFFI, Stanford University
ELAINE COHEN, University of Utah
W. BRUCE CROFT, University of Massachusetts at Amherst
THOMAS E. DARCIE, AT&T Labs Research
JOSEPH FARRELL, University of California, Berkeley
JEFFREY M. JAFFE, Bell Laboratories, Lucent Technologies
ANNA KARLIN, University of Washington
BUTLER W. LAMPSON, Microsoft Corporation
EDWARD D. LAZOWSKA, University of Washington
DAVID LIDDLE, U.S. Venture Partners
TOM M. MITCHELL, Carnegie Mellon University
DONALD NORMAN, Nielsen Norman Group
DAVID A. PATTERSON, University of California, Berkeley
HENRY (HANK) PERRITT, Chicago-Kent College of Law
BURTON SMITH, Cray Inc.
TERRY SMITH, University of California, Santa Barbara
LEE SPROULL, New York University
JEANNETTE M. WING, Carnegie Mellon UniversityMARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL, DirectorHERBERT S. LIN, Senior Scientist
ALAN S. INOUYE, Senior Program Officer
JON EISENBERG, Senior Program Officer
LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Program Officer
CYNTHIA PATTERSON, Program Officer
STEVEN WOO, Program Officer
JANET BRISCOE, Administrative Officer
DAVID PADGHAM, Research Associate
MARGARET HUYNH, Senior Project Assistant
DAVID DRAKE, Senior Project Assistant
JANICE M. SABUDA, Senior Project Assistant
JENNIFER BISHOP, Senior Project Assistant
BRANDYE WILLIAMS, Staff AssistantYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viBOARD ON CHILDREN, YOUTH, AND FAMILIESEVAN CHARNEY, University of Massachusetts Medical School,ChairJAMES A. BANKS, University of Washington
DONALD COHEN, Yale University
THOMAS DEWITT, ChildrenÕs Hospital Medical Center ofCincinnatiMARY JANE ENGLAND, Washington Business Group on Health
MINDY FULLILOVE, Columbia University
PATRICIA GREENFIELD, University of California, Los Angeles
RUTH T. GROSS, Stanford University
KEVIN GRUMBACH, UCSF/San Francisco General Hospital
NEAL HALFON, UCLA School of Public Health
MAXINE HAYES, Washington State Department of Health
MARGARET HEAGARTY, Columbia University
REN…E R. JENKINS, Howard UniversityHARRIET KITZMAN, University of Rochester
SANDERS KORENMAN, Baruch College, CUNY
HON. CINDY LEDERMAN, Juvenile Justice Center, Dade County,FloridaVONNIE McLOYD, University of Michigan
GARY SANDEFUR, University of Wisconsin-Madison
ELIZABETH SPELKE, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
RUTH STEIN, Montefiore Medical CenterELEANOR E. MACCOBY (Liaison, Division of Behavioral and SocialSciences and Education), Stanford University (emeritus)WILLIAM ROPER (Liaison, IOM Council), University of North
Carolina, Chapel HillMICHELE D. KIPKE, Director (through September 2001)MARY GRAHAM, Associate Director, Dissemination andCommunicationsSONJA WOLFE, Administrative Associate
ELENA NIGHTINGALE, Scholar-in-Residence
JOAH G. IANNOTTA, Research AssistantYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiYouth, pornography, and the Internet.  The combination of these ele-
ments is a subject on which individuals from all walks of lifeÑparents,teachers, librarians, school administrators, library board members, legis-
lators, judges, and other concerned citizensÑhave thoughts and strongopinions.  Those with products and services to sell are also interested in

and concerned about the subject.  Some from the online adult entertain-

ment industry fear that efforts to restrict the access of children to certain
kinds of sexually explicit material on the Internet will impinge on what
they see as legitimate business opportunities to market their products and
services to adults.  Those with technology-based protection systems to

sell hope to capitalize on what they see as a growing market for solutions
to the problem, however that may be defined.Views in this subject area are highly polarized.  Because strongly held
values are at stake, the political debate is heated, and often characterized
by extreme views, inflammatory rhetoric, and half-truths.  Against the

backdrop of intense lobbying in the halls of Congress and many local
school and library board meetings in communities across the country, a
document assembling in one place the different dimensions and pros and
cons of approaches that might be taken to address the problem can help to
conduct the debate over Òwhat to doÓ in a more informed manner.
Thus, one purpose of this report is to provide a reasonably completeand thorough treatment of the problem and potential solutions that airs
all sides.  In addition, different communities or groups of readers are

likely to be interested in different aspects of this report.Preface
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiiPREFACE¥Parents will be interested in its description and assessment of areasonably comprehensive set of tools and strategies for protecting their
children on the Internet from exposure to inappropriate sexually explicit
material (and other inappropriate material for that matter), many of which
can be deployed in their homes.  Furthermore, to the extent that parents

understand the advantages and disadvantages of these various tools and
strategies, they can engage their legislators and local administrative bod-
ies more effectively.¥Adults responsible for children and youth in other settingsÑschool,libraries, after-school programs, camps, and so onÑwill be interested inthis description and assessment as well for classroom and other purposes,
but also in the political and organizational issues that surround the use of
these various tools and strategies.  Those responsible for education broadly

construed will also be attentive to the issues related to material that is
improperly or incorrectly identified as inappropriate for children and youth.
¥The information technology (IT) sector is likely to be interested infinding business opportunities for helping parents and others deal with
the issues as they see fit, while many commercial interests in the IT sector
and in other corners are concerned about the possibility of regulation.¥Law enforcement agencies may be interested in this report to helpclarify their roles and responsibilities in both preventive and tactical op-
erations, and may benefit from the reportÕs overview about existing lawin this area.  The judiciary, especially at the local level, may find perspec-
tive and understanding that can be useful in trying and hearing cases
touching on the subject matter of this report.¥Policy makers will be interested in all of these dimensions of theissue, and must decide how to weigh them in their attempts to formulate
appropriate policy.  Further, much of this report points to legal, eco-

nomic, technical, and social realities that affect how legislation and regu-
lation might actually play out.ORIGIN OF THIS STUDYIn November 1998, the U.S. Congress mandated a study by the Na-tional Research Council (NRC) to address pornography on the Internet
(Box P.1).  In response to this mandate, the Computer Science and Tele-

communications Board (CSTB), responsible within the National Acad-
emies for issues at the nexus of information technology and public policy,
engaged the NRCÕs Board on Children, Youth, and Families (BOCYF) toform a committee with expertise diverse enough to address this topic.
The resulting committee was composed of a diverse group of people,
including individuals with expertise in constitutional law, law enforce-
ment, libraries and library science, information retrieval and representa-Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACEixBox P.1Legislative Language That Led to This StudyIn Public Law 105-314, the Protection of Children from Sexual Predators Act of1998, Title IX, Section 901, the U.S. Congress passed the following legislation:SEC. 901. STUDY ON LIMITING THE AVAILABILITY OF PORNOGRAPHYON THE INTERNET.(a) IN GENERALÑNot later than 90 days after the date of enactment ofthis Act, the Attorney General shall request that the National Academy ofSciences, acting through its National Research Council, enter into a contract
to conduct a study of computer-based technologies and other approaches to
the problem of the availability of pornographic material to children on the
Internet, in order to develop possible amendments to Federal criminal law and
other law enforcement techniques to respond to the problem.(b) CONTENTS OF STUDYÑThe study under this section shall addresseach of the following:(1)The capabilities of present-day computer-based control technologies
for controlling electronic transmission of pornographic images.(2)Research needed to develop computer-based control technologies to
the point of practical utility for controlling the electronic transmis-sion of pornographic images.(3)Any inherent limitations of computer-based control technologies for
controlling electronic transmission of pornographic images.(4)Operational policies or management techniques needed to ensure
the effectiveness of these control technologies for controlling elec-tronic transmission of pornographic images.(c) FINAL REPORTÑNot later than 2 years after the date of enactment ofthis Act, the Attorney General shall submit to the Committees on the Judiciary
of the House of Representatives and the Senate a final report of the study
under this section, which report shallÑ(1)set forth the findings, conclusions, and recommendations of the Council;
and(2)be submitted by the Committees on the Judiciary of the House of
Representatives and the Senate to relevant Government agencies and
committees of Congress.Based on this language and as noted in the text, the statement of task was nego-
tiated with the Department of Justice in ways that would lead to a report that placedthe issue of concern in context and would provide a range of useful alternatives for
constituencies affected by this issue.  The charge below guided the work of the

Committee to Study Tools and Strategies for Protecting Kids from Pornography:The project, requested by the U.S. Congress, seeks to frame the problem in anappropriate social, legal, educational, technological, and ethical context; presentwhat is and is not scientifically known about the impact on children of exposure to
sexually explicit material; and provide information useful to various decision-mak-
ing communities (e.g., parents, the information technology industry, school boards,
librarians, and government at all levels) about possible courses of action across ed-
ucational, legislative, law enforcement, and technological fronts. While it does notpresent explicit recommendations about actions that should be taken, it does pro-vide findings and conclusions that result from committee deliberations.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xPREFACEtion, developmental and social psychology, Internet and other informa-tion technologies, ethics, and education.CSTB, with input from BOCYF, developed a proposal that was re-sponsive to the legislative mandate.  As a result of discussions with the

Department of JusticeÕs Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Pre-vention, the Department of Education, and various private companies in
the information technology industry, the studyÕs statement of work wasadjusted to include non-technological strategies as well as technology
options for protection and to address ÒpornographyÓ as the primary sys-
tematic focus of the studyÕs exploration of inappropriate content, withother areas addressed as appropriate for context-setting purposes, ex-
plored incidentally rather than systematically.Further, the negotiated statement of work noted that the final reportwould place the issue of concern in context, provide a range of useful
alternatives for constituencies affected by this issue, and explicate the
foundation for a more coherent and objective local and national debate on
the subject of Internet Òpornography,Ó but would avoid making specific
policy recommendations that embed particular social values in this area.METHODOLOGY AND CAVEATSAs with most controversial issues, the reality of both problem andsolution is much more complex than the rhetoric would indicate.  To

complement the expertise of its members and to understand the issue
more effectively, the committee took a great deal of testimony over the
course of its study.  In its plenary sessions, it heard testimony from some

20 parties with differing points of view and expertise; these parties are
identified in Appendix A (which provides the agendas of the various
plenary sessions).  It held two workshops to explore both technical and

non-technical dimensions of the issue; summaries of these workshops
were published prior to the publication of this report.1Members of the committee also visited a range of communities acrossthe United States to hear firsthand from the various constituenciesÑnotthe least of which were the children involved.  Thus, the committee con-

ducted seven site visits from April through June 2001 in a variety of1See National Research Council and Institute of Medicine, 2001, Nontechnical Strategies to Re-duce ChildrenÕs Exposure to Inappropriate Material on the Internet: Summary of a Workshop,Board on Children, Youth, and Families and Computer Science and Telecommunications Board,Joah G. Iannotta, ed., National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.; and Computer Science and Tele-
communications Board, 2002, Technical, Business, and Legal Dimensions of Protecting Childrenfrom Pornography on the Internet: Proceedings of a Workshop, National Academy Press, Washing-ton, D.C.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACExigeographical locales: Austin, Texas, on April 3-4; Greenville, South Caro-lina, on April 17-18; Salt Lake City, Utah, on April 26-27; San Diego,
California, on May 2-3; Blacksburg, Virginia, on May 8-9; Coral Gables,
Florida, on May 30-June 1; and Redding, Shelton, Bristol, Kent, and
Hamden, Connecticut, on June 1-2.Finally, the committee issued a call for white papers and receivedabout 10 (all of which are posted on the project Web site at <http:/
/www.itasnrc.org>).  The committee noted the existence of other work and

reports on the subject, such as the final report of the COPA Commission,2the report of the House Committee on Commerce on the ChildrenÕs OnlineProtection Act,3 Safeguarding the Wired Schoolhouse from the Consortiumon School Networking,4 and various efforts supported by the Bertelsmann
Foundation (e.g., Protecting Our Children on the Internet5).  And, because
the committee was, by design, composed of individuals with varying
expertise and perspectives on the issues, the committee learned from it-
selfÑthrough argument and discussion.  As a result of this process, it is
fair to say that every committee member came to understand the issue
differently than when he or she first joined the studyÑand left behindany notion that an instant solution could be found.This study is not a comprehensive study of safety on the Internet, noreven one on safety for children on the Internet.  The primary emphasis of
this study is on approaches to protect youth from pornographyÑor moreproperly, sexually explicit material deemed inappropriate for minorsÑthough the relevance of these approaches to some other kinds of material
deemed inappropriate receives some attention as well.  This emphasis

does not reflect a consensus of the committee that inappropriate sexually
explicit material isÑor is notÑthe most important safety issue on theInternet for children, but rather the fact that such material was a central
element in the legislative mandate to the committee.This study is not a study on the impact of exposure to such material,nor does it come to a consensus on this question.  Committee members

had, and continue to have, a variety of different views.  Committee mem-

bers do share common views about the undesirability of exposing chil-
dren to some kinds of sexually explicit material, but they do not share2The COPA Commission was established as part of the Child Online Protection Act, discussed inChapter 4.  Information on the COPA Commission can be found online at <http://www.copacommission.

org>.3H.R. No. 105-775.4Consortium for School Networking.  2001.  
Safeguarding the Wired Schoolhouse.  Available
online at <http://www.safewiredschools.org/pubs_and_tools/white_paper.pdf>.5Jens Waltermann and Marcel Machill, eds.  2000.  
Protecting Our Children on the Internet.Bertelsmann Foundation Publishers, Gutersloh, Germany.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiPREFACEviews about other kinds of sexually explicit material.  But coming to
consensus on a world view regarding all sexually explicit material was
not the task given to the committee, and the consensus on the material
contained in this reportÑwhich focuses on things that communities cando to help themselvesÑindicates that such agreement is not necessary formaking informed decisions.Note also that this report mentions a variety of companies, products,services, and Web sites.  These references are for illustrative purposes

only, and their mention should not be taken by readers as an endorse-
ment in any way.SCOPE AND PURPOSE OF THIS REPORTThis report surveys the technical, legal, law enforcement, educational,
and economic dimensions of the problem of coping with materials and
experiences on the Internet that are inappropriate for children.  In addi-

tion, it describes a range of social and educational strategies, technology-
based tools, and legal and regulatory approaches that can help children to
use the Internet more safely.  Thus, this report provides a framework

within which responsible adults can develop their own approachesÑembodying their own valuesÑfor the children in their care.This study does not make recommendations about what communitiesshould do about the problem.  Although this study explicates the factors

that can enter into choices about appropriate approaches to protecting
kids from inappropriate sexually explicit material on the Internet, the
choice of any particular approach implies a particular weighting of these
various factors, and hence embeds a particular value choice, which the
committee was not charged to make.  Rather, the study emphasizes the

information needed to conduct a reasoned discussion among those seek-
ing to decide what to do.  Any given community
Õs decision will be shapedby the values it brings to that decision-making process.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSMany people contributed to this complex study and comprehensivereport.  The committee took testimony from many individuals at its ple-

nary sessions and at site visits.  The site visits in particular were valuable
precisely because they gave committee members a sense of life Òin thetrenches,Ó allowing them to put into appropriate perspective the input
received during plenary sessions and contributed in white papers.  (Ap-

pendix A provides the agendas of all meetings and site visits.)Talking to children about their perceptions and reactions to sexuallyexplicit material on the Internet is obviously a sensitive and delicate un-Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACExiiidertaking, and the committee is deeply grateful to those individuals andschools that allowed their students, teachers, and administrators to speak
freely with committee members and staff.These site visits would not have been possible without the assistanceof people at each locale.  The committee and staff would like to acknowl-

edge the following individuals:¥In Austin, Jeanette Larson, youth services manager, Austin Pub-lic Library, provided numerous leads regarding whom to contact to
arrange focus group sessions.  Many thanks also to Randy Strickland for

brokering sessions with students and teachers at John Connally High
School in Pflugerville, Texas; Sulema Vielman, for sessions with librar-
ians at Cepeda Branch Library, Austin, Texas; Julia Cuba of the Girl
Scouts Lone Star Council for her advice; and Angela Knott-Fryer of
Settlement Home.¥Arrangements in Greenville were facilitated by Norman Belk, im-mediate past president of the South Carolina Library Association, and
Beverly White, executive director, Education Technology Services, the
School District of Greenville County.  The committee is also grateful to

Rosia Gardner of Mauldin Middle School, Simpsonville, South Carolina;
Michael Evans, branch manager of the W. Jack Greer Library of Mauldin;
Sheila Bradley and Rodney C. Thompson of the Phillis Wheatley Associa-
tion, Greenville; and Ginger Stuart, interim principal, Greenville Senior
High Academy of Academic Excellence.¥The committee thanks Chip Ward, assistant director, and NancyTessman, director, of the Salt Lake City Library, for their willingness to
host sessions, make contacts, and suggest leads to staff.  It also thanks

Laura Hunter, director of content, Utah Education Network; Paula Hous-
ton, obscenity and pornography complaints ombudsman, Office of the
Attorney General; Clint Spindler, principal, Tooele Junior High School,
Tooele, Utah; and Sandra Shepard, principal, Tooele High School, Tooele,
Utah, for their contributions to the site visit.¥In San Diego, Suzanne Hess of El Cajon Library in El Cajon andCharlie Garten, director of technology in the Poway Unified School Dis-
trict, were pivotal in organizing library and school sessions.  The commit-

tee also thanks Paul Robinson, Rancho Bernardo High School; Walter
Desmond, Lincoln High School, San Diego; and Andrea Skorepa, direc-
tor, Florencia Gomez, youth service director, and Teresa Murillo, com-
puter lab coordinator at Casa Familia in San Ysidro, for hosting focus
group sessions.¥Sincere thanks are extended to Peggy Meszaros, director of theCenter for Information Technology Impacts on Children, Youth, and Fam-
ilies at the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, for herYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xivPREFACEextensive help in identifying and arranging focus groups in Blacksburg,Virginia.  The committee also thanks Gary McCoy, principal of Blacksburg

Middle School; Mary Fain, principal of Blacksburg High School; and An-
drew Michael Cohill, director of Blacksburg Electronic Village, for their
contributions to the site visit.¥In Coral Gables, Florida, the committee appreciates the assistanceof Anne Thompson, program commissioner of the National PTA; Karin
Brown, president of Miami-Dade County PTA; Joyce Corces, Coral Gables
High School; Alexander Rodriguez-Roia, Boys and Girls Club of Miami;
and Jenine Gendron, Fischler Graduate School of Education and Human
Resources, Nova Southeastern University, Ft. Lauderdale.¥In Connecticut, the committee appreciates the assistance of ArleneLiscinsky, treasurer of the Connecticut State PTA, for the Shelton visit;
Therese Duncan, vice president for legislation of the Connecticut State
PTA, for the Kent visit; Deborah Walsh, president of the Connecticut State
PTA, for the Hamden visit; and Beverly Bobroske, president of the Con-
necticut Association of Boards of Education, for the Bristol visit.Most of all, the committee appreciates the parents and students fortheir frank participation in the focus group sessions that took place dur-
ing the site visits.In the initial stages of project development, David Eisner from AmericaOnline was instrumental in convening representatives from the online in-
dustry to discuss the project.  As a result of these meetings, the NRC came

to understand the concerns of this community in greater detail.The committee members also extend their appreciation to the numer-ous presenters who briefed them during the project.  Of particular interest

was a special session at the committeeÕs December 2000 workshop withcommunity teams.  Team members were charged with listening to the

expert presentations and then applying what they had learned, as well as
their own experience, to a hypothetical scenario.  Committee members

engaged community teams as they reported their thoughts about applica-
tion.  The purpose of this activity was to provide information to the com-
mittee regarding how the expert but largely theoretical testimony might
be interpreted and applied in practical terms by education and library
professionals working in the field.  For their participation in this activity,
the committee thanks Paulette Armstrong, Carol Bird, Stephen Boyles,
Trina Brown, Andy Carvin, Deb Elder, Marjorie Geldon, William Gid-
dings, Wayne Hartschuh, Marge Medd, David Milhon, Irene E. Millett,
Sandra Patton, Jeana Pulis, Mike Westmoreland, Arthur Wolinsky, and in
particular, for their enormous contribution to orchestrating the commu-
nity teams, Sara Fitzgerald and Keith Krueger of the Consortium for
School Networking.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACExvThe committee also appreciates the hundreds of suggestions and con-structive criticism provided by the reviewers of an early draft of this
report.  That input helped the committee to sharpen its message and

strengthen its presentation.Within the NRC, the lead unit on the project was the Computer Sci-ence and Telecommunications Board.  However, the committee received

a high level of support from members and staff of the Board on Children,
Youth, and FamiliesÑand specifically calls attention to the critical rolesplayed by Joah Ianotta, research assistant for BOCYF, in developing the
summary of the first workshop on non-technical strategies, and by Gail
Pritchard, previously staff officer for CSTB, and Mickelle Rodriguez,
former senior project assistant, in organizing the site visits under very
trying conditions.Finally, grateful thanks are offered to Microsoft, IBM, and the KelloggFoundation, whose financial support for this project was essential in
rounding out the sponsorship of the Departments of Justice and Educa-
tion.  CSTB
Õs sponsors enable but do not influence its projects.A PERSONAL NOTE FROM THE CHAIRThe National Academies are well known for producing authoritativereports on controversial subjects.  It is the hope of the committee that this

report will be seen as comprehensive and authoritative, but I believe it is
bound to disappoint a number of readers.  It will disappoint those who

expect a technological Òquick fixÓ to the challenge of pornography on theInternet.  It will disappoint those who suggest that an aggressive law

enforcement effort is all that is necessary to shut down pornography pur-
veyors of all types.  It will disappoint parents, school officials, and librar-
ians who seek surrogates to fulfill the responsibilities of training and
supervision needed to truly protect children from inappropriate sexual
materials on the Internet.  And it will disappoint free speech absolutists

who maintain that children have an unrestricted right to access whatever
materials they choose to read or view in todayÕs society.Many of the members of this committee, including its chair, broughtto our task somewhat simplistic views of the challenges implicit in our
charge.  My own views were shaped by a career in law enforcement

during which time I learned that the issue of children and pornography is
highly political and emotionally volatile.  As a parent and a grandparent,
I also feel that I have a personal stake in this issue.I think it is fair to say that all committee members recognize that wefinish our task enriched by the welter of material developed for our use
and by the exchanges that took place among us.  Most of us are somewhat

chastened, I suspect, by adherence to our earlier views.  For, in truth, as
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xviPREFACEour report spells out in great detail, there are no easy answers to thequestions posed to our society by the proliferation of sexually explicit
materials and their ready availability to children, particularly through the
modern miracle we know as the Internet.Today our society is awash in graphic, sexually explicit materials thatare widely available in nearly every medium of communicationÑprint,audio, and videoÑand in nearly every imaginable setting from home andschool to overnight lodging.  Much of the material with which this report

is concerned was clearly violative of the obscenity laws a decade or so
ago, but seldom are prosecutions brought in this 21st century.The ubiquitous nature of the Internet poses special challenges forthose concerned with this phenomenon.  According to the U.S. Census,

two-thirds of U.S. school-age children had home access to a personal
computer in 2000.6  And, most of these computers provide access to the
Internet.  These figures are even higher when school-provided access is

added, and 90 percent of our children have Internet access in either homes
or school.The rapid growth in the availability of Internet images during the lastdecade has posed two specific problems in the conduct of this study.  First

is the private nature of Internet usage.  Parental and teacher or librarian

supervision is not nearly as easy when children seek or are inadvertently
exposed to sexually explicit materials on the Internet as when such im-
ages are available in books or on the family television set.  ÒPolicingÓ by
responsible adults is much more difficult when the Internet is involved.Moreover, the fact that the Internet is a worldwide method of com-munication creates two special problems for law enforcementÑevenwhen the subject matter is what has been traditionally outlawed as ob-
scene. U.S. Supreme Court decisions defining what is ÒobsceneÓ depend,
among other things, on the development of Òcommunity standardsÓagainst which the offending materials may be measured.  What is the

ÒcommunityÓ for a medium that is worldwide in its reach?  In addition, as
the report notes, much of the pornography available on the Internet in the
United States has its origins outside our borders and beyond the reach of
law enforcement officials here.  These are truly vexing challenges to even
the most capable of modern criminal investigators and prosecutors.The breadth of background and experience of the members of thiscommittee was a significant advantage in pursuing our charge.  Likewise,

the process undertaken by the committee was designed to seek out and
wrestle with the many issues implicit in that charge.  We sought to order
6See U.S. Census Press Release.  2001.  Ò9-in-10 School-Age Children Have Computer Access;
Internet Use Pervasive, Census Bureau Reports.Ó  September 6.  Available online at <http://
www.census.gov/Press-Release/www/2001/cb01-147.html>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACExviiour inquiry in a way that ensured that we heard from all sides and repre-sentatives of every interested point of view.  Our field trips took us to

communities across the country so that we might learn firsthand the views
of parents, teachers, children, community leaders, and law enforcement
officials.  We also sought out experts in child development and child

psychology, those intimately familiar with the technology of the Internet,
and representatives of the adult entertainment industry themselves.  I am

satisfied that no potential sources of information or opinion were ne-
glected, even if certainty on many points remained elusive.In the final analysis, I believe that this report advances our under-standing of the problems of childrenÕs access to inappropriate sexual ma-terials on the Internet.  But much work remains to be done.  As noted, it is

essential that unresolved legal issues be put to rest.  An observation to the

effect that Òwe know obscenity when we see itÓ will no longer suffice.  We
live under the rule of law, and prosecutors and courts must attempt to
resolve these problems, however difficult that may be.In addition, it is by no means clear that enough research has beencarried out in this important area.  Social science research into the effects

of children viewing sexually explicit materials has not been carried out
because of ethical considerations (although one must wonder if such re-
luctance doesnÕt speak to the reality of the harm itself).  The computer
industry has produced some of the largest personal fortunes in American
history.  Yet it has been curiously reluctant to commit its massive re-

sources to leading-edge research and development efforts in this area.Although, as the report emphasizes, responsibility for meeting thischallenge truly begins at home, we must exert ourselves as a society to
provide every possible support mechanism to parents concerned about
this threat to their childrenÕs well-being.  No concerned parent, however
responsible and determined, should be left to his or her own devices in
dealing with such a truly global challenge.It may be that some members of the committee itself complete theirassignment somewhat disappointed in our accomplishments.  But, in life,

the important tasks are never easy ones.  If this task is deemed to be

important for the future of our society and our children, our comprehen-
sive study of the multitude of issues involved in protecting children from
pornography on the Internet may prove to be a building block for future
efforts that can provide workable answers to the difficult questions inher-
ent in such a study.If this study has succeeded even in part in its undertaking, credit isdue to the remarkable and talented men and women who contributed so
much of their valuable time, thought, and effort to this unique and daunt-
ing task.  They set themselves to this difficult task in the best traditions of

searching inquiry which have always characterized this great nation.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xviiiPREFACESpecial thanks are due to Dr. Herbert Lin, whose tireless efforts kept us ontrack and whose skills at managing a sometimes fractious group were
admirable indeed.Dick Thornburgh, ChairCommittee to Study Tools and Strategies for Protecting Kids from Pornog-
raphy and Their Applicability to Other Inappropriate Internet ContentApril 2002Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xixThis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen fortheir diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with pro-
cedures approved by the National Research CouncilÕs Report ReviewCommittee.  The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid

and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its pub-
lished report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets
institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to
the study charge.  The review comments and draft manuscript remain

confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process.  We wish

to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:Danni Ashe, DanniÕs Hard Drive,Libby Black, Boulder Valley School District,
Frederick P. Brooks, University of North Carolina,
Robert Corn-Revere, Hogan and Hartson LLP,
David Finkelhor, University of New Hampshire,
Elizabeth D. Liddy, Syracuse University,
Eleanor Maccoby, Stanford University,
Michael Miller, PC Magazine,
Anita M. Pampusch, Bush Foundation,
Michael Puma, The Urban Institute,
William J. Raduchel, AOL Time Warner,
Sally G. Reed, Norfolk Public Library,
Carol Lynn Roddy, Ohio Public Library Information Network,
Paul Rothstein, Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver, and Jacobson,Acknowledgment of ReviewersYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xxACKNOWLEDGMENTSLynne Shrum, University of Georgia,Jane M. Spinak, Columbia Law School,
Bruce Taylor, National Law Center for Children and Families,
Jody Townsend, Colorado PTA,
Joseph Turow, University of Pennsylvania,
Willis H. Ware, RAND Corporation,
Ellen Wartella, University of Texas at Austin,
Gio Wiederhold, Stanford University, and
Nancy Willard, University of Oregon.Although the reviewers listed above provided many constructive com-ments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or
recommendations, nor did they see the final draft of the report before its
release.  The review of this report was overseen by Lyle Jones, University of

North Carolina, and Eugene Volokh, UCLA Law School.  Appointed by the

National Research Council, they were responsible for making certain that
an independent examination of this report was carried out in accordance
with institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully
considered.  Responsibility for the final content of this report rests entirely

with the authoring committee and the institution.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xxiContentsEXECUTIVE SUMMARY1
PART I1INTRODUCTION17
1.1The Internet: Source of Promise, Source of Concern, 17

1.2A Critical Definitional Issue
ÑWhat Is ÒPornographyÓ?, 201.3Other Types of Inappropriate Material and Experiences, 22

1.4A Broad Spectrum of Opinion and Views, 25

1.5Focus and Structure of This Report, 28
2TECHNOLOGY31
2.1An Orientation to Cyberspace and the Internet, 31
2.1.1Characteristics of Digital Information, 31

2.1.2The Nature of the Internet Medium and a
Comparison to Other Media Types, 322.1.3Internet Access Devices, 35

2.1.4Connecting to the Internet, 36

2.1.5Identifying Devices on the Internet: The Role of
Addressing, 382.1.6Functionality of the Internet, 39

2.1.7Cost and Economics of the Internet, 47

2.1.8A Global Internet, 47

2.1.9The Relative Newness of the Internet, 48
2.2Technologies of Information Retrieval, 49
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xxiiCONTENTS2.3Technologies Related to Access Control and Policy
Enforcement, 51
2.3.1Filtering Technologies, 51

2.3.2Technologies for Authentication and Age
Verification, 592.3.3Encryption (and End-to-End Opacity), 65

2.3.4Anonymizers, 66

2.3.5Location Verification, 66
2.4What the Future May Bring, 68
3THE ADULT ONLINE ENTERTAINMENT INDUSTRY71
3.1The Structure and Scale of the Online Adult Entertainment
Industry, 723.2The Generation of Revenue , 74

3.3Practices Related to Minors, 78

3.4What the Future May Hold, 79
3.4.1The Structural Evolution of the Industry, 79

3.4.2Increased Regulation, 79

3.4.3Future Products and Services, 81
3.5Industry Structure, Product Differentiation, and Aggressive
Promotion, 824LEGAL AND REGULATORY ISSUES84
4.1The First Amendment, 84
4.1.1First Principles, 84

4.1.2The First Amendment, Pornography, and Obscenity, 86

4.1.3The First Amendment and Protecting Children from
Exposure to Sexually Explicit Material, 894.1.4The First Amendment Rights of Minors, 92

4.1.5The First Amendment and Child Pornography, 93

4.1.6The First Amendment in Public Libraries, 94

4.1.7The First Amendment in Public Schools, 95

4.1.8The First Amendment and the Commercial
Advertising of Sexually Explicit Material, 964.2Relevant Statutes and Common Law, 96
4.2.1Federal Obscenity Statutes, 96

4.2.2Child Pornography Statutes, 97

4.2.3The Communications Decency Act, 99

4.2.4The Child Online Protection Act, 101

4.2.5The Children
Õs Internet Protection Act, 1034.2.6The Children
Õs Online Privacy Protection Act, 1044.2.7State Statutes, 107

4.2.8Regulatory Efforts, 107
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSxxiii4.2.9International Dimensions, 112
4.3Law Enforcement, Training, and Education, 112
5CHILDREN, MEDIA, AND EXPOSURE TO SEXUALLY
EXPLICIT MATERIAL115
5.1Children and How They Use Media, 115

5.2Sexuality in Culture, 120

5.3The Role of Media in Providing Information on Sexuality
to Youth, 1235.4Dimensions of Exposure and Access to the Internet, 127
5.4.1Venues of Access, 127

5.4.2Sources and Channels of Exposure, 128

5.4.3Extent of Exposure, 132
5.5Internet Exposure to Sexually Explicit Material, Solicitations,
and Harassment, 136
5.5.1Deliberate Search for Sexually Explicit Material, 138

5.5.2Inadvertent Exposure to or Intrusion of Sexually
Explicit Material, 1385.5.3Sexual Solicitations and Approaches, 141

5.5.4Harassment, 142
6THE RESEARCH BASE ON THE IMPACT OF EXPOSURE
TO SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIAL:  WHAT THEORY

AND EMPIRICAL STUDIES OFFER143
6.1Theoretical Considerations, 143

6.2Empirical Work, 149
6.2.1Violence, 149

6.2.2Sexually Violent Material, 152

6.2.3Exposure to Non-violent Sexual Material, 153

6.2.4Caveats and Cautions, 155
6.3Factors Affecting the Impact on Minors of Exposure to
Sexually Explicit Material, 157
6.3.1Impact, 157

6.3.2Minors, 157

6.3.3Gender, 158

6.3.4Special Needs, 159

6.3.5Exposure, 159

6.3.6The Type of Sexually Explicit Material, 160
7BEYOND THE SCIENCE: PERSPECTIVES ON IMPACT
AND THE PUBLIC DEBATE161
7.1Challenges to Parents, 161

7.2Speculations and Other Perspectives on Possible Impact, 166
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xxivCONTENTS7.3Rhetorical Concerns and Issues of Public Debate, 172
7.4Judgments in the Absence of a Reliable Research Base, 175

7.5Concluding Observations, 178
PART II8APPROACHES TO PROTECTION FROM INAPPROPRIATE
MATERIAL183
8.1The Identification of Inappropriate Material, 183
8.1.1In Principle, 183

8.1.2In Practice, 186
8.2Dimensions of 
ÒProtection,Ó 188
8.3The Time Line of Protective Actions, 190

8.4Differing Institutional Missions of Schools and Libraries, 191

8.5The Politics of Protection and Inappropriate Material
ÑWho and When?, 1928.6Techniques of Protection, 194

8.7Approaches to Protection, 196
9LEGAL AND REGULATORY TOOLS201
9.1Vigorous Prosecutions of Obscene Material, 201

9.2Civil Liability for Presenting Obscene Material on the
Internet, 2059.3Options for Dealing with Material That Is Obscene
for Minors, 205
9.3.1Age Verification, 206

9.3.2Plain Brown Wrappers and Age Verification, 208

9.3.3Labeling of Material That Is Obscene for Minors, 209

9.3.4Prohibiting Spam That Is Obscene for Minors, 209

9.3.5Prohibiting the Practice of Mousetrapping to Web Sites
Containing Material That Is Obscene for Minors, 2129.4Enforcement of Record-Keeping Requirements, 213

9.5Streamlining the Process of Handling Violations, 214

9.6Self-Regulatory Approaches, 215

9.7General Observations, 216
10SOCIAL AND EDUCATIONAL STRATEGIES TO
DEVELOP PERSONAL AND COMMUNITY
RESPONSIBILITY218
10.1Foundations of Responsible Choice, 218

10.2Definition of a Social or Educational Strategy, 221

10.3Contextual Issues for Social and Educational Strategies, 222

10.4Parental Involvement and Supervision, 225
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSxxv10.5Peer Assistance, 233
10.6Acceptable Use Policies, 235

10.7After-the-Fact Strategies, 240

10.8Education, 242
10.8.1Internet Safety Education, 242

10.8.2Information and Media Literacy, 245

10.8.3Collateral Issues, 249
10.9Compelling and Safe Content, 250

10.10Public Service Announcements and Media Campaigns, 254

10.11Findings and Observations About Social and Educational
Strategies, 25611A PERSPECTIVE ON TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS258
11.1Technology-Based Tools, 258

11.2Contextual Issues for Technology-Based Tools, 261

11.3The Questions to Be Asked of Each Tool, 265
12TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS FOR USERS267
12.1Filtering and Content-Limited Access, 267
12.1.1What Is Filtering and Content-Limited Access?, 267

12.1.2How Well Does Filtering Work?, 275

12.1.3Who Decides What Is Inappropriate?, 286

12.1.4How Flexible and Usable Is the Product?, 289

12.1.5What Are the Costs of and the Infrastructure
Required for Filtering?, 29212.1.6What Does the Future Hold for Filtering?, 298

12.1.7What Are the Implications of Filtering Use?, 301

12.1.8Findings on Filters, 303
12.2Monitoring, 304
12.2.1What Is Monitoring?, 305

12.2.2How Well Does Monitoring Work?, 307

12.2.3Who Decides What Is Inappropriate?, 309

12.2.4How Flexible and Usable Are Products for
Monitoring?, 31012.2.5What Are the Costs and Infrastructure Required for
Monitoring?, 31112.2.6What Does the Future Hold for Monitoring?, 314

12.2.7What Are the Implications of Using Monitoring?, 315

12.2.8Findings on Monitoring, 316
12.3Tools for Controlling or Limiting 
ÒSpam,Ó 317
12.3.1What Are Technologies for Controlling Spam?, 318

12.3.2How Well Do Spam-Controlling Technologies
Work?, 319Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xxviCONTENTS12.3.3Who Decides What Is Spam?, 320
12.3.4How Flexible and Usable Are Products for Controlling
Spam?, 32012.3.5What Are the Costs and Infrastructure Required for
Using Spam-Control Products?, 32012.3.6What Does the Future Hold for Spam-Controlling
Systems?, 32112.3.7What are the Implications of Using Spam-Controlling
Systems?, 32112.3.8Findings on Spam-Controlling Technologies, 321
12.4Instant Help, 322
12.4.1What Is Instant Help?, 322

12.4.2How Well Might Instant Help Work?, 324

12.4.3Who Decides What Is Inappropriate?, 324

12.4.4How Flexible and Usable Is Instant Help?, 324

12.4.5What Are the Costs and Infrastructure Required for
Instant Help?, 32512.4.6What Does the Future Hold for Instant Help?, 325

12.4.7What Are the Implications of Using Instant
Help?, 32612.4.8Findings on Instant Help, 326
13TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS AVAILABLE TO
NON-END USERS327
13.1A .xxx Top-Level Domain, 327
13.1.1What Is a .xxx Top-level Domain?, 327

13.1.2How Well Would a .xxx Top-Level Domain
Work?, 33013.1.3Who Decides What Material Should Be Confined to
.xxx Web Sites?, 33213.1.4How Flexible and Usable Are Schemes Based on a
 .xxx Top-Level Domain?, 332
13.1.5What Are the Costs and Infrastructure Required
for a .xxx Top-Level Domain?, 33213.1.6What Does the Future Hold for a .xxx Top-Level
Domain?, 33313.1.7What Are the Implications of Using a .xxx
Top-Level Domain?, 33413.1.8Findings on a .xxx Top-Level Domain, 334
13.2A .kids Top-Level Domain, 335
13.2.1What is a .kids Top-level Domain?, 335

13.2.2How Well Would a .kids Top-Level Domain
Work?, 335Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSxxvii13.2.3Who Decides What Material Should Be Allowed in
 .kids Web Sites?, 337
13.2.4How Flexible and Usable Are Schemes Based on a
.kids Top-Level Domain?, 33713.2.5What Are the Costs and Infrastructure Required
for a .kids Top-Level Domain?, 33813.2.6What Does the Future Hold for a .kids Top-Level
Domain?, 33813.2.7What Are the Implications of Using a .kids Top-Level
Domain?, 33813.2.8Findings on a .kids Top-Level Domain, 339
13.3Age Verification Technologies, 339
13.3.1What Are Age Verification Technologies?, 340

13.3.2How Well Do Age Verification Technologies
Work?, 34113.3.3Who Decides What Is Inappropriate?, 343

13.3.4How Flexible and Usable Are Products for
Verifying Age?, 34413.3.5What Are the Costs and Infrastructure Required
for Age Verification?, 34413.3.6What Does the Future Hold for Age Verification
Systems?, 34513.3.7What Are the Implications of Using Age Verification
Systems?, 34713.3.8Findings on Age Verification Technologies, 348
13.4Tools for Protecting Intellectual Property, 349
13.4.1What Are Tools for Protecting Intellectual
Property?, 34913.4.2How Well Do Tools for Protecting Intellectual
Property Work?, 34913.4.3Who Decides What Is Inappropriate?, 351

13.4.4How Flexible and Usable Are Products for
Protecting Intellectual Property?, 35213.4.5What Are the Costs and Infrastructure Required for
Protecting Intellectual Property?, 35213.4.6What Does the Future Hold for Tools for
Protecting Intellectual Property?, 35213.4.7What Are the Implications of Tools for
Protecting Intellectual Property?, 35313.4.8Findings on Tools for Protecting Intellectual
Property, 353Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xxviiiCONTENTSPART III14FINDINGS, CONCLUSIONS, AND FUTURE NEEDS357
14.1Framing the Issue, 357
14.1.1Social Dimensions, 357

14.1.2Developmental Dimensions, 358

14.1.3Legal Dimensions, 359

14.1.4Technical Dimensions, 360

14.1.5Economic Dimensions, 361
14.2On the Impact on Children of Exposure to Sexually Explicit
Material and Experiences, 36214.3On Approaches to Protection, 364

14.4Trade-offs and Complexity, 368
14.4.1Social and Educational Trade-offs, 370

14.4.2Technology Trade-offs, 371

14.4.3Public Policy Trade-offs, 373
14.5Take-Away Messages for Different Parties, 374
14.5.1Parents, 374

14.5.2Teachers and Librarians, 378

14.5.3Industry, 380

14.5.4Makers of Public Policy, 383
14.6Research Needs, 386

14.7Conclusion, 387
APPENDIXESAINFORMATION-GATHERING SESSIONS OF THE
COMMITTEE391
BGLOSSARY AND ACRONYMS407

CSELECTED TECHNOLOGY ISSUES418

DSITE VISIT SYNTHESIS430

EBIOGRAPHIES434
INDEX445
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1The Internet is both a source of promise for our children and a sourceof concern. The Internet provides convenient access to a highly diverse
library of educational resources, enables collaborative study, and offers
opportunities for remote dialog with subject-matter experts.  It provides

information about hobbies and sports, and it allows children to engage
with other people on a near-infinite variety of topics.  Through online

correspondence, their circles of friendship and diversity of experience can
achieve a rich and international scope.  [Section 1.1]
Yet press reports have suggested to many that their children are vul-nerable to harm on the Internet.  While only a small fraction of material on

the Internet could reasonably be classified as inappropriate for children,
that small fraction is highly visible and controversial.1  If the full educa-
tional potential of the Internet for children is to be realized, such concerns
must be reasonably addressed.  [Section 1.1]
At the request of the U.S. Congress in 1998, the Computer Scienceand Telecommunications Board of the National Research Council as-
sembled a committee with expertise in many fields.  Based on a wide

range of information sources as well as the committeeÕs own expertise,Executive Summary1For purposes of this report, ÒmaterialÓ refers to that which may be seen or read (e.g.,images, movies, or text on a Web page), while ÒexperiencesÓ are interactive (e.g., talking to
a stranger through instant messages or chat rooms).  E-mail sent or received that is essen-
tially advertising is Òmaterial,Ó while a sequence of interactive e-mails corresponds to
Òexperiences.ÓYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETthis report seeks to frame the problem in a legal, educational, techno-logical, social, and societal context and to provide information useful to
various decision-making communitiesÑe.g., parents, the informationtechnology industry, school boards, librarians, and government at all
levelsÑabout possible courses of action to help children be safer in theiruse of the Internet.DEFINITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS IN PROTECTINGCHILDREN FROM INTERNET PORNOGRAPHYThe term ÒpornographyÓ lacks a well-defined meaning.  To be sure,
broad agreement may be found that some materials are or are not Òporno-graphic,Ó but for other materials, individual judgments about what is or is
not ÒpornographyÓ will vary.  In recognition of this essential point, the
report uses the term Òinappropriate sexually explicit materialÓ to under-
score the subjective nature of the term.  [Sections 1.2, 4.1]
The term ÒchildÓ is also problematic.  From birth to the age of legal
emancipation covers a very wide developmental range.  What is inappro-

priate for a 6-year-old to see may not be inappropriate for a 16-year-old to
see, and in particular, older high school students have information needs
for education that are very different from those of elementary school
students.  [Section 5.1 and Table 5.1]
Finally, ÒprotectionÓ is an ambiguous term.  For example, does 
Òpro-tectionÓ include preventing a child from obtaining inappropriate material
(sexual or otherwise) even when he or she is deliberately seeking such
material?  Or, does it mean shielding a child from inadvertent exposure?

Or, does it entail giving the child tools to cope effectively with exposure
to inappropriate material if he or she should come across it?  These sce-

narios pose conceptually different problems to solve.  [Section 8.2]
All of these ambiguities complicate enormously the debate in com-munities about the nature of the problem and what might or should be
done about it.SEXUALITY IN MEDIAThe fact that children can sometimes seeÑand even sometimes seekoutÑimages of naked people is not new.  However, compared to other
media, the Internet has characteristics that make it harder for adults to
exercise responsible supervision over childrenÕs use of it.  A particularly
worrisome aspect of the Internet is that inappropriate sexually explicit
material can find its way onto childrenÕs computer screens without beingactively sought.  Further, it is easy to find on today
Õs Internet not onlyimages of naked people, but also graphically depicted acts of hetero-Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3EXECUTIVE SUMMARYsexual and homosexual intercourse (including penetration), fellatio, cun-nilingus, masturbation, bestiality, child pornography, sadomasochism,

bondage, rape, incest, and so on.  While some such material can be found

in sexually explicit videos and print media that are readily available in
hotels, video rental stores, and newsstands, other sexually explicit mate-
rial on the Internet is arguably more extreme than material that is easily
available through non-Internet media.  [Section 1.2]
The Internet also enables many strangers to establish contact withchildren.  While many interactions between children and strangers can be

benign or even beneficial (e.g., a student corresponding with a university
scientist), strangers can also be child predators and sexual molesters.  Face-

to-face contact with such individuals may be traumatic and even life-
threatening for a child; for this reason, Internet-based interaction (which
includes chat rooms, instant messages, and e-mail dialogs, and which
could involve the transmission of sexually explicit material as one compo-
nent) that can lead to face-to-face contact poses a greater potential danger
to children than does the passive receipt of materialÑeven highly inap-propriate materialÑper se.  The anonymity and interaction-at-a-distance
of using the Internet prevent a child from using cues that arise from face-
to-face interaction to help judge anotherÕs intent (e.g., gestures, tone ofvoice, age).  [Sections 1.3 and 5.5]
THE LEGAL CONTEXTThe legal context for sexually explicit material is driven by the FirstAmendment to the Constitution, and three categories of sexually explicit
material are subject to government regulation.  Obscenity is sexually ex-
plicit material that violates contemporary community standards in cer-
tain specified ways.  (How the appropriate 
ÒcommunityÓ is defined is a
matter of great uncertainty, especially in an Internet context.)  Child por-nography is material that depicts a child engaged in a sexual act or ÒlewdÓexhibition of his or her genitals.  Obscenity and child pornography enjoy

no First Amendment protection.  A third category of sexually explicit

material that is not obscene and not child pornography can be obscene forminors; such material may be regulated for minors but must be freelyavailable to adults.  [Section 4.1]
NEW TECHNOLOGY, DIFFERENT ECONOMICSSearching the Internet for information is generally enabled by ÒsearchenginesÓ that accept a few user-typed terms and return to the user links to
Web pages that refer to those terms.  A search engine can be used to find

information on science, sports, history, and politics, as well as sexuallyYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETexplicit material.  Furthermore, because of ambiguities in language (e.g.,
ÒbeaverÓ has both sexual and non-sexual connotations), a search will
sometimes return links to material that is not related to what the user is
trying to find.  In some cases, that unrelated material will contain sexually

explicit content when it was not sought.  [Section 2.3 and Box 2.3]
A second common use of the Internet is to communicate with others.However, the Internet is designed in such a way that it transports bits of
information without regard for the meaning or content of those bits.  Thus,

Internet traffic can contain a letter to oneÕs aunt, a chat about sports, adraft manuscript for a report, or sexually explicit images.  Furthermore,

controlling traffic demands special effort at the sending and/or receiving
points.  [Section 2.1 and Box 2.2]
The Internet is also a highly anonymous medium.  Such anonymity
can be advantageous for a teenager who finds answers on the Internet to
questions that he or she is too embarrassed to ask an adult.  It can also be
disadvantageous, in that someone can conduct antisocial or criminal ac-
tivities (e.g., child sexual solicitation) with less fear of identification and/
or sanction than might be true in the physical world.  [Sections 2.1, 2.3]
Information technology drives the economics of information on theInternet.  Because information can be represented in digital form, it is

very inexpensive to send, receive, and store.  Thus, for a few hundred

dollars to cover the cost of a digital camera and a Web site, anyone can
produce sexually explicit content and publish it on the Web for all to see.
Furthermore, because the Internet is global, regulatory efforts in the
United States aimed at limiting the production and distribution of such
material are difficult to apply to foreign Web site operators.  [Section 2.1]Sources of inappropriate sexually explicit material on the Internet arecommercial and non-commercial.  The commercial source is the online

adult entertainment industry, which generates about a billion dollars a
year in revenue from paying adults.  (For comparison, the adult entertain-

ment industry as a whole generates several billion dollars a yearÑper-haps as much as $10 billion.)  According to the best information available

to the committee, U.S. business entities in the industry support around
100,000 sites (globally, there are about 400,000 for-pay adult sites).  Glo-

bally, sexually explicit Web pages constitute a few percent of the 2+ bil-
lion publicly accessible Web pages as of this writing.  [Section 3.1]
For many online adult entertainment firms, profitability depends ondrawing a large volume of traffic in a search for paying customers, and
many seek revenue through the sale of advertising that typically makes
no effort to differentiate between adults and children.  Further, the ag-

gressive marketing campaigns that firms need to stand out in a highly
saturated marketÑwhere margins are inherently low and traffic is there-fore critical to economic survivalÑinevitably reach both minors andYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5EXECUTIVE SUMMARYadults.  The exposure of minors to such material is thus a side effect of the
effort to reach large numbers of paying customers.  [Section 3.2]
To date, public debate has focused largely on commercial dimensionsof inappropriate sexually explicit material on the Internet.  But there are

many non-commercial sources of inappropriate sexually explicit material
on the Internet, including material available through peer-to-peer file ex-
changes, unsolicited e-mail, Web cameras, and sexually explicit conversa-
tion in chat rooms.   Solutions that focus only on commercial sources will
therefore not address the entire problem.  [Section 5.4]
THE IMPACT OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIALON CHILDRENPerhaps the most vexing dimension of dealing with childrenÕs expo-sure to sexually explicit material on the Internet is the lack of a clear
scientific consensus regarding the impact of such exposure.  Nonetheless,

people have very strong beliefs on the topic.  Some people believe that

exposure to certain sexually explicit material is so dangerous to children
that even one exposure to it will have lasting harmful effects.  Others

believe that there is no evidence to support such a claim and that the
impact of exposure to such material must be viewed in the context of a
highly sexualized media environment.  [Chapter 6]
It is likely that individuals on both sides of the issue could reachagreement on the undesirability of exposing children to depictions of the
most extreme and most graphic examples of sexual behavior, in the sense
that most individual parents on each side would prefer to keep their
children away from such material.  The committee concurs, in the sense

that it believes that there is some set of depictions of extreme sexual
behavior whose viewing by children would violate and offend the com-
mitteeÕs collective moral and ethical sensibilities, though this sentimentwould not be based on scientific grounds.  However, protagonists in the

debate would be likely to part company on whether material that is less
extreme in nature is inappropriate or harmful:  such material might

include information on sexual health, the depiction of non-traditional
ÒscriptsÓ about how people can interact sexually, and descriptions of what
it means to be lesbian or homosexual in orientation.  [Sections 7.3, 7.4]
Extreme sexually explicit imagery to create sexual desire on the onehand, and responsible information on sexual health on the other, are ar-
guably unrelated and, many would contend, easily distinguished.  But

much content is not so easily categorized.  While some extreme sexually

explicit material meets legal tests for obscenity (and therefore does not
enjoy First Amendment protection), less extreme material may notÑandmaterial described in the previous paragraph, lingerie advertisements,Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETand models in swimsuits generally do enjoy First Amendment protection,at least for adults and often for children.  [Section 7.3]
In short, sexually oriented content that falls outside the realm of ex-treme sexually explicit imagery is likely to be the source of greatest con-
tention, and there are arguments about whether such content would be
subject to regulatory efforts aimed at reducing the exposure of minors to
material that is or may be sexual in nature.  [Section 7.3]
PATHS OF EXPOSUREChildren may be exposed to inappropriate Internet material or expe-riences through a variety of channels, including Web pages, e-mail, chat
rooms, instant messages, Usenet newsgroups, and peer-to-peer file-shar-
ing connections.  Furthermore, the exposure may be sought by the child

(i.e., deliberate) or unsought by the child (i.e., inadvertent), and there are
many forms of each kind of exposure.  An example of deliberate exposure

occurring is when a child searches for sexually explicit terms in a search
engine and clicks on the links returned.  An example of inadvertent expo-

sure occurring is when a child receives unsolicited e-mail containing sexu-
ally explicit material or links to such material.  [Section 5.4]
IDENTIFYING INAPPROPRIATE MATERIALThree methods can be used to identify inappropriate material.  Whether
machine or human, the agent that makes the immediate decision about the
appropriateness of content can do so based on its specific content, rely on a
tag or label associated with the material, or examine the source of the
material (or a combination of these factors).  [Section 8.1]
In practice, the volume of material on the Internet is so large that it isimpractical for human beings to evaluate every discrete piece of informa-
tion for inappropriateness.  [Box 2.6]  Moreover, the content of some

existing Web pages changes very quickly, and new Web pages appear at
a rapid rate.   Thus, identifying inappropriate material must rely either on

an automated, machine-executable process for determining inappropriate
content or on a presumption that everything that is not explicitly identi-
fied by a human being as appropriate is inappropriate.  An approach

based on machine-executable rules abstracted from human judgments
inevitably misses nuances in those human judgments, which reduces the
accuracy of this approach compared to that of humans, while the pre-
sumption-based approach necessarily identifies a large volume of appro-
priate material as inappropriate.  [Section 2.3]
All mechanisms for determining if material is appropriate or inappro-priate will make erroneous classifications from time to time.  But note that
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.7EXECUTIVE SUMMARYsuch misclassifications are fundamentally different from disagreementover what is inappropriate.  Misclassifications are mistakes due to factors

such as inattention on the part of humans or poorly specified rules for
automated classification.  They will inevitably occur, even when there is

no disagreement over the criteria for inclusion in various categories.  In

contrast, disagreements over what is appropriate result from differences
in judgmentÑPerson A says, ÓThat material is inappropriateÓ and Person
B says of the same material, ÒThat material is not inappropriate.Ó   Both of
these issues exacerbate the problem of putting into place a systematic way
to protect children.  [Box 12.1]
CONCEPTS OF PROTECTIONWhether protection is based on law, technology, or education, it gen-erally involves some combination of the following concepts:  [Section 8.6]
¥Restricting a minor to appropriate material
 through techniques that
give a minor access only to material that is explicitly judged to be appro-
priate;¥Blocking inappropriate material
 through techniques that prevent a
minor from being exposed to inappropriate material;¥Warning a minor of impending exposure to inappropriate material or
suggesting appropriate material, leaving him or her with an explicit choice toaccept or decline a viewing;¥Deterring the access of minors to inappropriate material
 by detecting
access to such material and imposing a subsequent penalty for such access;¥Educating a minor about reasons not to access inappropriate material
 in
order to inculcate an internal sense of personal responsibility and to build
skills that make his or her Internet searches less likely to turn up inappro-
priate material inadvertently;¥Reducing the accessibility of inappropriate material
 so that inappropri-ate material is harder for minors to find;¥Reducing the appeal of deliberate contact with inappropriate material
 by
making access to the material (and only such material) more difficult,
cumbersome, and inconvenient; and/or¥Helping a minor to cope with the exposure to inappropriate material
 that
will most likely occur at least occasionally with extended Internet use.All of these concepts have costs and benefits.  Any party seeking to
decide on an appropriate mix of approaches based on these concepts
must consider the extent and nature of physical, emotional, developmen-
tal, social, ethical, or moral harm that it believes arises from exposure to
inappropriate material or experiences.  Greater costs may be justifiable if
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETthe presumed harm is large and highly likely, or if young children ratherthan youth in late adolescence are involved.  [Section 14.4]
Differing institutional missions must also be considered.  A public
school serves the primary purpose of providing academic instruction for
individuals that have not attained the age of majority.  By contrast, a

public library serves the primary purpose of providing a broad range of
information to the entire community in which it is based, including chil-
dren and adults, and the information needs of the communityÑtaken as awholeÑare generally much more diverse than those of children and youthin school.  Thus, it is not surprising that schools and libraries have differ-
ent needs and might take different approaches in seeking to protect chil-
dren and youth from inappropriate Internet material and experiences.
[Section 8.4]APPROACHES TO PROTECTIONPublic PolicyPublic policy to affect the supply of inappropriate sexually explicitmaterial can operate to make such material less available to children.
For practical and technical reasons, it is most feasible to seek regulation
of commercial sources of such materialÑbecause these seek to drawattention to themselves (and non-commercial sources generally operate
through private channels).  Public policy can provide incentives for the

adult online industry to take actions that better deny childrenÕs access totheir material and to some extent to reduce the number of providers of
such material.  [Chapter 9]
Public policy can go far beyond the creation of statutory punish-ment for violating some approved canon of behavior to include shaping
the Internet environment in many ways.  For example, public policy can

be used to reduce uncertainty in the regulatory environment; promote
media literacy and Internet safety education (including development of
model curricula, support of professional development for teachers on
Internet safety and media literacy, and encouraging outreach to educate
parents, teachers, librarians, and other adults about Internet safety
education issues); support development of and access to high-quality
Internet material that is educational and attractive to children in an age-
appropriate manner; and support self-regulatory efforts by private
parties.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.9EXECUTIVE SUMMARYSocial and Educational StrategiesSocial and educational strategies are intended to teach children howto make wise choices about how they behave on the Internet and to take
control of their online experiences:  where they go; what they see; what

they do; who they talk to.  Such strategies must be age-appropriate if they

are to be effective.  Further, such an approach entails teaching children

to be critical, skeptical, and self-reflective of the material that they are
seeing.An analogy is the relationship between swimming pools and chil-dren.  Swimming pools can be dangerous for children.  To protect them,

one can install locks, put up fences, and deploy pool alarms.  All of these

measures are helpful, but by far the most important thing that one can do
for oneÕs children is to teach them to swim.  [Section 10.3]
Perhaps the most important social and educational strategy is respon-sible adult involvement and supervision.  [Section 10.4]  
Peer assistance can behelpful as well, as many youth learn as much in certain areas from peers
or near-peers (e.g., siblings) as they do from parents, teachers, and other
adult figures.  [Section 10.5]  
Acceptable use policies in families, schools,libraries, and other organizations provide guidelines and expectations
about how individuals will conduct themselves online, thus providing a
framework within which children can become more responsible for mak-
ing good choices about the paths they choose in cyberspace, thereby learn-
ing skills that are relevant and helpful in any venue of Internet usage.
[Section 10.6]Internet safety education is analogous to safety education in the physi-cal world, and may include teaching children how sexual predators and
hate group recruiters typically approach young people, how to recognize
impending access to inappropriate sexually explicit material, and when it
is risky to provide personal information online.  Information and medialiteracy provide children with skills in recognizing when information is
needed and how to locate, evaluate, and use it effectively, irrespective of
the media in which it appears, and in critically evaluating the content
inherent in media messages.  A child with these skills is less likely to

stumble across inappropriate material and more likely to be better able to
put it into context if and when he or she does.  [Section 10.8]
The greater availability of compelling, safe, and educational Internet con-tent that is developmentally appropriate, educational, and enjoyable ma-
terial on a broad range of appealing or helpful topics (including but not
limited to sex education) would help to make some children less inclined
to spend their time searching for inappropriate material or engaging in
inappropriate or unsafe activities.  Greater availability entails both the

development of new appropriate content, as well as portals and Web sitesYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETdesigned to facilitate easy access to existing appropriate content.  [Section
10.9]Public service announcements and media campaigns could help to educateadults about the need for Internet safety and about the nature and extent
of dangers on the Internet.  Such campaigns are best suited for relatively

simple messages (e.g., Òbe aware of where your child is on the InternetÓand Òask for parental controls when you subscribe to an Internet serviceproviderÓ).  [Section 10.10]
Social and educational strategies focus on the nurturing of personalcharacter, the development of responsible choice, and the strengthening
of coping skills.  Because these strategies locate control in the hands of the

youth targeted, children have opportunities to exercise some measure of
choiceÑand as a result some children are likely to make mistakes as theylearn to internalize the object of these lessons.  [Section 10.11]
These strategies are not inexpensive, and they require tending andimplementation.  Adults must be taught to teach children how to make

good choices on the Internet.  They must be willing to engage in some-

times-difficult conversations.  They must face the trade-offs inevitable

with pressing schedules of work and family.  And these strategies do not
provide a quick fix.  But in addition to teaching responsible behavior and

coping skills for when a child encounters inappropriate material and ex-
periences on the Internet, they are relevant to teaching children to think
critically about all kinds of media messages, including those associated
with hate, racism, senseless violence, and so on; to conduct effective
Internet searches for information and to navigate with confidence; and to
make ethical and responsible choices about Internet behaviorÑand aboutnon-Internet behavior as well.  [Section 10.11]
Technology-Based ToolsA wide array of technology-based tools are available for dealing withinappropriate Internet material and experiences.   
FiltersÑsystems or ser-vices that limit in some way the content to which users may be exposedÑare the most-used technology-based tool.  [Section 12.1]    All filters suffer

from both false positives (overblocking) and false negatives (underblock-
ing).  However, filters can be highly effective in reducing the exposure of
minors to inappropriate content if the inability to access large amounts of
appropriate material is acceptable.  Teachers and librarians most com-

monly reported that filters served primarily to relieve political pressure
on them and to insulate them from liability (suggesting that filter vendors
are more likely to err on the side of overblocking than on underblocking).
In addition, filters reduced the non-productive demands on teachers and
librarians who would otherwise have to spend time watching what stu-Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11EXECUTIVE SUMMARYdents and library patrons were doing.  Note also that filters can be cir-
cumvented in many ways, the easiest way being to obtain unfiltered
Internet access in another venue (e.g., at home).Monitoring of a childÕs Internet use is another technology-basedoption.  
[Section 12.2]  
Many monitoring options are available (e.g.,remote viewing of what is on a childÕs screen, logging of keystrokes,recording of Web pages that he or she has visited)Ñand each of theseoptions can be used surreptitiously or openly.  Surreptitious monitor-

ing cannot deter deliberate access to inappropriate material or experi-
ences, and raises many concerns about privacy (for example, in a fam-
ily context, it raises the same questions as reading a childÕs diary orsearching his or her room covertly).  Furthermore, while it probably

does provide a more accurate window into what a child is doing online
compared to the lack of monitoring, it presents a conflict between
taking action should inappropriate behavior be discovered and poten-
tially revealing the fact of monitoring.The major advantage of monitoring over filtering is that it leaves thechild in control of his or her Internet experiences, and thus provides op-
portunities for the child to learn how to make good decisions about

Internet use.  However, this outcome is likely only if the child is subse-

quently educated to understand the nature of the inappropriate use and is
reinforced in the desirability of appropriate use.  If, instead, the result of

detecting inappropriate use is simply punishment, the result is likely to
be behavior motivated by fear of punishmentÑwith the consequence thatwhen the monitoring is not present, inappropriate use may well resume.
Clandestine monitoring may also have an impact on the basic trust that is
a foundation of a healthy parent-child relationship.Age verification technologies (AVTs) seek to differentiate between adultsand children in an online environment.  [Section 13.3]   A common AVT is

a request for a valid credit card number.  Credit cards have some mean-

ingful effectiveness in separating children from adults, but their effective-
ness will decline as credit-card-like payment mechanisms for children
become more popular.   Other AVTs can provide higher assurance of

adult status, but often at the cost of greater inconvenience to at least some
legitimate users.A number of other technology-based tools are discussed in the mainreport.OVERALL CONCLUSIONSContrary to statements often made in the political debate, the issue ofprotecting children from inappropriate sexually explicit material and ex-
periences on the Internet is very complex.  Individuals have strong and
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETpassionate views on the subject, and these views are often mutually in-compatible.  Different societal institutions see the issue in very different

ways and have different and conflicting priorities about the values to be
preserved.  Different communities
Ñat the local, state, national, and inter-national levelsÑhave different perspectives.  Furthermore, the technical
nature of the Internet has not evolved in such a way as to make control
over content easy to achieve.  [Section 14.1]
There is no single or simple answer to controlling the access of minorsto inappropriate material on the Web.  To date, most of the efforts to

protect children from inappropriate sexually explicit material on the
Internet have focused on technology-based tools such as filters and legal
prohibitions or regulation.   But the committee believes that neither tech-

nology nor policy can provide a completeÑor even a nearly completeÑsolution.  While both technology and public policy have important roles

to play, social and educational strategies to develop in minors an ethic of
responsible choice and the skills to effectuate these choices and to cope
with exposure are foundational to protecting children from negative ef-
fects that may result from exposure to inappropriate material or experi-
ences on the Internet.  [Section 14.3]
Technology can pose barriers that are sufficient to keep those who arenot strongly motivated from finding their way to inappropriate material
or experiences.  Further, it can help to prevent inadvertent exposure to

such materials.  But, as most parents and teachers noted in their com-

ments to the committee, those who really want to have access to inappro-
priate sexually explicit materials will find a way to get them.  From this

point, it follows that the real challenge is to reduce the number of children
who are strongly motivated to obtain inappropriate sexually explicit ma-
terials.  This, of course, is the role of social and educational strategies.

[Section 14.4]As for public policy, the international dimension of the Internet posessubstantial difficulties and makes a primary reliance on regulatory ap-
proaches unwise.  Absent a strong international consensus on appropri-

ate measures, it is hard to imagine what could be done to persuade for-
eign sources to behave in a similar manner or to deny irresponsible foreign
sources access to U.S. Internet users.  [Section 14.4]
This is not to say that technology and policy cannot be helpful.  Tech-
nology-based tools, such as filters, provide parents and other responsible
adults with additional choices as to how best to fulfill their responsibili-
ties.  Law and regulation can help to shape the environment in which

these strategies and tools are used by reducing at least to some extent the
availability of inappropriate sexually explicit material on the Internet, for
example, by creating incentives and disincentives for responsible busi-
ness behavior.  Moreover, developments in technology can help to inform
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.13EXECUTIVE SUMMARYand support policy choices, and public policy decisions necessarily affectboth technology and the nature and shape of parental guidance.  In con-

cert with appropriate social and educational strategies, both technology
and public policy can contribute to a solution if they are appropriately
adapted to the many circumstances that will exist in different communi-
ties.  In the end, however, values are closely tied to the definitions of

responsible choice that parents or other responsible adults wish to impart
to their children, and to judgments about the proper mix of education,
technology, and policy to adopt.  [Section 14.3]
Though some might wish otherwise, no single approachÑtechnical,legal, economic, or educationalÑwill be sufficient.  Rather, an effective
framework for protecting our children from inappropriate materials and
experiences on the Internet will require a balanced composite of all of
these elements, and real progress will require forward movement on all
of these fronts.  [Section 14.3]
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART  I
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.17The Internet is both a source of promise for our children and a sourceof concern.  The promise is of Internet-based access to the information

ageÑand the concern is over the possibility that harm might befall our
children as they use the Internet.  Realizing the promise in all its richness
requires that adults put these concerns into perspective and also take
responsible steps to address them.  The purpose of this report is to help

put the risks of Internet use by children into perspective and to provide a
balanced assessment of different approaches that can help parents and
other responsible adults to deal constructively with the risks that children
face on the Internet, using as its primary illustrative example protecting
kids from inappropriate sexually explicit material on the Internet.1.1THE INTERNET:  SOURCE OF PROMISE,
SOURCE OF CONCERNMany policy makers, teachers, parents, and others concerned witheducation reform believe that the Internet has the potential to enhance
and transform K-12 education.  For example, the report of the Web-based

Education Commission, released in March 2001, asserted that Òthe Internet
is making it possible for more individuals than ever to access knowledge
and to learn in new and different waysÓ (Box 1.1).1Introduction
NOTE: Appendix B contains a list of acronyms and a glossary that the reader may wish toconsult.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETIncreasingly, school-age children have the ability to reach the Internet,driven by the steadily increasing fraction of U.S. classrooms and schools
connected to the Internet over the past 5 years and the growing presence
of networked information technologies in the home and elsewhere.1   By
the fall of 2000, 98 percent of public schools in the United States had
access to the Internet, compared with 35 percent in 1994.2  In addition,
1Anne Cattagni and Elizabeth Farris.  2001.  
Internet Access in U.S. Public Schools andClassrooms: 1994-2000.  NCES 2001-071.  U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educa-
tional Research and Improvement.  U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
2School connections to the Internet have been supported by a variety of federal programs,of which the federal E-rate program and the technology programs operated by the Depart-
ment of Education have been most important.  For more information on the E-rate program,
see <http://www.sl.universalservice.org/> and on the Department of Education programs,see <http://www.ed.gov/Technology/edgrants.html>.Box 1.1Views of the Web-based Education Commissionon the Internet and K-12 EducationThe following excerpts are reproduced, respectively, from the Foreword andfrom Section 1 of The Power of the Internet for Learning:For education, the Internet is making it possible for more individuals than ever toaccess knowledge and to learn in new and different ways. At the dawn of the 21st
Century, the education landscape is changing. Elementary and secondary schools
are experiencing growing enrollments, coping with critical shortages of teachers,
facing overcrowded and decaying buildings, and responding to demands for high-
er standards. . . .  The Internet is enabling us to address these educational challeng-

es, bringing learning to students instead of bringing students to learning. It is allow-
ing for the creation of learning communities that defy the constraints of time and
distance as it provides access to knowledge that was once difficult to obtain. . . .The Internet is perhaps the most transformative technology in history, reshapingbusiness, media, entertainment, and society in astonishing ways. But for all its pow-
er, it is just now being tapped to transform education. . . .  The Internet is bringing us

closer than we ever thought possible to make learningÑof all kinds, at all levels, any
time, any place, any paceÑa practical reality for every man, woman, and child.  The

World Wide Web is a tool that empowers society to school the illiterate, bring job
training to the unskilled, open a universe of wondrous images and knowledge to all
students, and enrich the understanding of the lifelong learner. . . .   Web-based

education is just beginning, with something of far greater promise emerging in the
middle distance. Yet technology, even in its current stage of development, can al-
ready allow us to realistically dream of achieving age-old goals in education: to
center learning around the student instead of the classroom, to focus on the strengths
and needs of individual learners, [and] to make lifelong learning a reality. . . .  The

Internet is a tool that can help us empower every student and elevate each individual
to new levels of intellectual capacity and skill.SOURCE:  The Power of the Internet for Learning: Moving from Promise to Practice.  2001.
Report of the Web-based Education Commission to the President and Congress of the United
States.  March.  Available online at <http://interact.hpcnet.org/Webcommission/index.htm>.
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.19INTRODUCTIONdial-up connections were used by 74 percent of public schools with In-ternet access in 1996, but in 2000, only 11 percent of public schools relied
on such connections, with the remainder using faster dedicated-line
Internet connections.  In the classroom, only 3 percent of instructional

rooms were wired for Internet access in 1994; by 2000, 77 percent of in-
structional rooms were connected to the Internet.  In public libraries,

Internet access is nearly ubiquitous, with over 95 percent of all library
outlets with an Internet connection in 2000 and an average of 8.3 worksta-
tions per connection.  Over half of these outlets have high-speed connec-

tivity.3  And around 17.7 million children had access to the Internet from
their homes by late 1999.4Such changes are hardly a surprise.  Though these adoption curves
substantially trail the overall price reduction curves for computing capa-
bility (unit capacity halves in price every 18 months), data storage (unit
capacity halves in price every 12 months), and bandwidth (unit capacity
halves in price every 9 months), it is likely that Internet access for homes
and schools will be the norm in the future.For children, the Internet generally eliminates many constraints oftime and space encountered in the physical world and, as such, funda-
mentally broadens childrenÕs access to information and experiences.  For
example, the Internet provides convenient access to an almost unlimited
and highly diverse (if usually unverified) library of information resources
that can be used for educational purposes.  It enables collaborative educa-

tion and study, and it provides opportunities for remote engagement
with subject matter experts.  It provides information about hobbies and

sports.  Finally, it allows children to engage with other people on a near-

infinite variety of topics and interests.  Through online friendships and

pen pals, their circles of acquaintance and diversity of experience can be
vastly enlarged across state and national boundaries.At the same time, fueled by press reports and some personal experi-ence, childrenÕs easy access to the Internet raises concerns in parents andcommunities about less productive or safe aspects that may result from
their Internet use.  One frequently stated concern relates to the easy

Internet availability of Òpornography,Ó  but public concerns are not con-
fined to this area (as Section 1.3 discusses further).Success in dealing with such concerns is arguably a necessary (but notsufficient) condition for fully exploiting the social and educational poten-3See <http://www.nclis.gov/statsurv/2000plo.pdf>.4See <http://cyberatlas.internet.com/big_picture/demographics/article/0,,5901_ 390941,00.html> for a summary of the Grunwald study.  The full study (Grunwald Associates,
2000, Children, Families, and the Internet 2000, Burlingame, Calif.) is available online at <http://www.grunwald.com/survey/index.htm>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETtial of the Internet for children.  For example, a study from the Annenberg
Public Policy Center found that parents in the United States are deeply
fearful about the InternetÕs influence on their children while at the sametime believing that the Internet has important and positive educational
potential.5  Ridiculing such fears as if they were a sign either of techno-
cultural unsophistication or of insufficient dedication to the First Amend-
mentÑas is often doneÑis not helpful.Given the nature of the Internet and how children and other peopleuse it, it is likely that most children will be exposed to some inappropriate
material or experiences by virtue of their mere access to the Internet.  This

is certainly true if no actions are taken to prevent such exposure, but the
National Research CouncilÕs Committee to Study Tools and Strategies forProtecting Kids from Pornography and Their Applicability to Other Inap-
propriate Internet Content concluded during its investigation that there is
no set of actions that will eliminate this risk entirely.Many policy makers at federal, state, and local levels (including mem-bers of the U.S. Congress, state legislators, school boards, and local librar-
ies) have sought solutions that focus primarily on the availability to chil-
dren of pornography on the Internet.  With some exceptions, the central

element of these solutions is a filter, based on technology that is intended
to allow objectionable content to be blocked.  However, the overall prob-

lem has many facetsÑtechnological, social, psychological, legal, emo-tional, moralÑand so, too, does any particular proposed approach tosolution.1.2A CRITICAL DEFINITIONAL ISSUE:
WHAT IS ÒPORNOGRAPHYÓ?The term ÒpornographyÓ has no well-defined meaning.   Despite the
fact that individuals use the term as though it does and behave as though
there is a universal understanding of what is and is not covered by the
term, judgments about the precise dividing line between the Òporno-graphicÓ and the 
Ònon-pornographicÓ vary widely.  (And, as with any
public issue, a large fraction of the public will not particularly care about
the nuances of any given definition.)  Indeed, it was Supreme Court Jus-
5Joseph Turow.  1999.  
ÒThe Internet and the Family: The View from Parents, the Viewfrom the Press.Ó  Annenberg Public Policy Center, University of Pennsylvania, Philadel-
phia.  This is not to say that concerns about the Internet are limited to the potential negative
influence on children.  For example, many adults, including parents, worry about a loss of

privacy associated with Internet use.  Moreover, attempts to differentiate children from
adultsÑone aspect of protecting children from inappropriate material on the InternetÑmay have privacy implications as well.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.21INTRODUCTIONtice Potter Stewart who observed, ÒI canÕt define it [obscenity], but I knowit when I see it.Ó  Furthermore, the same image or text can have different
meanings and interpretations depending on context.  For example, 
LadyChatterlyÕs Lover has been considered pornographic in some contexts andgood literature in others.Recognizing these ambiguities, the committee chose to use the termÒsexually explicit material,Ó which is material
Ñtextual, visual, or auralÑthat depicts sexual behavior or acts, or that exposes the reproductive
organs of the human body.  Sexually explicit material may be used for

many purposesÑeducation, art, entertainment, science, personal sexualgratification or fantasy, and so on.  From common usage, ÒpornographyÓmight be seen as material that is intended to create sexual arousal or
desire, and usually involving sexually explicit material.6For expository and analytical purposes (and to prevent passages frombeing misinterpreted or taken out of context), this report uses the term
Òinappropriate sexually explicit materialÓ in many places where it might
have used Òpornography.Ó   The use of the term 
Òinappropriate sexuallyexplicit materialÓ manifestly raises the issue of 
Òinappropriate by whosedefinition,Ó a basic point that must be kept in mind in all discussions
relating to this topic.Public concern and controversy in this area arise from the fact that ontodayÕs Internet, it is easy to find graphically depicted acts of heterosexualand homosexual intercourse (including penetration), fellatio, cunnilin-
gus, masturbation, bestiality, child pornography, sadomasochism, bond-
age, rape, incest, and so on.  Although some such material is comparable

to sexually explicit videos and print media that are easily available in
hotels, video rental stores, and newsstands, other sexually explicit mate-
rial on the Internet is more extreme than that which is easily available
through non-Internet media.  Furthermore even the most graphic of these

images can find their way onto childrenÕs computer screens without be-ing actively sought, which makes this medium different from most other
media.Because the committee found that many people are unaware of thekinds of sexually explicit material that can be found on the Internet, it6Of course, ÒintentÓ is itself ambiguous, because it may refer to intent on the part of the
creator of the material, or intent on the part of the viewer of the material.  Under this usage
of the term, an individual may believe that clinical discussions of sexual behavior andadvertisements for contraceptives or lingerie are ÒpornographicÓ because some people re-
spond to such material in a sexual manner, even if those materials were not produced withsuch a result in mind.  A second issue (with this definition) arises in the likely event that a
young child does not become sexually aroused after being exposed to such material.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETpondered how best to illustrate the range of material described above.7After deliberation, the committee decided that the best way to illustratesuch material would be to invite the reader of this report to use a general-
purpose Internet search engine to search on terms such as Òsex,Ó Òorgy,ÓÒbondage,Ó Òcum,Ó or 
ÒrapeÓ coupled with terms such as 
Òpics,Ó Òavi,Óand Òjpg.Ó  If the search engine
Õs filter for adults-only content is turnedoff, the search engine will return in the first several links a variety of Web
sites containing the content listed above.8  This process will illustrate the
content available, as well as the ease with which it is available when it is
deliberately sought out.1.3OTHER TYPES OF INAPPROPRIATE MATERIAL
AND EXPERIENCESYouth have been exposed to materials of concern through many dif-ferent kinds of mediaÑprint (books, comic books, or magazines), televi-sion, movies, billboards, and telephones, as well as the Internet.  Corre-

spondingly, U.S. society has long been concerned about the types of
information to which youth are exposed.  Frequently, such concern fo-

cuses on information related to sexual matters, from the facts and biology
of human reproduction to graphic portrayals of unusual sexual activity.
But in addition to inappropriate sexually explicit material, there are other
types of material that various parties regard as inappropriate, some of
which several students and parents told the committee were more upset-
ting or objectionable than sexually explicit material.  These include:
¥Hate speech and overt racism:  material extolling the inherent or
moral superiority or inferiority of a particular race, ethnic group, or sexual
orientation; racial epithets; or religious bigotry.  (Note that Europeans
7One alternative was to include actual screen shots of such material in the report.  How-
ever, the inclusion of such material would inevitably become the primary focus of thisreport, rather than any of the committeeÕs analytical work.  A second alternative was to
provide specific Web sites that are good examples of the material described.  However,

inclusion of such sites in a National AcademiesÕ report would give them undue promi-
nence, and the committee did not want to be in the position of increasing the exposure thatsuch sites receive.8The reader may also find it instructive to turn the filter ÒonÓ to see how one type of
filtering works.  In this case, the search results will be different, but some sexually explicit
material is likely to appear.  As discussed in Chapter 12, filters seek to block certain kinds of

material from appearing (or, equivalently, do not return links to those kinds of material)but cannot perform this task perfectly.  Note that the results from filters embedded into
search engines are not necessarily those that would be obtained from other types of filters.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.23INTRODUCTIONmay regard such material as being of more concern than sexually explicitmaterial, a point that underscores the cultural dimensions of concern.9)¥Violent speech and imagery, including but not limited toÑGraphic images of blood and gore (without medical purpose),resulting from the application of weapons to the human body.  These

images may be photo-realistic or cartoon-like, and may also involve ani-
mals and/or avatars.ÑDepictions of violence to the human, such as people being shot,stabbed, or beaten up.ÑInformation on the use and construction of weapons, explosives,and other tools of violence.Media violence has been a prominent social concern for many years,especially given that the presence of violent media content is largely un-
regulated.   In the case of media violence, the debate centers on concerns

that exposure to such content is one factor leading to childhood aggres-
sion.  However, the broadcast of obscene, indecent, and profane language

is regulated by law,10 and so sexual content has been more heavily regu-
lated than violence on the public air waves.¥Expressions of extreme nationalism or extreme political views: forexample, materials from violent conspiracy theorists, and materials extol-
ling the inherent superiority or inferiority of certain nations or national
groups.¥Materials recruiting new members into non-traditional religiousgroups or cults.¥Information on drugs, alcohol, tobacco, gambling, and the meansto gain access to them.¥Scientific concepts such as evolution and the ÒBig BangÓ theory for
the creation of the universe.Of course, this short list does not begin to exhaust the type of materi-als that some individuals may regard as inappropriate for children.  Dis-

entangling this relativism from the necessity of action cannot be made
easy by the mere introduction of technical means, because technology
cannot divine human intent or judgment (a point addressed further in
Chapter 2).  Further, different individuals even within a given commu-

nity may have very different sets of concerns.9See <http://www.pewinternet.org/reports/toc.asp?Report=36>.  This point is further
explored in Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council,2001, Global Networks and Local Values, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.10 18 U.S.C. 1464.
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETAs for inappropriate Internet experiences, the committee concludedthat the potential harm from interacting one-on-one with strangers on the
Internet is a far greater threat to children than the potential harm of sim-
ply viewing inappropriate images on the Internet.11  The likelihood that
such interactions will lead to actual meetings between children and strang-
ers, with the obvious attendant dangers, although relatively small, should
not be overlooked because of the potentially very serious consequences of
such meetings.This theme recurred repeatedly in committee discussions with manyof the parents and children at site visits, and it served to place into per-
spective the concerns expressed about sexually explicit material.   Indeed,

for these parents, the risk of predators who seek to entice children into
such encounters is an especially serious danger for children compared
with merely viewing inappropriate material, and the Internet creates op-
portunities for molesters to meet potential victims in a setting where none
of the ordinary visual and location clues of the physical world apply.
Table 1.1 describes differences in the nature of the childÕs interaction onthe Internet between passive and interactive exposures to inappropriate
material.Some polling data reflect these concerns to a certain extent. For ex-ample, a survey by the Pew Internet and American Life Project12 indi-
cated that while parents generally agree that for the most part the Internet
is a good thing or at least has a neutral impact on their own children, they
have many concerns about the Internet and they struggle to protect their
children from the worst elements of the online experience without keep-
ing children from its benefits.   They are concerned that their children will

be stalked or harassed online (parents of girls are more concerned than
parents of boys about these matters).  While only a very small proportion

of strangers who contact children via the Internet are likely to be sexual
predators, they are understandably concerned about such interactions
given the possibly severe consequences.  They are also concerned about

what their children might see or read online (parents of younger children
are more concerned about this than parents of older children). And many
worry that the Internet may lead some young people to do dangerous or
harmful things.11The committee does not intend to say that interactions with all strangers are dangerous.For example, the ÒstrangersÓ may be students at the same age level in another school, or
participants in a moderated chat room, or the sender of a large-group mailing list that doesnot support two-way interaction.  In such cases, the interaction may be reasonably safe.  But

it is the potential danger raised by interacting one-on-one with unknown adults that is thecommitteeÕs primary concern.12See <http://www.pewinternet.org/reports/toc.asp?Report=36>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.25INTRODUCTION1.4A BROAD SPECTRUM OF OPINION AND VIEWS
Parents have a long-recognized responsibility to care for their chil-dren and to raise them in a manner consistent with their own values, and
they can feel that exposure to certain materials found on the Internet
reduces their ability to carry out their parental responsibilities.  As argued

by one parent,13How I train my children and what moral values I impart to them doesnÕtdo much good if theyÕre simply walking by a computer in the referencearea while an adult male is accessing hard-core pornography, which hasbeen a very common occurrence at our library.  What gives the library

or anyone else that right, especially in a public institution, to take awaythe innocence of my child? We get frequent phone calls from distraughtparents . . . who are being responsible parents with their children in the
library and suddenly being exposed to the most vile material.While the definition of Òhard-core pornographyÓ and the frequency
of adult males using library facilities to access such material are open to
debate, sentiments such as those reflected above can be powerful motiva-
tors for political action.  On the other side, another parent wrote the

following:14Be it books, or the Internet, or movies, or music, itÕs our job as parents toteach children what we believe is acceptable and not acceptable, ourvalues, morals. . . .  By the time they
Õre old enough to read or cruise theInternet, theyÕre old enough to know your basics of right or wrong. My13Michelle Yezerski, director, Citizens for the Protection of Children.  See <http://
netwinds.com/library/yezerski-meeks.htm>.14Deb McNeil, parent, Benton, New York.  See <http://www.csmonitor.com/durable/
1999/06/01/p11s1.htm>.TABLE 1.1  Differences in the Nature of the Child
Õs Interaction:  Passive
Versus Interactive ExposuresPassive InteractionInteractive Interaction
Source of ÒthreatÓThe material itselfThe predator
The nature of possiblePsychological or emotionalPhysical as well as
danger involvedharmpsychological or emotional
harmTime scale of exposureShort (minutes for a one-Long (weeks or months)
time exposure) to long(years for long-term mediaconsumption)Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETadvice is to set perimeters in cyberspace [and] then trust their judg-mentÑwhich you instilled.In addition, the United States has seen in recent decades increasingcultural and social heterogeneity, and opinions on how to protect chil-
dren from inappropriate sexually explicit material on the Internet vary
widely.  Such diversity was reflected in the testimony to the committee

as well.Because the varying definitions of pornography, the nuances of pub-lic concern about pornography, and their implications for action defy
consensus, effective approaches that deal with pornography in ways that
honor democracy and a pluralistic society must allow for, indeed em-
power, varying community judgments (and in the case of the Internet, a
possible community with no geographic bounds on the one hand and
individual family judgments on the other), a point that is common to
dealing with any of the wide range of material that some people might
regard as inappropriate.15There is also considerable variability in views of the Internet as com-pared to views of other media.  In one group are those who believe that

even though the Internet is a medium unlike any others, the ethical and
moral codes, cultural norms, and laws that govern behavior on the In-
ternet should be generally the same as those that govern behavior and
interactions in the physical world.16  For example, in the non-networked
world, such techniques include movie ratings, special (restricted) sections
of video and book stores, opaque wrappings over the covers of adult
magazines, reports to law enforcement officials of suspected child por-
nographers by photo processing lab personnel, special hours or channels
for transmission of certain types of cable TV shows, and so on.  Parties in
this group suggest that the problems of minors and Internet pornography
are no different than those in other media, and they see no reason for
different goals or types of regulation in the Internet domain.In another group are those who believe that because the Internet is amedium unlike any other, the ethical and moral codes, cultural norms,
and laws that govern behavior on the Internet should be different from
those that govern behavior in other media.17  This second group is itself
15Differences in such judgments are also illustrated in Computer Science and Telecom-munications Board, National Research Council, 2001, Global Networks and Local Values.16See, for example, Jack L. Goldsmith, 1998, ÒAgainst Cyberanarchy,Ó University of Chi-cago Law Review, Fall.17See, for example, David R. Johnson and David G. Post, 1996, ÒLaw and BordersÑTheRise of Law in Cyberspace,Ó Stanford Law Review 48: 1367.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.27INTRODUCTIONdivided.  Some believe that the social and societal problems posed by theInternet differ qualitatively fromÑand are worse thanÑtheir physicalworld analogs, so that special regulation is warranted, including manda-
tory filters on school or library computers and prohibitions on certain
content on the Internet that may be freely available elsewhere.  Others

believe that although the problems with respect to the Internet may not
necessarily be worse than in the physical world, special attention and
regulation in the Internet domain are warranted anyway, especially where
Internet access becomes an economic or educational necessity.  In this

case, the desire for regulation to cope with problems with respect to the
Internet arises because the Internet is a new medium that offers opportu-
nities for solutions that did not emerge from societyÕs solutions to theanalogous problems in the physical world.18Still others argue that the Internet is so different that regulations fromthe physical world should not apply at all.  Indeed, in the formulation of

the project that is the subject of this report, a variety of cyber-libertarians
and industry representatives argued that the project should be scoped as
narrowly as possible, and preferably should not be undertaken at all,
because any attention to these issues would simply pointÑinappropri-ately, from their perspectiveÑto targets for government regulation.There are also differing and mutually incompatible approaches todefining what is objectionable.  One approach is based on the notion that
individual communitiesÑincluding individual familiesÑhave the right(and obligation) to define what is objectionable. A second approach, rarely
stated but often implicit as the motivating force behind certain policy
positions, is the idea that a particular definition of objectionableÑnamelyone supported by specific advocates with a specific social agendaÑisappropriate for all communities.Then, there is a question about the agendas of some people whoobject to ÒpornographyÓ and sexually explicit material.  While it is likely
that agreement could be reached among people of varying perspectives
on the undesirability of minors being exposed to certain types of Òhard-coreÓ material, there is profound disagreement about a great deal of other
material related to sexuality, including nudity, homosexuality, art, mate-
rial about sexually transmitted diseases, bestiality as it relates to animal
rights, abortion and contraception, sex education, and so on.  Because

many of those who raise the most vocal objections to hard-core material
also object to many other types of material related to sexuality, those with18For more discussion of this point, see Computer Science and TelecommunicationsBoard, National Research Council, 1994, Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Net-worked Communities, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.  This report also addresses
some of the perspectives raised in the preceding few paragraphs.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETdifferent views fear that the objections to hard-core material expressed bythe most vocal may be at least in part a cover for an agenda that will
eventually restrict these other types of material as well.Some parents are silent about the issue of ÒInternet pornographyÓ anddo not appear to be very active in attempting to keep their children away
from these materials or in protecting their children on the Internet.  Silence
and inactivity may reflect a sense that the Internet presence of adult-ori-
ented sexually explicit material is simply not much of an issue for them, or
may indicate a lack of knowledge about the quantity and type of material
available or about how to keep their children from it.  Or, it may signal

resignation and an attitude that the availability of such material is yet an-
other side effect of modernity, much as the smokestacks that were once
regarded as symbols of progress.  It might also indicate a principled posi-

tionÑthat it is insulting to suggest that they should have to solve the prob-lem, that such material should not be available so profusely in the first
place, or that regulation of such material is itself inappropriate.  Or, it might

indicate that parents trust that their children will not search for sexually
explicit materials online, or that they know what to do and are able to
handle themselves should they encounter such materials.A point on which most parties agreeÑimplicitly if not explicitlyÑisthat the Internet is a medium in which to preserve policy ground that they
have gained in other domains and to advance their policy goals further if
possible.  That is, the Internet presents both new risks (for losing ground)

and new opportunities (for gaining ground).  Thus, familiar policy battles

are re-fought, clothed in new rhetoric and updated with new facts, but
reflecting the same differences in values and goals that characterized simi-
lar disagreements associated with more traditional media.1.5FOCUS AND STRUCTURE OF THIS REPORT
The committeeÕs deliberations revealed a degree of complexity notapparent from the usual political debate.  Nevertheless, a number of

themes recurred frequently.  These themes are sketched in the sections

above, are addressed in greater detail in chapters to follow, and are sum-
marized in Box 1.2 to provide a road map for the reader.Part I of this report examines the issue along several dimensions andin context.   This chapter (Chapter 1) provides an initial framing of the

issue.  Chapter 2 describes the rapidly changing technological environ-

ment primarily as it relates to sexually explicit material.  Chapter 3 ad-

dresses the economic dimensions of the issue.  Chapter 4 focuses on the

relevant legal and regulatory regimes.  Chapter 5 discusses children and

their knowledge of, exposure to, and use of the Internet.  Chapter 6 ad-

dresses the scientific research base regarding the impact on children ofYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.29INTRODUCTION(continues)Box 1.2Themes Pervasive Throughout the ReportEach of the following themes becomes apparent in the discussion and analysispresented in Chapters 2 through 13.  They are presented here to provide the reader

with signposts for material to come.On Inappropriate Material¥The term ÒpornographyÓ often serves as a proxy in the political debate for a
wide range of ill-defined sexually explicit material and does not have a formal legaldefinition.On Minors and Culture¥Minors span a wide developmental range that varies with age, and the age ofa minor has considerable influence on the impact that exposure to sexually explicitmaterial will have on that minor as well as on the approaches that are appropriate for
protection.¥Community standards regarding sexual depictions both explicit and implied appearto have changed in the direction of greater tolerance at least over the last decade.¥Many children know far more about information technology than their par-ents, teachers, and other adults responsible for their care and well-being, a situationthat reverses the traditional gap in knowledge between adults and children.On Law¥The First Amendment protects from government action speech on the Internetas well as in other media.¥Material that is obscene or that constitutes child pornography enjoys no FirstAmendment protection.¥Definitions of material that is obscene (or that is Òobscene with respect tominorsÓ) vary from community to community, and so whether material is legallyobscene or legally obscene with respect to minors cannot be ascertained from itscontent alone.¥Sexually explicit materials that are Òobscene with respect to minorsÓ may be
regulated for minors, but not in a way that denies access to adults.¥Because of the relative dearth of obscenity prosecutions in recent years, thereis considerable uncertainty about the nature of sexually explicit material that couldbe successfully prosecuted as legally obscene.¥The global reach of the Internet greatly complicates the challenge of restrict-ing content providers or Internet service providers.On Technology and Economics¥The online adult entertainment industry exists because of demand from adultsbut is only one source of sexually explicit material.¥The anonymous interactions possible through the Internet make it very diffi-cult to differentiate between adults and minors.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETexposure to sexually explicit material.  Chapter 7 examines some of the
non-scientific considerations involved in this issue.Part II assesses a variety of generic approaches to protecting childrenfrom exposure to inappropriate material on the Internet.  Chapter 8 poses

general considerations regarding what ÒprotectionÓ means.  Chapter 9
focuses on legal and regulatory approaches.  Chapter 10 addresses social

and educational strategies that seek to educate individuals to use the
Internet safely, to make good decisions about content to be viewed, to
reduce their exposure to inappropriate material, and to mitigate the con-
sequences, if any, of viewing inappropriate material. Chapter 11 provides
a perspective on technology-based tools for protection, and Chapters 12
and 13 focus on a variety of specific tools for use by end users and other
parties.Part III consists of a single chapter (Chapter 14) that addresses com-munities of action that must coordinate their use of different tools, strate-
gies, and legal and regulatory approaches.  Further, it recaps key findings

and conclusions and shows relationships among several threads whose
discussion has started in Chapter 1, and it outlines where a richer and
deeper knowledge base would help to address the issue of protecting
children from inappropriate material on the Internet.Because this report is quite long, several chapters also include a num-ber of tables with some summary observations that provide an orienta-
tion to the material of the report.Box 1.2  (continued)
¥The low cost of entry and decentralized management of the Internet meanthat a large number of Internet ÒpublishersÓ or content providers is inevitable.  The
result, in general, is often a wide variety of sources of generically similar content (sothat there are many sources of similar sexually explicit material).On Protection¥Technology alone cannot protect Internet-using youth at a level that elimi-nates the need for responsible adult supervision and education.¥Multiple approaches for protection are generally appropriate, but social andeducational strategies are foundational in helping a child learn to make good deci-sions about Internet usage and to cope effectively with inappropriate material shouldhe or she come across it.¥The specific combination of approaches that should be used to protect chil-dren depends on the values of the childÕs parent or guardian and the community ofwhich these parties are members.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.31Suppose that a student is assigned to do a report for school on ani-mals that build things, and he selects beavers as his primary topic.   Con-
necting to the Internet through a computer at home, he goes to an online
search engine, where he tries to search the Internet for information about
Òadult beavers.Ó  The search engine returns links to a large number of

Web pages.  When he clicks on a certain link, he is surprised when he

finds a sexually oriented Web site intended for adult use.This scenarioÑor one similar to itÑis one of the most common thatunderlies parental concerns about children using the Internet.  This chap-

ter addresses the technological dimensions of this Òreference scenarioÓ
and some of the things that can be done to protect against it.2.1AN ORIENTATION TO CYBERSPACE AND THE INTERNET
2.1.1Characteristics of Digital Information
In the reference scenario, the student is seeking information (content)on beaversÑa kind of animal.  All information on the Internet is repre-

sented in bitsÑelectronic strings of 1Õs and 0Õs that are later interpreted
according to some algorithm to produce a representation that is meaning-
ful to human beings.  Digital information has properties very different

from those of the information that a student might retrieve in a book.  For

purposes of this report, the salient aspects of this digital representation of
information are the following:12Technology
1More discussion can be found in Computer Science and Telecommunications Board,National Research Council, 2000, The Digital Dilemma: Intellectual Property in the InformationAge, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET¥Reproducible.
  Unlike a physical book or photograph or analog au-
dio recording, a digital information object can be copied infinitely many
times, often without losing any fidelity or quality.¥Easily shared.
  Because information is easily copied, it is also easy to
distribute at low cost. Digital information can be shared more easily than
any type of analog information in the past.  In the physical world, broad-
casting information to groups has serious costs and hence requires a cer-
tain wherewithal and commitment. Technologies such as e-mail and Web
sites allow broadcasting to many people at the touch of a single button.¥Flexible.
  A variety of different types of information can be repre-
sented digitally: images, movies, text, sound.  Digital information can

even be used to control movement in the physical world through digitally
controlled actuators.¥Easily modified.
  Digital representations of information can be easily
manipulated.  It is trivial to modify an image
Ñsay, changing hair colorfrom blond to red, adding a few notes to a musical score, or deleting and
adding text to a document.  So, for example, a naked body can be affixed

to a head of a child, words modified from their original intent and music
ÒborrowedÓ freely, and even virtual 
ÒpeopleÓ created, all without leaving
a visible trace of these manipulations.¥Difficult to intercept
.  Because no physical object is necessarily asso-
ciated with a digital information object, interdiction of digital information
is much more difficult than interdiction of a physical object carrying in-
formation.  In other words, there is no book, no magazine, no photo that

can be intercepted by physical means.2.1.2The Nature of the Internet Medium and
a Comparison to Other Media TypesIn the reference scenario, the student relies on the Internet.  The pre-
ceding discussion about digital information is important, but the nature
of the Internet itself also makes it quite unlike other more traditional
media such as television, film, print, and the telephone.  Thus, it is useful
to describe certain key features of the Internet medium and to compare it
to some other, more traditional media.¥The Internet supports many-to-many connectivity.
  A single user can
receive information and content from a large number of different sources,
and can also transmit his or her content to a large number of recipients
(one-to-many).  Or a single user can engage with others in a one-to-one

mode (one-to-one).  Or multiple users can engage with many others (many-

to-many).  Broadcast media such as television and radio as well as print are

one-to-many mediaÑone broadcast station or publisher sends to manyrecipients.  Telephony is inherently one-to-one, although party lines and
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.33TECHNOLOGYconference calling change this characterization of telephones to some ex-tent.¥The Internet supports a high degree of interactivity (Box 2.1). Thus,
when the user is searching for content (and the search strategy is a good
one), the content that he or she receives can be more explicitly customized
to his or her own needs.2  In this regard, the Internet is similar to a library
in which the user can make an information request that results in the
production of books and other media relevant to that request.  By con-

trast, user choices with respect to television and film are largely limited to
the binary choice of Òaccept or do not accept a channel,Ó and all a user has
to do to receive content is to turn on the television.  The telephone is an

inherently interactive medium, but one without the many-to-many con-
nectivity of the Internet.¥The Internet is highly decentralized.  Indeed, the basic design philoso-
phy underlying the Internet has been to push management decisions to as
decentralized a level as possible.  Thus, if one imagines the Internet as a

number of communicating users with infrastructure in the middle facili-
tating that communication, management authority rests mostly (but not
exclusively) with the users rather than the infrastructureÑwhich is sim-ply a bunch of pipes that carry whatever traffic the users wish to send and
receive.  (How long this decentralization will last is an open question.
3)By contrast, television and the telephone operate under a highly central-
ized authority and facilities.  Furthermore, the international nature of the
Internet makes it difficult for one governing board to gain the consensus
necessary to impose policy, although a variety of transnational organiza-
tions are seeking to address issues of Internet governance globally.¥The Internet is intrinsically a highly anonymous medium.  That is, noth-
ing about the way in which messages and information are passed through
the Internet requires identification of the party doing the sending.4   One
2Customization happens explicitly when a user undertakes a search for particular kindsof information, but it can happen in a less overt manner because customized content can bedelivered to a user based, for example, on his or her previous requests for information.3Marjory S. Blumenthal and David D. Clark. 2001. ÒRethinking the Design of the Internet:The End to End Arguments vs. the Brave New World,Ó in 
Communications Policy in Transi-tion: The Internet and Beyond, B. Compaine and S. Greenstein, eds. MIT Press, Cambridge,Mass.4It is true that access to the Internet may require an individual to log into a computer oreven to an Internet service provider.  But for the most part, the identity of the user
Ñoncecaptured for purposes of accessing the InternetÑis not a part of information that is auto-matically passed on to an applications provider (e.g., a Web site owner).  More importantly,
many applications providersÑfor entirely understandable business reasonsÑchoose not torequire authentication.  (Strong authentication in general requires an infrastructure that is

capable of providing a trusted verification of identityÑand in the absence of such an infra-structure, strong authentication is an expensive and inconvenient proposition for the user.This point is discussed at greater length in Section 2.3.2.)Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETBox 2.1Interactivity of the InternetThe Internet provides bidirectional capability between communicating partiesthat can be equally rich in both directions.  The InternetÕs interactivity can be used:
¥To search for information.  In this application, the user sends a little informa-
tion (to specify what he or she is seeking), and can receive in return a lot of informa-tion from many sources (many-to-one communication). Typical applications includeusing search engines and broadcasting requests for particular kinds of information.¥To interact with other people on a peer-to-peer basis (one-to-one communi-
cation).  In this application, information exchanges tend to be more symmetric.  Typ-
ical applications include using e-mail and instant messaging.  For example, a youth

may encounter a friendly, or a dangerous, adult.  A friendly adult might be an expert
who provides good answers to sexual questions or real-time coaching on how tohandle a bad online experience; a dangerous one might be one who seeks to lure the
child into an improper sexual encounter.   Or a child may gather with other children
to share sexually explicit material among themselves, or to discuss matters related tosexuality.¥To broadcast information to wide audiences (one-to-many communication).
In this case, the amount of information that the user sends out is relatively large, andthe volume of what is returned is typically small.  Typical applications include broad-

casting unsolicited e-mail (spam) to large, undifferentiated audiences with an invita-tion to view an adult-oriented site or setting up a Web site on which the user postssexually explicit pictures taken on last weekÕs vacation.The interactivity of the Internet and its capability of supporting real-time interac-tion is a major differentiator from other media such as film, books, video, and radiothat offer passively consumed content.  Users of these latter media view or listen to

the content offered, and how the media experience unfolds is determined by onlyone user choiceÑwhether or not to continue viewing or listening.  The Internet, as
well as much of modern computer-based information technology such as CD-ROM-
based video games and Nintendo, expands the range of user choices.  Thus, while it
is possible to use the Internet to consume media content passively (and many do useit in such a manner), it also allows the user to interact with other parties, and the
number of modes of interaction today is large and still expanding.Such interaction implies a dynamically constructed media experience, and thusone can ÒtalkÓ with people in a chat room, send instant messages on a one-to-one
basis with anyone, post and read messages on computer bulletin boards on anyimaginable topic, exchange e-mail on a one-to-one or a one-to-many basis withanyone, assume fictional ÒrolesÓ in games and other experiences, and join commu-
nities with others that revolve around a shared interest or passion.  The information
content exchanged in these interactions can be text, images, video clips, sound re-cordings, or real-time video or sound.The interactivity of the Internet is very attractive and useful for many purposes.For example, in an educational context, the Internet allows students to collaborateover large geographical distances and to engage with subject-matter experts in a
wide variety of fields.  But interactivity on the Internet also enables 
Òchildren talkingto strangers,Ó an action that raises concerns for many parents.  Without the normal
cues available in the physical world (e.g., gestures, voice tone, facial expression,
age), children are especially vulnerable to being preyed on by people who are notwhat they claim to be.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.35TECHNOLOGYimportant consequence of the InternetÕs anonymity is that it is quite diffi-cult to differentiate between adult and minor users of the Internet, a point
whose significance is addressed in greater detail in Chapter 4.  A second

consequence is that technological approaches that seek to differentiate
between adults and minors (discussed in Chapter 13) generally entail
some loss of privacy for adults who are legitimate customers of certain
sexually explicit materials to which minors do not have legitimate access.¥The capital costs of becoming an Internet publisher are relatively low,and thus anyone can establish a global Web presence at the cost of a few
hundred dollars (as long as it conforms to the terms of service of the Web
host).  Further, for the cost of a subscription to an Internet service pro-

vider (ISP), one can interact with others through instant messages and
e-mail without having to establish a Web presence at all.  The costs of

reaching a large, geographically dispersed audience may be about the
same as those required to reach a small, geographically limited audience,
and in any event do not rise proportionately with the size of the audience.¥Because nearly anyone can put information onto the Internet, the appro-priateness, utility, and even veracity of information on the Internet are generally
uncertified and hence unverified.  With important exceptions (generally as-
sociated with institutions that have reputations to maintain), the Internet
is a Òbuyer bewareÓ information marketplace, and the unwary user can be
misinformed, tricked, and seduced or led astray when he or she encoun-
ters information publishers that are not reputable.¥The Internet is a highly convenient medium, and is becoming more so.Given the vast information resources that it offers coupled with search
capabilities for finding many things quickly, it is no wonder that for many
people the Internet is the information resource of first resort.2.1.3Internet Access Devices
In the reference scenario, the student uses a computer to access theInternet.  While today a personal computer is the most common way to

connect to the Internet, devices for accessing the Internet are proliferating.
Entire businesses have begun to spring up in order to ready content and
delivery of information for a host of other devices.  These devices include:
¥Handheld organizers like Palm and HandspringÑtypically thesedevices contain built-in wireless modems and use services like OmniSky;¥Cell phones with built in Web access;¥WebTVTM and Internet access devices that are used on TV sets and
customized to MSN and AOL and whose deployment began in 2001;¥Blackberry RIM and wireless paging devices;Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET¥Standalone Internet machines like the Compaq Ipaq and mail-stations;¥Kiosks designed for surfing the Internet and typically used in pub-lic spaces;¥Game machines like Sega, Nintendo, MicrosoftÕs Xbox.  Today
Õsgaming technology (e.g., SonyÕs Playstation) increasingly uses the Inter-net to provide users with multi-player communities in which a user can
compete against and/or cooperate with other like-minded individuals.
Software is generally available on CD-ROMs, and the widespread avail-
ability of CD-ROM writers makes the possibility of non-vendor-produced
games and activities a realistic one.  Game-playing applications are also

increasingly available for use on various Web sites, sometimes for free.
Note that such games often contain violent material.In addition, many commercial establishments frequented by children,
including coffee shops, department stores, and fast food restaurants, will
have customer-usable Internet access points.  Broadband Internet access
Ñneeded for efficient transmission of images and moviesÑwill also growin the future, though with some uncertainty about how fast it will be
deployed.  Specialized Web access devices will cost much less than today
Õscomputers (a few hundred dollars each rather than several hundred or
thousand dollars).  Wireless Internet access is also expected to grow in

popularity, though the feasibility of transmitting high-quality images
through wireless links remains an open question.These devices and business trends suggest increasingly ubiquitousaccess to the Internet.  Note also an important social point
Ñwireless ac-cess and access ÒanywhereÓ enable users, including children, to escape
many forms of local supervision (e.g., someone looking over his or her
shoulder), and individuals will not be as dependent on school, libraries,
and work to provide Internet access.  Consequently, approaches to Inter-

net protection and safety for children that depend on actions whose effect
is limited to a single venue will be increasingly ineffective.2.1.4Connecting to the Internet
In the reference scenario, the student connects to the Internet.  In
general, access to cyberspace is provided by one or more Internet service
providers (ISPs).  For children, Internet connections are available via:
¥Personal Internet service.  In this case, a party subscribes to a con-
sumer-oriented ISP, and gains access to the Internet through as many
places as the provider can provide access ports.  Such services are gener-

ally responsible for home access.  There are many variations in the offer-

ings from ISPs and many different fee structures as well.  Note that an
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.37TECHNOLOGYindividual child may be using a family account, a personal account asso-ciated with a family account, or a friendÕs personal Internet service.¥School and/or library Internet service.  A student (or faculty member
or staff person) or a library patron uses school or library facilities to obtain
Internet access.  In general, schools and libraries obtain Internet service

for their students and patrons through business-oriented ISPs, and a
whole host of classroom ISPs have been brought to the market.¥Public terminals.  An individual pays 
Òby the minuteÓ for Internet
access at a public terminal, which may be located in a coffee shop or an
airport, or through a wireless service.In addition to Internet connections, some ISPs offer other servicesdesigned to enhance the userÕs experience.  Proprietary services (includ-
ing parental controls to help manage the online experience of children)
and content are offered by a number of online service providers. These
services and content are available only to those who subscribe to those
online service providers.  In other cases, services are available to some

non-subscribers (for example, the instant message (IM) services of some
ISPs can provide IM service to those who do not subscribe to those ISPs).Moreover, various online service providers developÑand seek to de-velopÑreputations about the kinds of content that they may offer.  For
example, a service provider may bill itself as being Òfamily-friendlyÓ andthus provide access only to Web sites that it regards as appropriate.  The

denial of access to all Web sites not on the providerÕs Òfamily-friendlyÓlist is a proprietary service that the online provider offers that is unavail-
able to others who do not subscribe to it.ISPs offer dial-up or broadband access to the Internet.  The majority of
at-home access is today achieved through dial-up connectionsÑa userÕscomputer dials an ISP phone number and connects to the ISP through an
ordinary modem.  However, broadband access, generally through DSL

(digital subscriber lines) from phone companies or cable modems from
cable TV companies, is growing because of the higher-bandwidth connec-
tions offered.  Higher bandwidth is relevant because some kinds of mate-

rial contain many more bits than others.  Text, for example, typically

contains many fewer bits than do images, and images contain many fewer
bits than movies have.  Thus, viewing of graphics-intensive material

online through a low-bandwidth connection is often very tedious and
tries the patience of all but the most dedicated users.ISPs also require their subscribers to abide by certain terms of service,violation of which is grounds for termination of the service contract with
a subscriber.  An individual subscriber to an ISP is bound directly by the

terms of service of that ISP.  An individual who obtains Internet service

through an intermediary is bound by the terms of service imposed by theYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETintermediary, which may (or may not) be stricter than those that bind theISP and the intermediary.  Note also that ISPs vary across a wide range in

the extent to which they enforce their terms of service.  A typical provi-

sion in the terms of service of many ISPs might forbid a user from posting
sexually explicit material under most conditions.ISPs make decisions about content that they will carry.  In particular,many ISPs do not allow access to every Usenet newsgroup (e.g., they may
not carry newsgroups that carry a large volume of child pornography).5For subscribers to these ISPs, the newsgroups that are not carried can be
difficult to find and are for many practical purposes non-existent.6Finally, ISPs are funded by subscription and/or by advertising.  Sub-
scription entails periodic payment by the user to the ISP for access privi-
leges.  Advertising entails payments by advertisers to the ISP for the

privilege of displaying ads, and thus the user must be willing to accept
the presence of ads in return for access privileges.2.1.5Identifying Devices on the Internet: The Role of Addressing
Every computer or other device connected to the Internet is identifiedby a series of numbers called an IP address.7  The domain name system is
a naming system that translates these computer-readable IP addresses
into human-readable forms, namely domain names.  Thus, a domain name

is a name that identifies one or more IP addresses.  A canonical domain

name has the form Òexample.com.ÓEvery domain name has a suffix corresponding to a top-level domain(TLD), in this example .com.  Until October 1, 2001, the most common top-

level domains allowed for Internet use have been .net, .org, .com, .edu,5Usenet is a worldwide distributed discussion system consisting of a set of newsgroupswith names that are classified hierarchically by subject.  ÒArticlesÓ or 
ÒmessagesÓ are
ÒpostedÓ to these newsgroups by people on computers with the appropriate software
Ñthese articles are then broadcast to other interconnected computer systems via a wide vari-ety of networks.  Some newsgroups are 
ÒmoderatedÓ; in these newsgroups, the articles arefirst sent to a moderator for approval before appearing in the newsgroup.  For more infor-

mation, see Chip Salzenberg, ÒWhat Is Usenet?,Ó available online at <http://www.faqs.org/
faqs/usenet/what-is/part1/>.6There are Web sites through which one can read Usenet newsgroups even if the ISP hasdecided not to carry certain newsgroups, thus circumventing the ISPÕs selection policy.7The IP address of a device provides a unique address to which and from which mes-sages can be routed.  A typical IP address has the form a.b.c.d, where a, b, c, and d are

numbers from zero to 255.  The mapping between domain name and IP address is managed
by devices known as domain name servers.  More information is given in a Computer
Science and Telecommunications Board report on domain name systems that is currently in
preparation.  Note also that IP addresses may be mapped dynamically to devices, so today,a userÕs computer would have one IP address and tomorrow it might have a different one.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.39TECHNOLOGY.gov, and .mil.  In addition, a number of two-letter country suffixes have
been recognized.  As this report goes to press, a number of other top-level

domains have been approved: .biz, .info, .pro, .coop, .aero, .museum, and
.name.  (How many other TLDs will eventually be available is an open

question, and the issue of the number and type of TLDs is highly charged
politically and economically.)   As a rule of thumb, the non-country suf-

fixes indicate something about the nature of the party with which the site
is affiliated.  For example, example.museum is likely operated by a mu-

seum; example.gov is operated by a government agency.The domain name is a key element of routing traffic across the Internet.For example, a typical e-mail address is of the form ÒJohn.Doe@ example.com.ÓThe address of a typical Web site has the form Òwww.example.com.Ó  The Web
site address is generally part (or all) of a uniform resource locator (URL) that
identifies a particular Web page that can be found on a Web site.  Thus,

www.example.com/page1 might refer to a page on the example.com Web site.2.1.6Functionality of the Internet
In the reference scenario, the student used a search engine tosearch the World Wide Web for information about beavers.  Search

engines are only one aspect of the functionality that the Internet of-
fers, and as the Internet matures, new functions based on new appli-
cations and technologies are constantly being introduced.  Some of

the more important applications of the Internet are described below
and are summarized in Table 2.1.¥The World Wide Web (WWW) refers to the set of all the information
resources that can be accessed via the hypertext transfer protocol (HTTP).
Loosely speaking, it is the set of all Web pages that can be addressed by a
request of the form Òhttp: URL.Ó8  Today, the publicly accessible World
Wide Web consists of over 2 billion Web pages,9 though there is a great
deal of uncertainty in any estimate of Web size.  Web pages are associated

with particular hosts (though not every host has a Web page), and many
Web pages themselves include links to other Web pages.  The Web is

based on a client-server modelÑa user (client) specifically requests a Webpage from a host (server).¥Search engines help to organize, classify and return information
based on a query, and those who surf the Web typically rely on various8Most browsers handle addresses without a preceding Òhttp:Ó as though it was present.
Also,  some Web pages are accessible only through the 
Òhttps:Ó protocol.
9For example, as of November 2001 the Google search engine had indexed 1.6 billion Webpages.  As of April 2002, it had indexed 2.1 billion Web pages.
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETTABLE 2.1  Selected Internet Applications and Their Implications for
Exposing Children to Inappropriate Sexually Explicit Material andPotentially Dangerous ExperiencesChannelKey Points
Web pagesIdentified by and accessed through knowledge of the uniform resource
locator (for example, http://www.random_sex_site.com,
http://www.just_fine_kids_site.com)Can display still images, text, and movies
Generally the channel used today by the adult online industry
Can be found by typing the URL into a browser or clicking on a link (linkscan be embedded in instant messages, e-mail, and so on; included in other
Web pages; or found through a search engine)E-mailRequires knowledge of a user
Õs e-mail addressCan contain (or carry) text, images, links to Web pages; can be used toinitiate two-way dialog as well as to deliver information and filesSenderÕs e-mail address can be faked (or be misleading)Is the route for unsolicited commercial e-mail (spam)ChatGenerally text-based, and conducted in a 
Òchat roomÓ; text can contain linksto Web pagesCan be public (accessible to anyone) or private (by invitation only)
Content of chat and online identities of participants are visible to everyoneparticipating in the chat roomChat rooms are an online equivalent of CB radio
Used to initiate, establish, and maintain online relationshipsInstantOne-on-one dialog, and private
messagesText-based, but can contain links; images and voice can sometimes be
transmitted as wellInitiation of instant message requires knowledge of user name
ÒBuddy listsÓ allow user to know who is online at the same time as the user
UsenetPopulated by some 30,000 newsgroups of specialized topics; newsgroups
function essentially as online bulletin boards on which users can post
anything they wish, often anonymouslyMany newsgroups contain sexually explicit material, and some are orientedprimarily toward such material; sexually explicit content on Usenet
newsgroups is often more extreme than those on adult-oriented Web sitesCost of content distribution is borne by Internet service provider that carriesnewsgroups with content rather than by publisher or receiverSexually explicit Usenet newsgroups serve as conduits for advertising ofadult-oriented Web sites and as a medium in which sexually explicit
content can be exchanged among usersInternet service providers make choices about what Usenet newsgroups tocarry; some carry the full line, and others carry only a subset (e.g., all
except those devoted to child pornography)Peer-to-peerConnection between two users that is made directly without
connections mediation through a central server
Purpose of peer-to-peer connection is typically for file-sharing (of any kindof content, including sexually explicit content)Not generally anonymous (because connections are peer-to-peer, each usermust have an Internet address with which to interact)Cost of distribution is borne by the Internet service provider rather than theend usersYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.41TECHNOLOGYtypes of search engines to find the information they are seeking.  Box 2.2
describes how search engines work.  Search engines rely on technologies

of information retrieval, as discussed in Section 2.2.  Given the enormous
volume of information on the Web, users in general do not know where to
find the information they seek.  To cope with this situation, search en-

gines have been developed to help users find the addresses of informa-
tion residing on the Web.  While no data have been collected on this point,

it is probably fair to say that search engines enable the finding of most
information that people access on the Internet.Box 2.2How Search Engines WorkSearch engines help users find information on the Internet stored in Web pages.Typically, a user will type some words (the Òsearch queryÓ) into a search engine, andthe search engine will return a number of ÒlinksÓ on its results page.  To reach any of
these results, the user clicks on the link, which transfers the user away from thesearch engine and into the uniform resource locator (URL) corresponding to thatlink.A search engine works by matching the userÕs query against an index of Webpages (documents) on the Internet that it has stored in a database.  An index is
necessary because with over 2 billion pages on the Internet, a real-time search of all
of them when someone makes an information request would be prohibitively expen-sive and time-consuming.  An index allows a search to be completed in a much
smaller amount of time (seconds rather than days or weeks), though at the cost of
some incompleteness and inaccuracy (because pages may have changed or beenadded since the index was created).No search engine indexes (or even could index) all of the pages on the Web, andeach search engine indexes a different set of pages.  For this reason, and because ofthe dynamic nature of the Web, all search engines are inherently Òincomplete,Ó and
the contents of their indexes (and thus search results) differ from one another.A search engine builds its index of Web pages by sending out a ÒspiderÓ to
retrieve the pages from Web sites.  Spiders retrieve only static pages, not pages that
are hiding as databases or are dynamically generated.  Most spiders also obey the

robot.txt file on a Web site; if the file says, ÒDo not index this site,Ó they do not index
that site.  They can store millions of words and hundreds of thousands of sites.
A paper published in Nature in 1999 estimated the types of material indexed,excluding commercial sites.  ÒScientific and educationalÓ sites were the largest pop-
ulation. Health sites, personal sites, and the sites for societies (scholarly or other) areall larger than the percentage estimated for pornography; i.e., a few percent of Web
pages contained material that could reasonably be characterized as adult-oriented,sexually explicit material.1For a more detailed description of how search engines index Web pages, inter-pret queries, and search their databases, see Appendix C.1Steve Lawrence and Lee Giles.  1999.  
ÒAccessibility of Information on the Web,Ó Nature400: 107-109.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET¥E-mail refers to messages that are sent electronically from one userto another (or to many others) and read at a time of the recipientÕs choos-ing.   E-mail can carry attachments that can be other information objects,

such as images, movies, audio recordings, and so on.  E-mail can also be

used as a direct marketing tool (ÒspamÓ) analogous to third-class postalmail (also known as junk mail).  The use of e-mail requires knowledge of

a recipientÕs e-mail address.¥File sharing refers to a process in which devices controlled by end
users (i.e., ÒpeersÓ) interact directly with each other to transfer files be-tween them, rather than interacting through a central server.  In some file-

sharing networks, a central server holds a publicly accessible index to the
files available from end users (but not the files themselves).  End users

then transfer the files between themselves.10  Other peer-to-peer file-shar-
ing networks eliminate even the centralized server index function.  Users
of these systems are connected to a network of other parties (rather than
to a centralized index), and a query from one user goes to an immediate
circle of possible respondents.  If not satisfied, the query then goes from

those respondents to other respondents.  Furthermore, such queries are

highly anonymous, though file transfers between end users are not.  Al-

though peer-to-peer interaction is most often performed in a user-to-user
mode, there is no reason that in principle a single user could not establish
peer-to-peer connections to a large number of other users and thus func-
tion in a Òserver-likeÓ mode for those users.
¥Usenet newsgroups are a broadcast medium in which anyone any-
where with a computer can be a transmitter.  Typically groups form

around shared social interests.  Thus, the Usenet becomes the place for

discussion among self-selecting groups interested in specific topics.  The

volume carried by Usenet newsgroups is substantial (over 50 gigabytes
per day on more than 10,000 newsgroups).11  Anyone can 
ÒpostÓ a mes-
sage on any Usenet newsgroup (perhaps anonymouslyÑsee Section 2.3),governed only by his or her own judgment in ascertaining the relevance
of the message to the nominal topic of that newsgroup.  Newsgroups are

named as described in Box 2.3.10This mode of file sharing first gained widespread publicity with the Napster network,an online service that facilitated the sharing of digital music files among users.  The files

themselvesÑthe information content of interest to end usersÑalways remained on clientsystems and never passed through a centralized server (such as one that would host a Webpage).  Instead, the server gave end users the ability to search for particular files of interest

and to initiate a peer-to-peer transfer between the users willing to share (and receive) fileswithout the payment of a fee, even when the files constituted legally protected intellectualproperty.  Napster is important for this discussion because there is no particular reason that

the files in question must be digital music filesÑand indeed, extensions of the Napsterprotocol can handle other types of files.11Personal communication, Dan Geer, president of Usenet.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.43TECHNOLOGYBox 2.3Characteristics of Usenet NewsgroupsNamingNaming of newsgroups is hierarchical and of arbitrary depth.  Naming of Usenet
newsgroups mirrors the spirit of how computer and other network end points arenamed within the Internet as a whole, which Usenet predates.  Hence
¥[comp.org.usenix] is the computer professional organization USENIX,¥[comp.os.linux.announce] is announcements concerning a computer operat-ing system named LINUX,¥[rec.travel.africa] is about recreational travel to Africa,¥[alt.sex] is about sex in general, whereas¥[alt.sex.wanted.escorts] is an obvious specialization,¥[net.config] is about configuring networks,¥[alt.drugs.mushrooms] is about mushrooms as sources of drugs,¥[misc.health.diabetes] is advice on diabetes and health, and¥[ne.politics] is wars of words around New England politics.By technocratic convention, some parts of the hierarchy are static and new groupscan only arise by consensus voting (groups improperly created do not get carried).
Conversely, other parts of the hierarchy (notably ÒaltÓ) are wide open to the creation ofnew groups and subgroups, all under the banner of anti-censorship.  Not surprisingly,the alt-newsgroups contain large amounts of sexually explicit content of all varieties.ModerationSome groups are Òmoderated,Ó which means that postings are routed to modera-
tors, people who either approve and forward or deny and delete prospective postings.This is enormously thankless work, and first-rate moderation often requires load shar-
ing among several people working as one.  Because unmoderated groups are available

to all, the ÒspamÓ problem that bedevils e-mail is vastly worse in Usenet.  Ironically,
the parts of Usenet devoted to communications about sexual matters are so over-
whelmed with advertisement that they have been effectively censored inasmuch as nouseful discussion can take place within them due to the volume of junk.Sexually Explicit ContentUsenet newsgroups in the ÒaltÓ hierarchy come and go.  On one day in 2001, an
examination of Usenet on one server of one ISP showed:¥287 Usenet discussion groups in the alt.sex.* hierarchy, most of which were(in principle) text groups and which contained an aggregate of 30,541 postings in a
recent 3-day interval (which overcounts the number of original posts because many
are repeatedly cross-posted to multiple groups);¥469 postings in one sample group, alt.sex.anal, appearing in the 3-day interval,of which 102 appeared by their own headline description to be involving children;¥27 Usenet groups in the picture-oriented alt.binaries.erotica.* hierarchy, con-taining an aggregate of 6,469 postings in the 3-day interval (again without regard to
duplicate cross-postings); and¥198 Usenet groups in the picture-oriented alt.binaries.pictures.* hierarchy, ofwhich 57 (of the 198) appeared to be sex related and which contained an aggregate of
46,417 postings in the 3-day interval (again without regard to duplicate cross-postings).Similar results for availability, volume, quality, repetition, and ease of accessapply to other channels in like manner.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET¥Internet relay chat (IRC) and chat rooms.  These are popular real-time
interactive services on the Internet that function as the equivalent of CB
radio, where one person talks on a channel and anyone listening on that
channel can hear and respond.  IRC and chat rooms allow users to ex-

change text-only messages in real time with other people all over the
world.  IRC ÒchannelsÓ and chat rooms can be public (so that they can befound by others wishing to join the conversation) or private (so that they
are invisible to the general public and special knowledge of the channelÕsor chat roomÕs name is needed to join).   IRC and chat rooms require a
user to take active (initiating) steps to join an ongoing conversation.  In

addition, some chat rooms or channels on the Internet are monitored by
employees or volunteers for language and content and behaviors, but
most are not.  (These monitors sometimes have the ability to force particu-

lar users out of a conversation.)There are many variants of chat rooms. Chat rooms can be based oninterestsÑmovies, sports, hobbiesÑor can be just a place to meet people.Some of the latest technologies are found in the online gaming commu-
nity where people assume digital visual representations called avatars.
Avatars can then interact with each other in cyberspace.  The chat then

has a visual animated component.  MUDs and MOOs are complex online

games relying mainly on text interactions while relatively new games like
MicrosoftÕs Age of Empires and Electronic Arts
Õ The Sims Online utilize
visual representations to create fantastic communities for role playing.¥Instant messaging services allow a two-way, real-time, private dialog
between two users  These services include such well-known entities as

AOLÕs Instant Messenger and YahooÕs Messenger.  A user initiating a
message sends an invitation to talk to another (specific) user who is online
at the same time.  Unlike IRC, no channel-seeking initiating step is re-

quired on the part of the recipient to become part of such a conversation.12Instant messaging also allows someone to carry on multiple private con-
versations simultaneously.  Instant messaging is very popular today for

both professional and personal use, because unlike in chat rooms, one
tends to talk to people whom one already knows.  Note also that IMs are
12Buddy lists are an important element of IM services.  A buddy list contains the online
names of ÒbuddiesÓ of a given user and indicates when one or more come online.  When the
user knows that Òsue123Ó is online, she can send 
Òsue123Ó an instant message and start a
conversation.  Thus, buddy lists facilitate online real-time communication among people
who know each otherÕs online names.  Most IM services also offer a blocking option that
enables a user who receives an IM from someone to block it.  This option is used when a
user receives an IM from someone with whom the user does not want to communicate (e.g.,a stranger, or a friend with whom one is on the ÒoutsÓ).Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.45TECHNOLOGYoften used in conjunction with chat rooms or other online activitiesÑauser in a chat room can send an IM to someone else in the chat room
(because he or she sees the other partyÕs screen name or ÒhandleÓ), thusestablishing a private communication.  Once limited to text-only interac-

tions, IM services are increasingly sophisticated.  For example, some IMs

can support direct voice interactions and exchanges of music or image
files.  Other IM services allow a user to block selected other parties from

contacting him or her, thus increasing the difficulty of harassment.¥Videoconferencing applications are growing.  Web cameras and
streaming media depend on the increasing availability of broadband
Internet connections to allow the high-quality real-time transmission of
audio and video content.  Today
Õs Internet videoconferencing suffersfrom many of the same problems as Internet telephony, most notably
poor quality (low resolution as well as ÒjitterÓ in the moving images).  A
popular consumer videoconferencing application is CU-SEE-ME, a very
inexpensive videoconferencing tool originally developed at Cornell Uni-
versity for educational applications and now used to support a wide
variety of video applications.  Chat rooms are often forums in which

Web cameras are used to send pictures in real time.¥Streaming media, video, and audio are allowing people to watch mov-
ies like broadcasts over the Web as well.  A movie that is now available

through pay-per-view cable TV may readily become available through
the Internet (a phenomenon known as digital convergence), perhaps aug-
mented by the availability of an online chat room for discussion of that
content with oneÕs friends and/or an electronic commerce site where onecan purchase products or services illustrated in the movie.¥Internet telephony allows two-way real-time voice communication
to be established without records of such communications appearing on
family telephone bills.  A variety of standards now in place facilitate the

interoperability of Internet telephony products, which would otherwise
be hampered by proprietary specifications and protocols.   However,

because the Internet was not designed to support real-time operations,
the quality of such connections remains an issue, though progress is
being made in this area.  Internet telephony products enable Internet

users to establish real-time voice contact without the need for a tele-
phone, and even today, voice connections (of somewhat low fidelity)
can be established through certain types of instant message and in some
chat rooms.In addition to these functions, there are a variety of Internet applica-tions for facilitating Web activity (Box 2.4).  The use of these applications

is often free, and they are important because they reduce the costs and
difficulty of establishing a (non-commercial) Web presence and of gener-Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETating communities of shared interestÑin sports, in science, and in tradingof sexually explicit materials.Finally, a variety of peripheral devices are also relevant to a discus-sion of Internet functionality.  The availability of devices to convert sound

into digital form, to digitize existing images, and to record still and video
imagery enables individuals to generate digital content inexpensively and
in private.  Digital cameras, Web cameras, and camcorders are dropping

in price and the pictures they take increasing in quality, and virtually
anyone can publish videos to the Web or can participate in or set up
videoconferences at very low cost.13  Thus, while one might have had
Box 2.4Internet Applications for Facilitating Web ActivityA number of companies provide free e-mail accounts that are accessible fromanywhere on the World Wide Web.  Because they are free, many savvy consumers
have set these accounts up to do their more general e-mail (for instance to get infor-
mation from companies), while they reserve their private e-mail address for a muchcloser circle of friends and colleagues.A second service available from service providers is free storage. A company willprovide some limited amount of storage online (25 megabytes is a common num-ber), and the user can make that storage space accessible to anyone that he or shechooses.  Online storage can be used to host a Web site or as a private online 
ÒdropÓfor any kind of digitized electronic content.  A variant on free storage services is free
Web page hostingÑa user receives a limited amount of disk space to construct apublicly accessible Web page, with content restricted only by the terms of service to
which the user agrees in return for the free service.1A third service is that of the Òonline community.Ó  Services that promote online
communities help to bring like-minded individuals into electronic contact and inter-
action with each other.  The Internet service providers promoting these communities
provide directories, search engines, chat rooms, and an organization to help facili-tate these electronic affinity groups.1Note that free services often have characteristics that may make them less desirable thanfor-pay services.  For example, a business owner who is concerned about high reliability and

availability of resources is likely to want a service that provides frequent file backup, a feature
that is unlikely to be available from a free storage provider.13A 2001 video advertisement from Sony Europe for its Vaio line of notebook computers(which can have a Webcam built into them) depicts a man working at home on his Vaio
notebook computer (with the Webcam).  An adult female whom he obviously knows enters
the room, greets him, strips to her underwear in another room, and starts behaving withhim in a very sexually aggressive manner.  The advertisement closes with several business-
men on the other end of a video conference looking at their screen in surprise seeing thewoman on top of the man.  The advertisement is sexually suggestive but depicts no overt
sexual activity or nudity.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.47TECHNOLOGYdifficulty in the past in taking a picture of a couple having sex (because ofthe difficulty in having the film developed), today a digital camera en-
ables one to do the same in complete privacy.2.1.7Cost and Economics of the Internet
On the Internet, the cost of handling information is rapidly decreas-ing.  From a message sender
Õs point of view, electronic messages cost nextto nothing to create, exactly nothing to duplicate, and virtually nothing to
send, andÑgiven the anonymity of the InternetÑinexpensive bandwidthimposes none of the costs normally associated with responsibility, pru-
dence, or probity, leading to problems such as unsolicited commercial e-
mail (also known as spam).  Bandwidth is inexpensive enough that most

ISPs and services recognize that it is cheaper to Òsend everythingÓ through
its pipes than to determine if a message or information is inappropriate,
unwanted, or unrequested by the receiver.Furthermore, because digital information can be so freely reproduced,it is essentially impossible to rely on mechanical difficulty or expense of
reproduction to curtail the availability of anything to anyone.  Once re-

leased onto the Internet, content is next to impossible to banÑwhether thatcontent involves a political manifesto, sensitive classified information, com-
pany trade secrets, oneÕs medical records, or child pornography.14Finally, the Internet contains an enormous volume of material thatchanges rapidly.  The sheer mass of this material means that it is economi-

cally prohibitive to review every publicly accessible item for its inappro-
priateness or lack thereof.The economics described above suggest that if it costs virtually noth-ing to provide content to everyone, then an entirely free market will seek
to make all possible content available to everyone.  The implications of

such economics are further discussed in Chapter 3.2.1.8A Global Internet
The Internet transcends the physical boundaries of local communitiesand national borders alike, thus expanding the universe from which con-14This is not to say that all content on the Internet remains accessible, but in practiceattempts to ban certain information content result in efforts by those interested in such
information to copy and distribute it.  Thus, while the personal medical records of John Doe
may not be of particular interest, and if posted today may disappear without a trace tomor-row, the reason is that no one except John Doe is likely to be interested in such records.
However, if the personal medical records of the President of the United States were postedon the Internet, it would be virtually impossible for the most determined efforts of theWhite House to erase them and to eliminate all access to them.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETtent of various kinds can be drawn.  Of particular relevance is that many
other nations have different views about visual depictions of sexuality
and the human body.  For example, images of frontal nudity are found in

mainstream print media in many parts of Europe, and publication or
broadcast of such images raises little concern or outcry there.  Thus, mate-

rial not seen as ÒpornographicÓ by those providing it (e.g., content pro-
viders in Europe) may be perceived as such by those viewing it in a
different cultural context (e.g., by some viewers in the United States).A further consequence of the InternetÕs international nature is thatonly with great difficulty (and many would argue that it is impossible)
can laws passed in one jurisdiction affect the behavior of parties in other
jurisdictions that are not generally subject to such laws.15  Thus, to the
extent that sexually explicit material of any kindÑor any other type ofmaterial, for that matterÑis available from overseas sources, laws thatseek to restrict U.S. content providers from making such material avail-
able to U.S. citizens will fail to restrict it in practice.162.1.9The Relative Newness of the Internet
Amidst all of the attention given to the Internet and dot-com phe-nomena, it is helpful to recall that the Internet has been a part of the
national consciousness for less than a decade (since the mid-1990s).   Ten

years is an enormously long time compared to the time scale of technol-
ogy change, but it is quite short on the time scale of social, economic, and
legal change.  Given that the array of pre-Internet social, economic, and

legal and regulatory practices to balance competing societal interests de-
veloped over a time scale of many decades (and in some cases, centuries),
it is not surprising that the Internet has offered something of a vacuum
into which many parties seeking quick advantage have moved.For example, the practice of adult-oriented Web sites using addressesthat are based on common words or that are similar to those of non-adult
businesses draws many people to sites that they had not intended to visit.
Branding histories have not been established that allow users to differen-
tiate between reliable and unreliable information.  Certain practices that

are acceptable in the real worldÑsuch as direct marketingÑmay cross15Of course, such a claim is valid only to the extent that content providers and ISPs arenumerous and dispersed internationally.  If the number of ISPs is small enough (as could

happen through attrition or mergers and acquisitions in one jurisdiction), they becomelikely targets for regulation, as regulatory efforts can be concentrated rather than dispersed.16On the other hand, sources that appear to be foreign may in fact be under the jurisdic-tion of U.S. law.  For example, the mere fact that a domain name has a country suffix such
as .ru or .jp does not necessarily mean that its owner is located in Russia or Japan.  Indeed,
in this hypothetical example, such parties may well reside in California or Iowa.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.49TECHNOLOGYover into the unacceptable in cyberspace because they are increasinglyvoluminous and often seen as more intrusive as well.Perhaps the most important consequence of the relative newness ofthe Internet is the generation gap in knowledge between parent and child.
It may be that as todayÕs children become parents themselves, their famil-iarity with rapid rates of technological change will reduce the knowledge
gap between them and their children, and mitigate to some extent the
consequences of the gap that remains.2.2TECHNOLOGIES OF INFORMATION RETRIEVAL
As suggested in the reference scenario in which a student seeks infor-mation on adult beavers, information retrieval is an important part of
what people do on the Internet.  By virtue of its vast scope, the Internet is

a route for obtaining a range and variety of material to which one would
most likely not otherwise have easy accessÑsuch materials include his-tory, science, entertainment, games, medical information, and religious
information, as well as materials that adults deem inappropriate for chil-
dren.  If children are treated as adults on the Internet, children may come

across such materials.Searching for information on the Internet is different from searching forinformation in, for example, a library in the physical world.  Typically, an

individual might search for information using an Internet search engine.  A

common initial search strategyÑused by many inexperienced individu-alsÑis to type one or two keywords and then to examine the sites that arereturned.  For a word such as Òsex,Ó a search engine might return informa-tion on sex education sites, a set of biology notes on sex, and adult-oriented
Web sites.  By contrast, a user of a physical library might rely on the content

labeling in various classification systems, such as those of the Library of
Congress and the Dewey Decimal systems.  On the Internet, this absence of

reliable content labeling confounds specificity in searching.  Further, the

scale of a ÒWeb catalogÓ (i.e., the volume of information accessible through
popular search engines) is much larger than that of most library catalogs of
holdings, and Web search engines often do not provide adequate categori-
zation of Web pages contained in their databases.  Finally, the most impor-
tant distinction between the physical library and the Internet is the fact that
all physical libraries exercise some editorial discretion in acquiring materi-
als, whereas the Internet is a venue in which the publications of any party
are available and retrievable without editorial restriction.Information retrieval systems support people in finding informationin large databases of information objects (whether in the form of text,
images, video, or other media) that is relevant to their problems or situa-
tions.  Internet search engines, where the database is the Web, are a typi-
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETcal example of such systems, as are libraries, where the database is thecollection.  To accomplish their goals, information retrieval systems must:
¥Represent the content of the information objects (what the objectsare about), through a process called content representation or content analysis;¥Represent the personÕs information Òneed,Ó through a process
called problem or user representation
;¥Match the representations of information objects and informationproblem, to retrieve those objects that are most likely to be useful to the
searcher (search techniques); and¥Provide an interface between the user and the other components ofthe system to support the userÕs interaction with those components andwith the information objects.Filtering systems, discussed at greater length in Sections 2.3.1 and12.1, work like information retrieval systems in reverse; that is, they are
concerned not with retrieving desirable information, but rather with mak-
ing sure that undesirable information is not retrieved. However, their
essential operations remain the same:  they must represent the content of
the information objects; they must represent relevant characteristics of the
user; they must match object representations with user representations to
eliminate undesirable objects; and they must provide a means for users to
specify or otherwise indicate what is not desired.The essential problem with information retrieval (and filtering) is thatall of these processes are inherently uncertain. With respect to contentanalysis, what an information object is about can be many things for
many people. The problem is intrinsically difficult, even for humans:  one

person may think a picture shows a starry sky; another may interpret it as
a symptom of mental ill-health; and a third is interested only in the brush
technique.  Similarly, one user may find a particular page of text obscene;

to a second it is merely embarrassing; and to the third, it contains impor-
tant health-care information. Also, even representing what text is about is
fraught with uncertainty. Most words mean many things (polysemy);
most concepts can be expressed in many ways (synonymy).Images are a particularly difficult recognition challenge for comput-ers.  Computers seek to recognize an image by analyzing the relationship

of the pixels in it (color tone, contrast, and so on).  While it is often

possible to tell whether a picture has nearly naked people in it, images of
the California desert and apple pies are also sometimes identified as pic-
tures with naked people by todayÕs image recognition software.17  And
17D.A. Forsyth and M.M. Fleck.  1999.  
ÒAutomatic Detection of Human Nudes,Ó Interna-tional Journal of Computer Vision 32(1): 63-77.
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.51TECHNOLOGYimage recognition technology is for the most part incapable of distin-guishing minors from adults (and hence cannot identify child pornogra-
phy with any reliability).  At the same time, using words that may be

found alongside images provides additional information that can help
identify sexually explicit images properly.With respect to representing the user (or what the user desires ordesires not to see) the problems are similarly difficult. Users are in general
unable to specify precisely that which they do not know but may be
searching for, nor are they (or a computer algorithm, or another person)
able to specify precisely the characteristics of that which they should not
see. The matching process is thus itself inevitably uncertain, since the
representations on which it depends cannot be complete and certain.Because information retrieval and information filtering are probabi-listic, any search engine will find material that is irrelevant to the userÕsneeds and fail to find material that is relevant.  Similarly, any filter will

inevitably allow the passing of some undesirable material, and will filter
out some desirable material. Any attempt to avoid errors of the first type
will lead to an increase in errors of the second type, and vice versa.These points are discussed in greater detail in Section 2.3.1 and inAppendix C.2.3TECHNOLOGIES RELATED TO ACCESS CONTROL AND
POLICY ENFORCEMENTAs more peopleÑand childrenÑconnect to the Internet, problemssuch as exposure to inappropriate material and experiences assume a
higher profile. One logical conclusion might be that if technology helped
to create these problems, technology can help to solve them.  While the

committee does not believe that technology is yet the foundation of good
solutions to these problems (and may never be), technologies neverthe-
less do have useful roles to play.  Below is a brief discussion of technolo-

gies that may be relevant.2.3.1Filtering Technologies
Filtering technologies allow Internet material or activities that aredeemed inappropriate to be blocked, so that the individual using that
filtered computer cannot gain access to that material or participate in
those activities.  Typically, material is determined to be inappropriate on

the basis of its source, its content, or the labels that have been associated
with it.  Determination of inappropriate content can be accomplished by

computer-based methods, by a combination of computer-based methods
and human judgment, or by human judgment alone.  This section ad-
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETdresses automatic and human plus automatic methods, since the size ofthe Internet effectively prevents use of human judgment alone (Box 2.5).
(In the case of methods based on a combination of human plus automatic
techniques, a human rater examines Web sites that a preliminary ma-
chine-performed analysis has identified for human examination, and
makes a judgment call about whether the site is inappropriate, and if so,
determines the objectionable category into which the page falls.)Filtering technologies can be applied in several ways.  One is by the
establishment of so-called Òblack lists,Ó which are lists of sources that
have been deemed to be inappropriate, and that the user is prevented
from accessing.  Another is by the establishment of 
Òwhite lists,Ó which
are lists of sources that have been deemed appropriate, and thus are the
only sources that the user is allowed to access.  These two methods re-

quire a priori identification of the bad (good) sites, which are then incor-
porated into the filtering software, which stands between the userÕs Inter-net access tool and the Internet itself.  Bad sites for black lists can be

identified through any of the technologies described below.  Also, in a

priori determinations of inappropriate content, the categorization judg-
ment is usually made days, weeks, or even months in advance of the
userÕs request for the Web siteÑa point that is significant in light of thefact that the content of Web sites typically changes over time.A third means of applying filtering technologies occurs in real time,that is, at the time that the user is actually interacting on the Internet and
when the information in question is flowing directly to the user.  In this

case, there may be no a priori blocking of specific sites or sources; rather,
the content or other characteristics of retrieved items are analyzed prior to
display, and on this basis it is determined whether they should be dis-
played to the user.  This real-time method can also be used in reverse; that

is, it can be used to analyze the userÕs request, and on this basis decidewhether the request should be allowed, or disallowed.  Although con-

ducted in real time, this method nevertheless requires a priori specifica-
tion of indicators of content which determine that that source has inap-
propriate content.  Finally, only real-time content monitoring is useful for

monitoring and selective blocking of outgoing information, such as block-
ing certain text from appearing in e-mail (e.g., a phone number).Note that if a requested Web site is determined to be inappropriate,there are several options for how much material from that site should be
blocked.  For example, all material on that site might be blocked (every-

thing on www.example.com).  Or only a certain directory might be blocked

(www.example.com/directory1 might be blocked, while www.example.
com/directory2 might not be blocked).  Or a particular page within a direc-

tory might be blocked (e.g., www.example.com/directory1/picture1.jpg).Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.53TECHNOLOGYBox 2.5Human Scrutiny of Every Site to Be Blocked?The Web is so large that it is impossible for a human being to have scrutinizedevery possible Web page that a viewer might access. However, filter vendors oftenclaim that some human being has examined every one of the sites blocked by their
filter and identified it as inappropriate.On the face of it, such a claim is not necessarily inconsistent with the first state-ment about the size of the Web.  But the sheer size of the Web means that the

screening process involved must involve a mix of automated and human process.  In
particular, the only method that makes sense for large-scale screening is for someautomated process to nominate sites for blocking, and for an individual to evaluate
the nominated sites.Can the claim of human examination for every site be substantiated?  One as-
sumption on which the claim rests is that blocked sites are revisited on the time scale
on which the content of a site is likely to change.  If the revisit rate is inadequate to
keep up with such changes, a site that may have been properly blocked when it wasfirst added to the list may remain blocked even if the siteÕs new content would not bedeemed inappropriate (overblocking).A more serious issue is that human evaluation of a site is a labor-intensive pro-cess.  The critical variable is how long it takes for a human being to evaluate a Web

page.  Finkelstein and Tien
1 estimate 1 minute per page as a reasonable overall
estimate for sustained work.  This estimate is quite plausible if the page contains a
significant amount of textual material that must be read (as would be the case for
hate speech, for example), but is likely high by a factor of 5 or 10 for pages thatcontain images of the kind typically found on adult Web sites.  Assuming about 200
workdays per year, an individual doing page evaluation alone might be able to
evaluate somewhere between 0.1 million and 1 million pages per year.These figures suggest that an effort of 10 person-years is needed to create a com-prehensive list of a million sites to be blocked (including both text and images)Ñwhile an effort on the order of a person-year is required if the primary target is sexualimages of the sort found on adult Web sites.Reliable software to identify possibly inappropriate sites could reduce the effortrequired considerably.  That is, the software
Ñset to minimize underblockingÑwould propose candidate sites for human evaluation, and the resulting higher levelof overblocking would propose sites for which human decision making is essential.
Moreover, technology could be used to filter out duplicates, reducing further theoverall number of sites that would require human decision making.See also the discussion in Finkelstein and Tien, ÒBlacklisting BytesÓ21Seth Finkelstein and Lee Tien, 2000, ÒBlacklisting Bytes,Ó white paper submitted to the
Committee on Tools and Strategies for Protecting Kids from Pornography and Their Applicability
to Other Inappropriate Internet Content.  Available online at <http://www.itasnrc.org> and at

<http://www.eff.org/Censorship/Censorware/20010306_eff_nrc_paper1.html>.2Finkelstein and Tien, 2000,  ÒBlacklisting Bytes.ÓYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETFiltering by Internet Domain Names and AddressesFiltering by Internet domain names and addresses is typically accom-plished by examination of the name of the Web site that is requested by the
user or returned to the user, in the case of real-time filtering.  The name of

a Web site (or page on a Web site) is specified by a uniform resource locator
(URL).  A given URL, for example, http://www.example.com/directory1/

picture1.jpg, is usually checked against this list in a number of ways.In the case of a priori filtering, the URL is checked against a preexist-ing list of inappropriate names generated by the filter vendor.  All parts of

the URL are compared to a list of words or terms that have been previ-
ously found to be associated with sites containing inappropriate material,
or that are believed are likely to be associated with inappropriate mate-
rial.  For example, www.hotmama.com is likely to refer to an adult Web

site.18  The .xxx domain (discussed in Section 13.1) is based on this notion.
This method can be used to permit access, as well as to prevent access.For instance, a site in the .gov domain would in general be considered
highly unlikely to contain inappropriate material, as would a site with the
name of a museum.  In the case of real-time filtering, access would be

denied (allowed) based on the comparison; in the case of a priori filtering,
the URL would probably be forwarded to a human evaluator, who would
determine whether it should be placed on the black list.A related method is to examine the links that are made from a site andto a site.  Because many adult Web sites are linked to each other, a referral

to a known adult site A that is present on Web site B provides reason to
assume that B is also an adult site.A second method is to check the IP address of the Web siteÑin this(made-up) case, 203.12.34.12.  If this address is on a list of inappropriate IP

addresses, access is blocked.  This approach is helpful when a Web site

has only an IP address and no domain name associated with it.A complication in this analysis of page names is that different hostscan share the same IP address through a process known as IP-based vir-
tual hosting, which is a way of assigning multiple domain names to the
same IP address. IP-based virtual hosting is made possible by the fact that
the HTTP protocol passes the URL containing the requested domain name
to the site at the given IP address, and the software at that IP address
maps the domain name to the appropriate portion of the server.  Thus, an

entry in the domain name server need not point to a unique address, and
a given IP address does not specify a Web site unambiguously.  Thus,

www.porn-company.com and www.safe-for-kids.com might share the18As of October 26, 2001, this Web site presented a blank page.  But it may not be blank in
the future.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.55TECHNOLOGYsame IP address (e.g., 204.1.23.3), even though each of these names, whenentered into a browser, would reach the correct sites.  A list that desig-

nated 204.1.23.3 as containing inappropriate material would block both
domain names.Filtering by Textual AnalysisFiltering by textual analysis makes use of information retrieval repre-sentation technologies discussed in Section 2.2 and Appendix C.  The

basic concept is to examine all of the text that is on the site or page that is
being considered (or in the search request), and to determine whether
that text is indicative of inappropriate content.The most naŁve method of doing this is to compare the individualwords of the text or request to a list of words that are strongly associated
with inappropriate content.  For example, the site might be deemed inap-

propriate if any of a number of keywords is found (e.g., Òorgy,Ó Òcum,ÓÒbomb,Ó Ògun,Ó Òmarijuana,Ó and so on).  When such words are found,
access is blocked, or the site is flagged for possible inclusion on a black
list.However, many words have more than one meaning (for instance,ÒbeaverÓ can have both sexual and nonsexual meanings); furthermore,
the context in which words appear has a great effect on their appropriate-
ness (for instance, the word ÒbreastÓ can appear in a cancer information
site, as opposed to an adult-oriented, sexually explicit site).  More sophis-

ticated text analysis techniques that are available to address these prob-
lems can, for instance, identify phrases (e.g., Òbeaver damsÓ or 
ÒbreastcancerÓ) in order to determine appropriateness more precisely.Another method of textual analysis that is used for filtering is textclassification or categorization (see Appendix C).  This technique ana-

lyzes the text as a whole, taking account of such characteristics as fre-
quency of occurrence of various words, co-occurrence of pairs or other
combinations of words, and other statistical parameters of the text.  Text

classification is first applied to a so-called training collection of texts that
are already known to be either appropriate or inappropriate, in order to
discover regularities in the statistical properties of appropriate texts and
inappropriate texts.  The same technique is then applied to texts retrieved

from the Web, and their statistical characteristics are used to classify them
as either appropriate or inappropriate.Filtering by Image AnalysisAlmost all sexually explicit material on the Internet is associated withimages.  As indicated in Section 2.2 and Appendix C, analysis of images to
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETdetermine if they are inappropriate is a very hard problem, if it is to bedone accurately.  Nevertheless, there are some techniques that can pro-

vide clues to the potential inappropriateness of an image.19  For instance,
it is possible to identify large expanses of what is likely to be flesh in an
image, and it is also possible to determine whether an image is likely to be
of one or more people.  Also, it is possible to have a set of canonical or

usual inappropriate images, against which images on a Web site can be
compared.  However, all of these techniques are highly error-prone and

therefore are most often used in combination with other indicators of
potential inappropriateness as described below.Filtering by LabelsAll Web pages have associated with them information that describesvarious characteristics of the page and that is typically hidden from the
user.  For example, HTML or XML tags within the body of a page can

encode various rules that determine how information is structured on the
page.  This low-level information can be used to compare the page
Õsstructure against a set of structures commonly associated with inappro-
priate pages.  At a somewhat higher level, Web sites have associated with

them information about the site or page as a whole.  Such metadata can be

used to determine the appropriateness (or not) of a site.  Metadata is not

directly viewable by the user, a feature that has been exploited by many
inappropriate (and even some appropriate) sites in order to bias search
results toward themselves.For instance, due to the nature of search engines, the more times aword that is used in a query appears in a site, the higher up in retrieval
rankings that site will be placed.  Thus, extended repetition of commonly

used search terms in the metadata, which have no relationship to the
actual content of the site itself, will result in that siteÕs being retrieved andplaced highly in the results when those terms are used.This methodology can, however, also be used for filtering purposes,in the following ways.  The terms in the metadata can be compared to the

words in the text of the page, and if those in the metadata are markedly
dissimilar from those in the page, that page is suspect.  Also, the fact of

unusual repetition of words in the metadata can be used as a clue for
filtering.19A brief summary concerning the technology of screening for sexually explicit imagescan be found in James Ze Wang, Jia Li, Gio Wiederhold, and Oscar Firschein, 1998, ÒSystemfor Screening Objectionable Images,Ó Computer Communications Journal 21(15): 1355-1360,
and papers referenced therein.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.57TECHNOLOGYThe most straightforward method of labeling for filtering is labelingto indicate the nature of the content of the Web page or site.  This can be

accomplished either by third parties who label sites according to some
established set of categories that indicate their content, or by the producer
of the site.  This is, in effect, the human version of the statistically based

automatic text classification described above.  The filter then works by

establishing which categories of sites are allowed to be presented, reading
the appropriate label in the metadata, and refusing all sites that are either
on a black list of categories, or not on a white list.A common framework for labeling is the Platform for Internet Con-tent Selection (PICSÑBox 2.6).  In the domain of television, the V-chip is a
filter that is based on labeling.  (Movies and video games also have labels
Box 2.6The Platform for Internet Content Selection
The Platform for Internet Content Selection (PICS) is a framework for the supportof content-rating systems.  PICS provides standards that facilitate self-rating and third-
party rating of content.  Self-rating is performed by the content providers, who labelthe content they create and distribute.  Third-party rating enables multiple, indepen-

dent labeling services to associate additional labels with content created and distrib-uted by others.  Services may devise their own labeling systems, and the same con-
tent may receive different labels from different services.A content provider wishing to include a PICS-compliant label with its contentfirst chooses a rating vocabulary to use, such as ICRA or RSAC-i.  A provider will
describe the content to be rated in terms of this vocabulary (usually generated by
filling out an online questionnaire about that content).  The output of that question-
naire is metadata with the appropriate, standardized, machine-readable descriptors,which is then placed into the metadata portion of a Web site.  A third-party rater uses

much the same process, except that the metadata is associated with the URL atwhich the content is found and placed into a database residing in a Òlabel server.ÓPICS is part of a larger effort being managed by the World Wide Web Consortiumon metadata, that is, data associated with Web content that represents informationabout that content in a way that is easy for machines to deal with.  Metadata is
intended to facilitate searching, helping authors to describe their documents in ways
that search engines, browsers, and Web crawlers can understand.SOURCE:  See <http://www.w3.org/PICS>; Paul Resnick, 1997, 
ÒFiltering Information on theInternet,Ó Scientific American, March; and Jim Miller and Paul Resnick, 1996, ÒPICS: InternetAccess Controls Without Censorship,Ó Communications of the ACM 39(10): 87-93.  For oppos-
ing views on the desirability of PICS, see Simson Garfinkel, ÒGood Clean PICS: The Most Effec-tive Censorship Technology the Net Has Ever Seen May Already Be Installed on Your Desktop,Ó<http://hotwired.lycos.com/packet/garfinkel/97/05/index2a.html>; Lawrence Lessig, 1997, ÒTyr-anny in the Infrastructure,Ó Wired 5.07(July), <http://www.wired.com/wired/5.07/cyber_rights.
html>; and Jonathan Weinberg, 1997, ÒRating the Net,Ó Hastings Communication and Entertain-ment Law Journal 19(2): 453.
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET(i.e., ratings) that often appear before a program is televised or a game isplayed, but these are not machine-readable.  Further, these labels are

intended to provide advice to consumers rather than to enable techno-
logical denial.)Filtering Using Combinations of MethodsAll of the technologies of filtering that are discussed above have in-herent uncertainties associated with them, which lead them to make er-
rors both of commission (misinterpreting a site as inappropriate) or omis-
sion (not identifying an inappropriate site).  However, the sources of error

in each of the techniques are different.  Thus, by combining the various

techniques, the level of error can be reduced.  For example, if image

analysis indicates the high probability of a naked person but textual analy-
sis does not indicate any of the words usually associated with adult-
oriented material, analysis of the associated URL finds the domain .gov,
and the metadata indicates that the owner of the site is the National
Gallery of Art, the filter would be justified in predicting that the site
should not be regarded as containing adult-oriented, sexually explicit
material, despite the evidence from image analysis.  Such methods show

promise in improving filter performance.Trade-offs in FilteringAs mentioned above, filtering is subject to two kinds of error: errorsof commission, also known and referred to in this volume as Type I er-
rors, or as overblocking, and errors of omission, also referred to as Type II
errors, or underblocking.  In the information retrieval literature (see Ap-
pendix C), these kinds of errors are associated, respectively, with the
performance measures of precision and recall.  The first type of error
ÑoverblockingÑoccurs when a site that is appropriate is filtered, i.e., isdeemed inappropriate and therefore denied to the user.  The second type

of errorÑunderblockingÑoccurs when a site that is in fact inappropriateis deemed appropriate, and therefore permitted to the user.Due to the nature of filtering, these two types of errors are inevitable.It is possible to adjust the method of filtering such that the occurrence of
one type of error is reduced; however, reducing one type of error will
always result in increasing the other type of error.  For instance, one can

reduce underblocking by setting the standard for what is inappropriate at
a very low level (e.g., denying access to all sites or refusing all queries that
contain the word ÒadultÓ or the word 
ÒsexÓ).  This might result in many
sexually explicit sites being successfully filtered, but it will clearly also
result in a concomitant increase in overblocking, since many obviouslyYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.59TECHNOLOGYappropriate sites will also be filtered.20  In some settings (e.g., in doing
research), it is desirable to minimize overblocking.  In other settings (e.g.,

in households that are highly risk-averse), it is desirable to minimize
underblocking.  But it is not possible to minimize both simultaneously.

Note also that even a low rate of overblocking will still cause a large
number of pages to be blocked, simply because most of the content on the
Web consists of innocuous content.Quantitatively estimating the rates of these two types of errors, or therate of success in blocking and not blocking, depends on knowledge (or
estimation) of four numerical parameters, as indicated in Box 2.7.Placement of FiltersFilters can be installed in a variety of places.  Some ISPs use filters to
screen the content they pass onto their subscribers.  The major Internet

browsers (Internet Explorer and Netscape) support label-based filtering.
Some search engines provide users with the option to perform filtered
searches.  Third-party commercial software vendors sell stand-alone fil-

ters that can be installed on a personal computer or into a local area
network serving an organization (e.g., a school or a library system).  See

Section 12.1.1 for a more detailed discussion of this issue.2.3.2Technologies for Authentication and Age Verification
The process of authentication involves assessing the validity of anassertion about the identity of a user.21 (Note that a separate issue relates
to the identification of a specific piece of software or hardware being used
(Box 2.8). When only a specific individual is using that software or hard-
ware, the authentication problem is reduced to that of identifying the
specific software or hardware in use.  But in general, multiple users of a

given software or hardware system must be assumed.22)20This is a real example from a filtering system that was encountered at one of the sitevisits.21In this report, the term ÒidentityÓ is used in its colloquial sense, namely for the biologi-
cal life formÑthe human beingÑin question.  Security specialists often refer to identity
more generally as a collection of information about an individual.  For more discussion, seeCSTBÕs forthcoming study on authentication technologies, with project information  avail-
able at <http://www.cstb.org/web/projects/authentication>.22For more discussion of authentication technologies, see Computer Science and Tele-communications Board, National Research Council, Computers at Risk, 1991; CryptographyÕsRole in Securing the Information Society, Kenneth W. Dam and Herbert S. Lin, eds., 1996; Trustin Cyberspace, 1999; and Realizing the Potential of C4I: Fundamental Challenges, 1999, all pub-lished by National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.  CSTB
Õs forthcoming study on au-thentication will address these technologies comprehensively (see footnote 21).Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETBox 2.7Appropriate and Inappropriate BlockingA given filter claims to work over a class of content.  Examples of a class include
Òall Web content,Ó Òall content in a particular set of chat rooms,Ó and 
Òall e-mailheaded for a particular set of inboxes.Ó  Classes for a filter can also be combinations
of these things.At a certain moment in time, let T be the total number of Òcontent itemsÓ to
which the particular filter could be applied.  Break the number T into 4 parts, such

that A + B + C + D = T, where A, B, C, and D are defined in the table below.InappropriateAppropriate
BlockedAB
Not blockedCD
The success of a filter in blocking inappropriate sites is measured by the ratio ofA to A + C, and the success of a filter in not blocking appropriate sites is the ratio of
D to B + D. Thus, a completely successful filter would have values of 1 for each ofthese ratios; that is, only inappropriate sites would be blocked, and all appropriatesites would not be blocked.  A value of zero for each of these ratios indicates com-

plete failure of the filter to block inappropriate sites and to not block appropriatesites, respectively. Put another way, the rate of underblocking is C/(A + C), and therate of overblocking is B/(B + D), and a value of 1 for each indicates the complete
failure of the filter with respect to each measure, and a value of zero indicates com-plete success.Most filters are assessed against static content. In these cases, it is possible inprinciple to know the values of A, B, and C for any given filter, since inappropriateand appropriate sites that are blocked (A and B) can be identified, as can inappropri-ate sites that are not blocked (C).  However, the value of D must always be only an

estimate, since we cannot know exactly all of the appropriate sites that exist on theInternet.  Thus, although the rate of underblocking can be empirically determined,
the rate of overblocking can only be estimated.(Note that filters whose parameters or rules are updated in real time (e.g., param-eters or rules that are based on data gathered continuously by software watching thebehavior of network users) can result in the numbers T, A, B, C, and D varying with
time.  In principle, filters can also use additional computing power to more precisely
discriminate when traffic is modest, but fall back to less precise algorithms duringperiods of heavy traffic: T, A, B, C, and D would vary with time in this case as well.)How should D, the number of not blocked appropriate pages, be estimated?  A
controversy over methodology was the subject of testimony to the committee.  Oneapproach is that the number of appropriate pages should be estimated on the basis of
a random sampling of Web pages.  A second approach is that the number should be
estimated on the basis of actual usage, which weights certain popular Web pagesmore heavily than those not accessed as frequently.  Note that computing the over-

block rate in the first way increases it relative to the overblock rate computed in thesecond way.For the purpose of determining the accessibility of information in general, thefirst approach is arguably better. For the purpose of determining the accessibility ofYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.61TECHNOLOGYBox 2.8Specific Identification of Hardware and SoftwareIn the earliest days of information technology, any given version of a chip or asoftware program was released to users in absolutely identical formÑevery circuit inUser AÕs chip was identical to that in User BÕs chip, and every bit in User AÕs soft-ware program was identical to User BÕs software program.For a variety of technical and business reasons, there is an increasing trend to-ward individual identification of chips and software.  Thus, User A may purchase a
computer using a processor with a serial number embedded in it, and readableelectronically, and User B purchases an identical computer with an identical proces-
sor, but with a different serial number embedded in it.1  Another example, which
will become relevant below, is that every individual network interface card has asso-ciated with it a unique Media Access Control (MAC) address (a unique 48-bit num-
ber assigned by its manufacturer) that identifies the card in TCP/IP networks.  To-
dayÕs software often requires entering a serial number or authorization key (in thename of preventing piracy) in order for installation to proceed, and there is no par-
ticular reason that such a key cannot be embedded in documents or objects pro-cessed with that software.21For example, according to the Intel Corporation, a processor chip newer than the PentiumII processor (i.e., Pentium III and above) electronically embeds a processor serial number, which
serves as an identifier for the processor, and, by association, the system of which it is a part.
Though the default setting for the processor serial number is Òoff,Ó it can be turned on through
the use of software.  Intel believes that system identification can enable certain benefits, such as

authenticating participants in a secure chat room or ensuring security in e-commerce situations.
For business users, processor serial number identification will allow information technology
departments to provide better information management or improved management of corporate
PC assets.  See <http://support.intel.com/support/processors/pentiumiii/psu.htm> and <http://

support.intel.com/support/processors/pentiumiii/psqa.htm#2>.2See, for example, Greg Lefevre, 1999, ÒMicrosoftÕs GUID Sparks Fears of Privacy Invasion,ÓCNN, March 8.  Available online at <http://www.cnn.com/TECH/computing/9903/08/microsoft.
privacy.02/>.information in practice, the second approach is arguably better.  The reason that
these two approaches are different is that the information needs of peopleÑaggre-gated as a groupÑare not uniformly spread over the spectrum of information that theInternet provides.  For this reason, someone looking at information needs of large
groups in practice might well choose the second approach.  However, the informa-

tion needs of any given individual may not fall within ÒtypicalÓ search parameters
Ñfor those with non-typical information needs, the first approach may be morerelevant.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETIn the physical world, the authentication process is conceptuallystraightforward because of face-to-face interactions.  When an individual

buying beer presents a driverÕs license to a liquor store clerk, the clerkcan compare the picture on the license to the individual in front of him.
Of course, the license could be phony, but the face-to-face nature of the
interaction helps to ensure that the subject being compared to the cre-
dential is real.23Such assurance is not available when a face-to-face interaction is notpossible, as in the automated authentication of a user to a computer sys-
tem.24  Automated authentication depends on the prospective system user
sharing with the authentication device something the person knows, has,
or includes as a feature, such as a Òsmart cardÓ belonging to the appropri-
ate individual, a secret password, the individualÕs voice, or a biometricsignature such as a fingerprint or retinal pattern.Authentication is only one dimension of keeping children away fromage-inappropriate materials.  The second key element is that of ensuring

that a user is older than some specified age (e.g., older than 17).  While

authentication involves assessing the validity of an assertion about the
identity of a user, it does not speak directly to the issue of age verification.
Assurance about age must, in general, be provided by reference to a docu-
ment that provides information about it, and todayÕs infrastructuresneeded to support online authentication of identity generally do not in-
clude such documents.In the physical world, age verification can be provided as a part of thecredential being presentedÑa driverÕs license generally has a date of birth23Indeed, in the physical world, someone who presents a fake ID that is recognized assuch by the clerk is subject to arrest.24In principle, age verification could occur through the use of streaming video and audio.In this scenario, a Web camera and microphone located on the userÕs access point would beused to transmit a high-fidelity voice and video image to a human being working on behalfof the adult content provider.  The human being (who might be called a cyberspace
ÒbouncerÓ) would ascertain the adult status from viewing the image and listening to thevoice, and if there were any doubt, the bouncer would demand to see a driverÕs license thatthe alleged adult could hold up to the camera.  Even through voice alone, a trained human
verifier can often determine whether the person on the other end is in fact an adult, though
this may not always work for very young adults.  The human verifier asks questions, and
then listens for tone of voice, composure, presence, stuttering, and other things that are notreflected in a typed textual interaction.  Because adults tend to have more confidence and

self-assurance than children, such voice interactions provide valuable distinguishing infor-mation.  These scenarios are technically feasible even today, but are likely not to be eco-
nomically attractive.  The reason is that one of the major advantages of Internet commerce

is the ability to drastically reduce the extent to which human beings are involved.  Given
that many adult-oriented Web sites operate on very thin margins, the cost of using such amechanism would likely be prohibitive.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.63TECHNOLOGYrecorded on it.  However, a driver
Õs license would be just as good anauthenticator of identity if it did not have the date of birth on it.In an online environment, age verification is much more difficult be-cause a pervasive nationally available infrastructure for this purpose is
not available.  One method is based on the fact that many adults (but not

very many children) have credit cardsÑpresentation of a valid creditcard number is presumed to be an indicator that the presenter is an adult.
Taken in the large, this is not a bad assumptionÑthe vast majority ofcredit cards are in fact owned by adults, and the vast majority of minors
do not own or have legitimate access to credit cards.  Thus, an adult-

oriented Web site that uses credit cards as its medium of exchange pre-
sumes that the presentation of a valid credit card also verifies that the
card user is of legal age.  Entering a valid credit card number grants access

to the inside of the site.25Many online adult verification services (AVSs), which provide a veri-fication of adult status to other adult Web sites, also use credit cards.26Because the credit card is generally the userÕs method of payment for theservice, the AVS relies on the credit card to verify the adult status of the
user.27Another approach to age verification is to rely upon databases ofpublic records (i.e., government-issued documents such as voter registra-
tions and/or driversÕ licenses).  For example, an individual wishing to
gain access to an adults-only service sends an online request to an age
verification service (along with a credit-card number to effect payment)
for a certification of age for a given individual.  He or she also provides

appropriate personal information, and the adult verification service
checks that information against public records such as state driversÕ li-
censes and voting registration that contain or imply age information.Even higher confidence in age verification can be obtained by cou-pling the use of public record databases to an authentication process that25Determining with certainty whether a submitted credit card number corresponds to anaccount in good standing requires an online transaction between the site operator and the
credit card company.  That is, the site operator transmits the number to the credit card
company and the company checks to see if the number refers to an account in good stand-ing.  There are other methods that allow the offline identification of some invalid credit

card numbers, but they can be defeated with a little effort and sophistication.26Such services also accept applications via 1-900 phone numbers (which children are notsupposed to use without parental permission) that charge phone bills automatically and via
U.S. mail.  Mail applications are supposed to include proof of age.
27The ÒtypicalÓ adult verification service provides the user with a special code number.
Adult Web sites contract with the service (of which many exist).  A user wishing access to

one of these adult Web sites enters the code number.  The adult Web site then contacts the
AVS to confirm that the number is valid, and if it is, grants the user access.  (The adult Website usually pays the AVS a commission for users who are verified in this manner.)Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETprovides assurance of identity.  In this case, when adult status is con-
firmed, a credential certifying oneÕs adult status is mailed (via postalservice) to the address of record on those public records.  In this context,

the postal service serves as an authenticating process that ensures the
adult credential is sent to the right person. The individual can then use
this special key to obtain access to adults-only services that recognize this
special key.A third approach is to use age verification scripts.  An online script
can guide a user through a questionnaire that asks, among other things,
the userÕs age, and it can reject users who are underage.  To help deal with
the problem of lying about oneÕs age, some scripts are written to acceptonly one attempt at entering age, and so a user who enters Ò15Ó at first, is
rejected for being underage, and then tries to enter Ò20Ó is unsuccessful.
In such cases, he or she may have to try again from another computer.Note that each of these methods imposes a cost in convenience of use,and the magnitude of this cost rises as the confidence in age verification
increases.  Age verification scripts are very convenient for the legitimate

adult user, who must simply tell the truth about his or her age.  But they

are also susceptible to being fooled by a savvy adolescent who knows that
the correct age must be entered.  A credit card is less convenient for the

legitimate adult user, because he or she must be willing to incur the
expense of a subscription (or the hassle of canceling one).  However, since

most credit cards are owned by adults, the use of a credit card provides
additional confidence that it is truly an adult who is seeking to use it.  At

the same time, some minors do own credit cards or prepaid cards that
function as credit cards, while other minors are willing to use credit cards
borrowed with or without permission from their parents.  (Even when

parents review credit card statements, either their own or those of their
children, they may not be able to identify transactions made with adult-
oriented sexually explicit Web sites, as the adult nature of such transac-
tions is often not readily identifiable from information provided on the
statement.)  Using public record databases to verify adult status provides

additional confidence in age, but increases the amount of personal infor-
mation that the user must provide to gain access.  Mailing the certify-

ing credential to the user provides the greatest confidence of all that the
alleged adult is truly an adult, but because the user must wait for
the processing and mailing of the adult credential, it is also the least
convenient.Claims have been made that certain ÒbiometricÓ signatures can differ-
entiate between adults and children.  While human physiology does in-

deed dictate that certain changes in oneÕs body occur as one grows fromchild to adult, the precise trajectory of these changes varies from indi-Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.65TECHNOLOGYvidual to individual.  However, one
Õs legal statusÑas being entitled toprivileges as an adult that are not enjoyed as a childÑis fixed by laws thatspecify, for example, that individuals even one day over 18 are consid-
ered adults and one day under 18 are considered unemancipated minors.
No technology today or on the horizon can hope to make such fine dis-
tinctions in the case of individuals.28  For this reason, biometric technolo-gies as a method for age verification are not considered here.Age verification technologies as integrated into functional systemsare discussed in greater detail in Chapter 13.2.3.3Encryption (and End-to-End Opacity)
Encryption is used to hide information from all but specific autho-rized parties.  In the most general encryption process, an originator (the

first party) creates a message intended for a recipient (the second party),
protects (encrypts) it by a cryptographic process, and transmits it as
ciphertext.  The receiving party decrypts the received ciphertext message
to reveal its true content, the plaintext.  Anyone else (a third party) who

wishes undetected and unauthorized access to the message must pen-
etrate (by cryptanalysis) the protection afforded by the cryptographic pro-
cess or obtain the relevant decryption key (or use another approach to
obtain the key, such as bribing someone to reveal it).Encryption also has relevance to the protection of digitized intellec-tual property, such as proprietary images.  Because encryption restricts

the access of unauthorized parties, encryption can be used to help prevent
the dissemination of unauthorized reproductions of digital objects.  En-

cryption is thus the fundamental technology underlying digital rights
management systems (discussed in greater detail in Chapter 13).  The use

of encryption may increase dramatically in the coming years.In the context of this study, the significance of encryption is that ifcontent, whether acceptable or inappropriate, is encrypted properly, it
cannot be identified by third parties. Thus, while it is possible to interdict
all information flows that are encrypted, it is impossible to interdict spe-cific transmissions on the basis of contentÑa point with obvious relevanceto filtering systems intended to block specific content.  Thus, encryption

allows transmission and reception of information to occur with essen-
tially no outside scrutiny possible.28See, for example, testimony of John Woodward, senior policy analyst, RAND, to theCOPA Commission on June 9, 2000. Available online at <http://www.copacommission.org/meetings/hearing1/woodward.test.pdf>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET2.3.4Anonymizers
As noted in Section 2.1.2, the technology of the Internet itself does notgenerally require any party to authenticate its identity.  Thus, users and

online identities (e.g., a screen name or an e-mail address) are bound
together through administrative procedures, usually those of an ISP, that
are associated with gaining access to the Internet.  Through such bind-

ings, any interaction of an individual with an Internet-related serviceÑwhether visiting a Web page, sending an e-mail, posting a message, set-
ting up a Web page, or participating in a chat roomÑis tied to a specificidentity that can, in principle, be traced administratively back to that
specific individual.Anonymizers break this binding and decouple an individual from aspecific online identity.  The anonymizer provides what amounts to an

identity that is randomly generated.  This identity is then used for posting

messages, sending e-mail, participating in chats, and accessing Web pages.

(Some anonymizers enable return paths when necessary; for example, the
recipient of an anonymous e-mail may wish to reply to the (anonymous)
sender.)  However, anyone seeking to trace the anonymized identity back

to the original user will find a number of barriers that make it very diffi-
cult to recover the identity of the original user.  One example of an

anonymizer useful to publishing information on the Web is described in
Box 2.9.Anonymizers are significant because they enable individuals to un-dertake activities for which they need not suffer retribution.  For an indi-

vidual living in a totalitarian state, an anonymizer enables him or her to
post an anti-government message in safety or to browse forbidden Web
sites.  In the United States, it enables someone to freely post a message

expressing unpopular political views or to browse Web sites in privacy.
Commercial enterprisesÑwhich need to have a way to accept moneyÑdonot have much use for anonymizers, even if they are posting materials
that may be controversial.  But those with non-commercial interests can

use the same technology to anonymously post child pornography or ha-
rass or stalk an individual online.  When anonymizers are used, tracing

the identity of online criminal perpetrators becomes difficult.2.3.5Location Verification
The legal regimes of today are ones in which jurisdiction is basedlargely on geographical borders.  For example, as noted in Chapter 4,

Òcommunity standardsÓ are an important factor in determining whether
a given image is obscene.  However, the Internet is designed and struc-

tured in such a way that geographical borders and the physical location ofYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.67TECHNOLOGYa user have no significance for the functionality he or she expects fromthe Internet or any resources to which he or she is connected.  This fact

raises the question of the extent to which a userÕs location can in fact beestablished.One way to establish location is simply to ask the user where he orshe is located upon logging in.  Thus, the first screen seen by the user

might ask for his or her present zip code (or state, or country).  But in the
event that the user chooses to be deceptive (e.g., to avoid restrictions on
Internet service based on his or her location), the problem shifts to one of
determining location through technological means.Under some circumstances, it can be virtually impossible to deter-mine the precise physical location of an Internet user.  Consider, for ex-

ample, the case of an individual connecting to the Internet through a dial-
up modem.  It is not an unreasonable assumption that the user is most

likely in the region in which calls to the dial-up number are local, simply
because it would be unnecessary for most people to incur long-distance
calling costs for such connections.  However, nothing prevents a user

from using a long-distance telephone call (e.g., from Tennessee) to access
a modem in California.Box 2.9Publius: A System for Publishing Anonymouslyon the World Wide WebPublius is a Web publishing system that provides publishers with a high degree ofanonymity.  Publius encrypts digital content (say, a document) and then fragments

this encrypted content for distribution among a number of Web servers (e.g., 100servers) in such a way that the content can be reconstructed with a certain numberof fragments (e.g., 35 fragments).  Furthermore, any 35 fragments will do.  However,

someone possessing 34 or fewer fragments cannot reconstruct the original to anydegree of fidelity.  (In other words, having 34 fragments tells the owner nothing

about the contents of the original document.)  And, because of this encryption, the

cooperating Web servers have no way of knowing what is being stored.   Because
the cooperation of multiple servers is needed to recreate the document, Publius thusbreaks the one-to-one correspondence between a Web document that one might
wish to protect and a server.  Because any electronic payment today to a specific
creator identifies the creator, Publius is difficult to use for pay-per-view sites.  But for
those who wish to distribute their work broadly and do not care about financial
compensation, Publius has major advantages.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETIn practice, recovering location information is a complex and time-consuming process.29  As a rule, the information needed to ascertain the
geographic location of an IP address associated with a fixed (wired) Inter-
net access point at a given time is known collectively by a number of
administrative entities, and could be aggregated automatically.  But there

is no protocol in place to pass this information to relevant parties, and
thus such aggregation is not done today.The bottom line is that determining the physical location of mostInternet users is a challenging task today, though this task is likely to be
easier in the future.  Appendix C provides additional discussion.
2.4WHAT THE FUTURE MAY BRING
The hardest part of this report to calibrate is how the future willchange the technologies that today scope both the problem and any puta-
tive solutions.  As of this writing (May 2002), the World Wide Web is not

even a decade old, while the creation and adoption rates for new tech-
nologies show generally accelerating deployments of these technologies.The rapid changes of capability in the hardware underlying informa-tion technologies  will lead to computing that is 100 times more cost-

effective, storage 1,000 times more cost-effective, and bandwidth 10,000
times more cost-effective 10 years hence, and it is highly likely that many
applications will emerge to take advantage of such increased capability,
as has occurred in the past.  What follows below is admittedly specula-

tive, but even if any given speculation is far from the mark, taken together
these notions paint a portrait of a very different technological milieu in
which the age-old problem of Òprotecting children on the InternetÓ will
play out in the future.¥Mechanisms for financial transactions will change significantlyover the course of a decade.  Financial transactions are likely to become

increasingly less private, as the various forms of payment embody differ-
ent features to enable traceability.  Even cash may become more traceable

in the future.  This development will favor parents who wish to monitor

the expenditures of their children, but will have no impact on those chil-29While location information is not provided automatically from the IP addresses that anadministrative entity allocates, some location information can be inferred.  For example, if
the administrative entity is an ISP, and the ISP is, for example, a French ISP, it is likelyÑthough not certainÑthat most of the subscribers to a French ISP are located in France.  Of
course, a large French company using this ISP might well have branch offices in London, sothe geographical correspondence between French ISP and Internet user will not always bevalid for this case, though as a rule of thumb, it is not a bad working assumption.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.69TECHNOLOGYdren who borrow electronic wallets at home or who access those sourcesof sexually explicit material that do not charge.¥Voice interaction with computers will become increasingly com-mon, and the capability of computer-generated voices to sound like real
people, or even parties known to an individual, will increase.  Today, a

55-year-old man can pretend to be a 13-year-old girl using e-mail and
instant messages; tomorrow, a 55-year-old man may be able to sound just
like a 13-year-old girl over the telephone.  It may even be possible for the
same 55-year-old man to sound like the girlÕs mother.  In short, technol-
ogy will offer greater deceptive capabilities, and those that are most at
risk from the existence of such capabilities are likely to be children who
lack the experience to identify deception.¥Voice interaction will allow younger children, who would findtyping difficult, to speak a Web site address to their computer.¥Peer-to-peer interactions will be increasingly common, as the tech-nology will largely eliminate the need for large-scale servers, thus elimi-
nating them as principal points of leverage for any control strategy.  It

already grows ever more expensive to selectively delete content than to
keep it all, and this economic fact will dominate the future with implica-
tions for privacy, digital rights management, and the steady accumula-
tion of data that is best described as digital detritus.¥Virtual reality advances will soon defeat the ability of even expertsto distinguish pictures that are real from those that are synthetic.  Haptic

devices (i.e., touch-, motion-, and pressure-sensitive devices) may become
more common as a way to interface with computers.  Whether then a

person, an action, or an event is real or not may soon be irrelevant to
many consumers.  Action, especially 
ÒactionÓ in the sexual and violent
sub-meanings of those words, will be as realistic as the audience is willing
to pay for, and the prices of such offerings will inevitably drop.¥Locations from which access to the Internet is possible will prolif-erate wildly.  And, with an expansion in the types of information re-

sources that are accessible (e.g., new virtual reality resources), policies
that give permission to view, access, modify, or delete any information
resource will present an enormously complex problem simply as a result
of scale.  Even today, fine-grained access control driven by policy is, or

soon will be, beyond the scope of human management and may be be-
yond the scope of mechanistic alternatives.  If access control policies are

impossible to formulate, the only alternative is an approach that depends
on users to exercise self-control.  Monitoring of user actions in order to

ensure appropriately self-controlled users then becomes the only tech-
nical alternative to access control.  This is not a statement about the de-

sirability of this outcome, only that it is a possible one if access control
policies become impractical.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET30For example, the video cassette recorder, inexpensive video cameras, and CD-ROMtechnologies found some of their first applications in the production and viewing of sexu-
ally explicit ÒadultÓ movies and interactive sexual games and entertainment.  For one per-
spective on this point, see Jonathan Coopersmith, 2000, ÒPornography, Videotape, and theInternet,Ó IEEE Technology and Society 19(1): 27-34.
Although the notions described above are not necessarily desirablefrom a societal or personal standpoint, they are extrapolations of certain
phenomena today, and there are at least some paths from today that
could result in their coming true.  On the other hand, they may not come

true, a point that emphasizes a vast range of uncertainty about the techno-
logical future.What has been true over the years is that those who produce andconsume sexual contentÑboth for commercial and non-commercial pur-posesÑhave stayed on the leading edge of new technologies.30 Thus,
whatever the technological future is like in detail, it seems safe to predict
with reasonably high confidence that sexual content will be dispropor-
tionately present in the initial stages of adoption of any new technology.
Because technology changes rapidly, no final technological solutions are
possible.  It is for this reason, among others, that the committee in later

chapters emphasizes social and educational strategies for protecting chil-
dren from inappropriate sexually explicit material.Finally, many of the issues associated with protecting children frominappropriate material and experiences on the Internet relate to the archi-
tecture of the Internet as it exists today, a state of existence that reflects
policy and engineering decisions made decades ago.  These are not im-

mutable, though major changes that might facilitate control of content
delivery could be made only at very considerable cost and at the potential
expense of other societal interests.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.71While far from the only source of sexually explicit materials on theInternet, an important driver of public concerns about the access of chil-
dren to pornography on the Internet is the online component of the adult
entertainment industry (hereafter the adult online industry).  Indeed,

many of the canonical examples of exposure to pornography point to
commercial sites as prominent purveyors of such material that minors
can reach and see, and to a considerable extent, the fact that children can
come across such material (with or without a deliberate choice on their
part) results from the existence of an industry that caters to adult demand
for such material.  Material available online from these sources (and other

non-commercial sources as well) includes images of heterosexual and
homosexual intercourse (including penetration), fellatio, cunnilingus,
masturbation, bestiality, sadomasochism, bondage, rape, incest, and so
on.1  For this reason, it is helpful to describe certain important character-
istics of this industry.3The Adult Online
Entertainment Industry1Legitimate online adult entertainment businesses are not generally providers of childpornography.  However, one firm in the adult online industry that provided access to a

range of sexually explicit materials was indicted and convicted on child pornographycharges.  See Lenny Savino, 2001, ÒKid Porn Web Sites Lead to 100 Arrests: Investigation
Targets Biggest Such Business Found in U.S.,Ó Detroit Free Press, August 9, available onlineat <http://www.freep.com/news/nw/kids9_20010809.htm>.  In addition, some adult en-
tertainment Web sites do cater to viewers wishing to see young women in sexual poses(e.g., through advertising and site copy that promises Òhot teensÓ and Òyoung girlsÓ), and
because such content by assumption depicts young women in sexual poses, it is unclearfrom the images alone whether the young women depicted are in fact over 18 as requiredby law and merely look like they are younger, or if they are in fact underage.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET3.1THE STRUCTURE AND SCALE OF THE ONLINE ADULT
ENTERTAINMENT INDUSTRYThe adult online industry in the United States generates approximately$1 billion in revenues annually,2 and some in the industry expect this figure
to grow to $5 billion to $7 billion over the next 5 years, barring unforeseen

change.  As the rest of this chapter discusses, revenues can come from a

number of sources:  paid subscriptions to the site, advertisements carried

on the site, sending traffic to other sites, sale of sex-related products, and
providing auxiliary services such as adult content search engines, content
for other adult Web site operators, or age verification services.  For pur-

poses of this report, the term Òcommercial sourcesÓ should be understood
to mean sites that charge a fee for access and sites that provide access to
content for free but are supported by advertising revenues.According to the best information available to the committee, sub-scription sites with adult content exceed 100,000 in the United States (with
each site having multiple Web pages underneath it), and about 400,000
for-pay adult sites globally.  The business entities responsible for these

U.S. sites include about 1,000 U.S. firms operating as genuine business
enterprises, with perhaps another 9,000 or so operating as (usually small-
scale) affiliates of other established online adult entertainment firms.3Compared to the totality of content on the public World Wide Web,adult-oriented sites account for a relatively small fraction (about 1.5 per-
cent).4  However, these sites account for a significant amount of Web
traffic.  According to industry statistics, approximately 70 million differ-

ent individuals per week view at least one adult Web site on a global
basisÑ20 million view adult pages that are apparently hosted on sites in2The total size of the adult entertainment industry is not well known, and estimates rangefrom $4 billion to $10 billion.  See Frank Rich, 2001, 
ÒNaked Capitalists: ThereÕs No BusinessLike Porn Business,Ó The New York Times Magazine, May 20; Emmanuelle Richard, 2001, ÒThePerils of Covering Porn,Ó Online Journalism Review, July 10, available online at <http://
ojr.usc.edu/content/story.cfm?request=608>; and Dan Ackman, ÒHow Big Is Porn?,ÓForbes.com, available online at <http://forbes.com/2001/05/25/0524porn.html#story>.3Numbers provided by Bill Johnson, director of marketing, Flying Crocodile Inc., inter-view, January 2001.  An 
ÒaffiliateÓ can be a separate business entity or can have an em-
ployee or consultant relationship to the primary firm.4The first work in this area known to the committee is that of Steve Lawrence and C. Lee
Giles, 1999, ÒAccessibility and Distribution of Information on the Web,Ó Nature 400(6740):
107-109, July 8.  (In fact, the Lawrence and Giles result of 1.5 percent holds for the number of

servers found to be ÒpornographicÓ in nature.  The statement in the text that adult-oriented
sites are 1.5 percent of all sites is based on an assumption that on average, a server supports
the same number of sites regardless of its content.  This assumption is likely to be wrong in

detail, but probably holds on average.)  The results for sexually explicit information were
substantially reproduced in Daniel Orr and Josephine Ferrigno-Stack, 2001, ÒChildproofingon the World Wide Web: A Survey of Adult Webservers,Ó Jurimetrics 41(4, Summer): 465-475.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.73THE ADULT ONLINE ENTERTAINMENT INDUSTRYthe United States or Canada.  The number of paying subscribers is on theorder of several million in the United States, and may be as high as 10
million.  The majority of these viewers and subscribers are male,5 thoughthe fraction of female viewers may be growing.  On average, a paid sub-

scription generates $20 to $40 per month in revenue.  The majority of

subscribers cancel within a month, but of those who remain after a month,
the typical retention time is approximately 3 to 4 months.A profitable adult online business is often difficult to sustain over thelong run, despite the high demand.  The cost of entry into the business is

relatively low, and the availability of a range of services from content pro-
vision to free Web site hosting and credit card transaction processing makes
it easy to set up an adult Web site.  However, because the market is highly

saturated (i.e., for a Web site with any given sexual theme, there are likely
to be a large number of competitors), and subscription prices more or less
capped in price, the business is one with low margins.6  Thus, profitable
enterprises depend in large measure on drawing large volumes of traffic (in
industry jargon, ÒeyeballsÓ) in the hope of converting some of this trafficinto revenue (i.e., customers paying for subscriptions).  (Box 3.1 summa-

rizes the primary methods used to increase traffic to oneÕs Web site.)For large firms in the adult online industry, the cost of bandwidth is amajor element in their cost structure.  Because its products are graphics-

intensive, the adult online industry consumes enormous amounts of band-
widthÑand the two largest individual buyers of bandwidth in the UnitedStates are firms in the adult online industry.  However, it is also true that
most bandwidth is used by viewers of these sites who do not pay for their
use of these sites, because non-paying individuals can see large amounts
of sexually explicit material simply by looking at the home pages of these
sites, their free ÒteaserÓ pages, and their free demos.
The structure of the industry involves a relatively small number oflarge firms and a much larger number of smaller ones.  The major firms

(numbering 100 to 200) generate revenue from subscriptions and from
providing content to other, smaller businesses.  To increase traffic flow,

these large firms also pay for traffic that is forwarded to them by other,
smaller businesses.  These other smaller businesses also receive content

from these large firms to display on their own sites.   The majority of adult

Web pages have adult content that draws customers who can then be
referred to another site (where they will encounter subscription offers).5Alvin Cooper et al. 
 1999.  ÒSexuality on the Internet: From Sexual Exploration to Patho-logical Expression,Ó Professional Psychology: Research and Practice 30(2, April): 154-164.
6Some in the adult industry have also argued that credit card fraud has forced manyadult merchants to pay much higher credit card processing fees, thereby significantly re-ducing profit margins.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET3.2THE GENERATION OF REVENUE
Revenue in the online adult entertainment business, as in other busi-nesses both online and offline, results from the sale of products or ser-
vices (including subscriptions) or advertising.  The largest amounts of

revenue are obtained from the end-user customer, who typically uses a
credit card to subscribe to a site.  As a subscriber, he obtains unlimited

access, though the average subscriber only uses the subscription 1.5 times
per month (one viewing session typically involves seeing around 75 to
100 pages).The above models for revenue generation distinguish between adultsand children on the basis of the ability to produce a credit cardÑadults,but not children, are presumed to be the legitimate owners of the credit
card used.  This assumption is not valid under all circumstances, but does

not appear to be an unreasonable approach.  However, home pages that

serve as billboards for the sitesÕ contents and the generation of revenue
Box 3.1Methods for Increasing Traffic to OneÕs Adult Web SiteOnline Methods¥Sending unsolicited e-mail (ÒspamÓ) that advertises the site
¥Placing advertisements for the site on other Web sites

¥Paying search engine companies for more prominent placement in their
search engineÕs results¥Acquiring domain names with sexually oriented words in them

¥Acquiring domain names based on common misspellings of non-sexual Web
site addresses¥Acquiring expired domain names that have acquired some reputation for
generating traffic¥Paying other Web sites to obtain their exit traffic (otherwise known as mouse
trapping)¥Mailing list subscriptions (for which a user must make an explicit Òopt-inÓ
choice)Offline Methods¥Advertising in print media (e.g., an adult-oriented magazine)

¥Advertising on TV and radio
¥Advertising through cooperating partners (e.g., a store associated with adult
entertainment)Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.75THE ADULT ONLINE ENTERTAINMENT INDUSTRYthrough the sale of advertising generally make no such attempt to differ-entiate between adults and children.A Web site owner can also obtain revenue from advertisers.  Adver-
tisers can choose to simply pay for their ad to be displayed or pay each
time a person clicks on their ad.  When the ad is displayed the typical

advertiser might pay the Web site owner (e.g., $3 per 1,000 displays of the
adÑa CPM (cost per mille [thousand]) model).  When the advertiser pays
for the volume of referrals that the Web site sends to the advertiser (e.g.,
$0.05 for every user who clicks on the ad displayed and is then transferred
to the advertiserÕs site), it is a CPC (cost per click) model.  When the
advertiser pays only if and when it gains a new subscriber as a result of
the Web siteÕs referrals to the advertiser (e.g., half of the first monthÕsrevenue for every subscription that results), it is a CPA (cost per acquisi-
tion) model.   By contrast, the revenue model for traditional media adver-

tising is most similar to the CPM model, because traditional media cannot
track results from advertising to the same degree of precision that is pos-
sible on the Web.A related service is providing consumer Internet traffic to another adultWeb site in return for a small per-consumer fee.  Such 
Òtraffic forwardingÓis similar to the fees paid through CPC traffic referrals, except that the
consumer is forwarded involuntarily (i.e., without an affirmative choice to
be forwarded).  This practice is known as 
ÒmousetrappingÓ (or 
Òselling exittrafficÓ in the industry), and a mousetrapped user who tries to leave a
sexually explicit site is automatically forwarded to another such site.  This

other site may be operated by a different operator, but that fact is irrelevant
to the user who just wants to get out.7  (Technically, mousetrapping refers
to a process enabled by JavaScript (a scripting language for Internet brows-
ers) in which the closing of one window automatically directs the user to
another Web page.  The second Web page can do the same, so that attempt-

ing to exit the second page spawns a third page, and so on.8)7Mousetrapping is a practice that often results in user panic, especially when the user is achild.  Because the computer is for practical purposes to a non-expert disabled, the only
solution available to the non-expert is often rebooting or pulling the plug, which can resultin a loss of work and always costs time.8Note that the technology underlying mousetrapping can have entirely legitimate pur-poses.  For example, when a user leaves an e-shopping site, a questionnaire may appear
that asks the user for feedback about his or her shopping experience.  But in this instance,

the user can leave the questionnaire with a single click.  The problem with mousetrapping
arises when many sites are mousetrapped in succession, so that the user is caught in avirtually endless sequence of new but undesired and unrequested pages and is forced to
view each of them.  Moreover, if all of these sites are operated by different parties, any
regulatory action taken must be taken against each of the parties directing them to ceasesuch practices simultaneously.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETAll of these payment schedules can be (and usually are) adjusted onthe basis of the value of the user to the advertiser.  For example, if the

traffic sent to the advertiser is highly qualified (i.e., has a higher tendency
to subscribe), the payment rate per ad-click might be $0.20 instead of
$0.05.  If the customer who subscribes to the advertiser
Õs Web site staysmore than 2 months, the Web site owner might receive a bonus of an
additional 25 percent of the first monthÕs revenue.As a general rule, traffic with a higher proportion of children has lessvalue to the advertiser, because the vast majority of children are unable to
pay for subscriptions.  So, advertisers have little incentive to attract chil-

dren to their sites from the standpoint of obtaining paying customers.
However, the incentives are different for the Web site owners who dis-
play ads. A Web site owner operating on a CPA model indeed has no
particular incentive to send children to its advertisers.   But a Web site

owner operating on a CPM or CPC model is in a different situation.  A

display of an ad to a child counts in just the same way as its display to an
adult, and the click of a child on an ad that transfers him to the advertiserÕssite counts in just the same way as an adultÕs click.  Thus, a Web site
owner operating on CPM or CPC models (which constitute the large ma-
jority of adult Web site owners) has few incentives to refrain from differ-
entiating between adults and children.9This is not to say that this is the only incentive operating.  Because the
Web site owner must negotiate a contract with the advertiser, who is very
aware of the value of the traffic incoming from that site, the Web site
owner must realize that the advertiser will offer lower commissions if the
traffic being referred has low value.  Thus, the Web site owner has incen-
tives at the margin to refrain from distinguishing between children and
adults, but also significant incentives to refrain from too high an overall
percentage of children in the referred traffic.Revenues from selling traffic to advertisers can be significant, espe-cially if one uses some of the questionable means described in Box 3.1.
For example, one firm employing some of these means allegedly earned
between $800,000 and $1 million annually from selling traffic to advertis-
ers whose ads were included on its Web sites.10Subscriber retention is extremely difficult for these pay sites without aconstant supply of fresh content that they must produce themselves or9In principle, sponsors of ÒaffiliateÓ programs bear the responsibility for policing affili-
ates that behave in an over-aggressive manner and promote their affiliate Web sites throughthe use of spam or other improper methods.  In practice, some sponsors take this responsi-
bility more seriously than others, and sanctions for improper promotion can range from
non-existent to revocation of the affiliate relationship and withholding of payments thatwould otherwise be received for traffic.10See <http://www.ftc.gov/opa/2001/10/cupcake.htm>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.77THE ADULT ONLINE ENTERTAINMENT INDUSTRYlicense from providers.  Even then, because sites have designs, styles,
themes, and tastes that eventually become tiresome to the member, a high
percentage of members leave after the first month, and even more leave
after the first few months.  But these customers don
Õt give up on adultcontent.  Effectively, they simply transfer their membership by canceling

with one site and signing up at another until they become bored and move
on again. Additionally, given increasing saturation of the market, margins
have been shrinking dramatically for adult Internet businesses.  For these

reasons, the top sites are dependent on new subscribers far more than they
are on recurring revenues from short-term existing members.Five other business models based on providing services to the primaryproviders of adult-oriented sexually explicit material are worth noting:¥Counters 
are free services that offer businesses performance statis-tics, click paths and behaviors, browser technology data, and demograph-
ics on the visitors to individual sites.  In exchange for the service, the site

places on its pages an advertisement for the vendorÕs company, allowingvisitors to click and visit the vendorÕs portal.11  From there, the visitor
may visit any site using the service, by selecting a link from the directory.
The vendor makes money by selling advertising on the portal, and also by
selling a portion of the incoming traffic to other adult companies.¥Indexing services
 provide end users with a map or index to the adult
Web and receive revenue for forwarding traffic to these sites.  For ex-

ample, Flying Crocodile Inc. (FCI) provides both counters and indexing
services.  FCI generates more than 150 million impressions tracked per

day by FCI.  Approximately 20 percent of the large firms have advertising

contracts with FCI at any one time.  FCI
Õs gross annual revenues arebetween $12 million and $15 million, and 60 million unique people per
week visit the 70,000 sites (global) that contract with FCI.¥Third-party billing processors
 offer their services to adult Internet
companies that may or may not have merchant accounts.  Third-party

billing also avoids potential embarrassment for users who wish to sub-
scribe with some degree of privacy (since the name of the billing party
rather than the adult Web site operator appears on the credit-card bill).
These services manage the secure transaction processes, transfers of funds,
debits, charges, telephone billing, and all associated record keeping for a
per-transaction fee that is deducted from the revenues credited to the pay
site owner.11A portal is a Òhome baseÓ from which a user may access a variety of content and
services that the portal provides.  Content may include sports scores, financial news, and
headlines; services may include search engines, e-mail, and message boards.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET¥Adult verification services (AVSs) provide certification to adult Web
site operators that an individual is an adult.  As Chapter 4 discusses in

greater detail, a user can provide a credit card number to an AVS (posses-
sion of a credit card is regarded as proof of adulthood).  In return, he or

she receives a special access code that can prove adulthood to all Web
sites that use that particular AVS.  Often AVSs are used by 
ÒfreeÓ adult
Web sites, which receive a portion of the revenue generated by the AVS
required for entry to those sites.¥Content provision services provide sexually explicit content to Web
site operators that cannot produce their own content.  Such content in-

cludes still images, videos, live sex chats, interactive videocamera sex
shows, and so on.3.3PRACTICES RELATED TO MINORS
According to Nielsen/NetRatings, nearly 16  percent of the visitors to
adult-oriented Web sites in February 2002 were under the age of 18.12One source in the adult industry asserted that traffic sent to some adult
sites is 20 to 30 percent children.13   These sites are usually sites that are
intended to be broadly appealing to a wide variety of tastes (rather than
those serving more specialized tastes).  Even using current AVSs, adult

sites receive traffic that is 5 percent children.  That said, advances in AVSs

and better screening may enable the industry to achieve traffic that is no
more than 2 percent children.14  In addition, sites offering highly special-
ized, niche products tend to have higher rates of traffic that ultimately
purchases subscriptions (and hence lower fractions of children).In a survey of adult-oriented commercial sites, the majority of adult-oriented sites (about 74 percent) were found to display adult content on
the first page (accessible to anyone who visits the page), often through the
display of sexually explicit banner ads to other sites.  Nearly two thirds

(66 percent) did not include a notice indicating the adult nature of the site,
and only 11 percent included such a notice and also did not have adult
content on the first page.  About 25 percent employed practices that hin-
12Nielsen/NetRatings, February 2002.  Nielsen/NetRatings provides Internet audience
measurement data and analysis by monitoring actual click-by-click Internet user behaviorthrough a real-time meter installed on the computers of more than 225,000 individuals in 29countries worldwide.  The meter is installed with the permission of the homeowner to

record the relevant activities of users and includes an automated login to identify who theuser is at specific times.  Because the family specifies the ages of household users, the Web
sites visited need not determine if the visitor is an adult or a child, a task whose difficulty is
addressed in Chapter 2.13Bill Johnson, FCI, 2001.14Bill Johnson, FCI, 2001.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.79THE ADULT ONLINE ENTERTAINMENT INDUSTRYdered the user from leaving the site (e.g., mousetrapping), and only 3percent required a credit card or other Òadult checkÓ to proceed past the
first page of the site (that is, most sites allow the user to take a ÒfreepreviewÓ in which some additional content is provided).
153.4WHAT THE FUTURE MAY HOLD
3.4.1The Structural Evolution of the Industry
A commonly occurring development path in many industries is oneof innovation, followed by imitation, and then by shakeout.16   In the
innovation phase, one or a few parties find new ways to profit from
innovationÑthey provide a previously unavailable product or service forwhich there is demand at prices that are sufficient to earn a profit.  In the
imitation phase, a host of other parties copy (perhaps with small variants)
the ideas that enabled the first innovators to succeed.  Imitation and the

creation of ÒcopycatÓ enterprises continue until the market is saturated
and cannot support additional entries into the market.  Shakeout is the

result, in which a large number of firms (which may be the first innova-
tors or the copycats) give up the business and others consolidate, result-
ing in a much smaller number of firms each with larger shares of the
market.  These larger firms are seriously in the business and are likely to

adapt to new business circumstances (e.g., markets, regulatory environ-
ment) rather than to leave the business.Since perhaps the mid-1990s (when the World Wide Web began togrow at a rapid rate), the proliferation of adult Web sites suggests that the
adult online industry has been in an imitation phase.  If the industry

continues on the trajectory described above, a shakeout in the industry is
likely to occur in the future.  If so, the remaining firms are likely to dem-

onstrate a higher degree of corporate responsibilityÑand that responsi-bility may well include more serious attempts at differentiating children
from adults in giving access to their products and services.3.4.2Increased Regulation
What might a more ÒresponsibleÓ adult online industry involve?  The
following sketch is derived from conversations with representatives from
businesses that are likely to become the more established responsible15Daniel Orr and Josephine Ferrigno-Stack.  2001.  
ÒChildproofing on the World WideWeb: A Survey of Adult Webservers,Ó Jurimetrics 41(4, Summer): 465-475.
16See, for example, F.M. Scherer and David Ross, 1990, Industrial Market Structure andEconomic Performance, Houghton Mifflin, Boston, Mass.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETcitizens described above.  Enterprises in this more responsible regime will
not use stolen or illegal content, will refrain from the use of fraudulent
and deceptive trade practices, will have effective means for preventing
fraudulent use of credit cards, and will promote widespread use of AVS
systems that prevent minors from being able to view sexually explicit
ÒteaserÓ images.  Noting that all schemes for protection of minors involve
a trade-off between the need to inform a potential consumer of the con-
tent that is being offered against the risk of exposing minors to overly
explicit material, home pages (i.e., the page accessible to users without
going through an adult verification check) could contain textual descrip-
tions only or some pictorial content that is obscured in the way that the
cover of an adult magazine is obscured when displayed on the news-
stand.  Such magazine covers may contain suggestive images, but opaque

plastic masks essentially everything except the head/face of the cover
models.  Such obscuration is much more complete than the token blurring

that occurs on many adult Web sites covering just the genitals, but never-
theless providing a sense of what is inside.  Furthermore, while greater

regulation may not be desirable from the standpoint of the industry, re-
sponsible firms in the adult online industry appear to be willing to shoul-
der some regulatory burden as part of the cost of doing business to keep
minors away from their services.One potentially important development in the industry occurred inOctober 2000, when the Federal Trade Commission took action against
seven major firms in the industry for unfair and deceptive trade practices
(discussed in Chapter 4).  A second occurred in October 2001 in which it

took action against a party that used misspellings of common Web sites
not oriented to adult entertainment to draw traffic and that engaged in
ÒmousetrappingÓ of users.
17  A third occurred in November 2001, in which
a number of adult entertainment firms on the Internet paid $30 million in
fines in response to FTC charges that they illegally billed thousands of
consumers for services that were advertised as ÒfreeÓ and billed other
consumers who never visited the Web sites at all.  In addition, the settle-

ment bars the illegal practices in the future and requires that the defen-
dants post a bond before they are allowed to continue to market adult
entertainment on the Internet.18  The long-term meaning of such actions
for the industry is as yet unclear, but coupled with a new administration,
it may suggest that the adult industry will be feeling increased pressure in
the future.  Such pressures may also include increased prosecutory efforts

under obscenity statutes.17See <http://www.ftc.gov/opa/2001/10/cupcake.htm>.18See <http://www.ftc.gov/opa/2001/11/crescentstlmt.htm>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.81THE ADULT ONLINE ENTERTAINMENT INDUSTRYThere are many paths toward a more responsible industry.  One in-
volves, of course, law and regulation that prohibit or mandate certain
kinds of behavior.  However, since explicit regulation is often quite oner-
ous, businesses in an industry that is subject to regulation may have strong
incentives to self-regulateÑthat is, to adopt codes of behavior to ward offthe threat of explicit regulation.19  Whether self-regulation will character-ize the path of the adult online industry remains to be seen, but it is likely
to depend on the occurrence of a shakeout that leads to substantial con-
solidation in the industry and trade groups with influence over a suffi-
ciently large number of individual firms in the business.3.4.3Future Products and Services
Today, the vast majority of online adult content consists of still im-ages.  The future will bring a greater emphasis on movie content and on

streaming, live video content as high-speed Internet connections become
generally available to consumers outside the workplace.  In 2000, interac-

tive content with live Òtour guidesÓ (i.e., a live narrator) was a business
model that was being investigated in partnership by Live Entertainment
Group and Flynt Digital Media.  In addition, a greater degree of niche

marketing is to be expected (as discussed below in Section 3.5). And,
given the increasing popularity of computer-generated imagery of near-
photographic quality, a mix of real and synthetic images may become
more common in the future.Content for transmittal to devices other than computers will becomemore common as well.  For example, 
Playboy will soon begin to offer
images for display on personal digital assistants (e.g., Palm Pilots).20Haptic (touch-sensitive) content is not yet, and may not be, a product
pursued by the industry. However, a variety of companies manufacture
products that are intended to provide a tactile counterpart to the visual
sexual experience.  These products are connected to a computer interface

that controls the location, relative force, and degree of stimulation.  Ac-

tions are initiated by a human being at some other location, by the user
clicking on certain sections of a Web page, or even a digitally presented
movie.  The products include devices that are intended to stimulate a

userÕs genitalia, realistic life-size dolls with computer-driven actuators in19For a discussion of self-regulation within a broader statutory framework, see ComputerScience and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, 2001, Global Networksand Local Values, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.20See <http://computerworld.com/nlt/1 percent2C3590 percent2CNAV47_STO66802_NLTPM percent2C00.html>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETcertain locations, and body suits capable of electronically stimulating auserÕs erogenous zones.21Whether or not haptic content will become widely available in thenear future is unclear, and a number of technological and economic barri-
ers stand in the way; these barriers include technological complexity, lag
times in haptic interactions, the difficulty of plausible haptic rendering of
even simple sensations, and the daunting economics today of producing
large numbers of small actuators.3.5INDUSTRY STRUCTURE, PRODUCT DIFFERENTIATION,
AND AGGRESSIVE PROMOTIONAccording to testimony from representatives of the adult online in-dustry, minors are not a focus of their marketing efforts.  Indeed, they

reported that because minors for the most part cannot purchase subscrip-
tions, targeting minors would make no economic sense for them (and
indeed would be a waste of resources).Nevertheless, in a saturated market with many firms, there are strongincentives for firms to be increasingly aggressive in their marketing ef-
forts (absent any counter-pressures).  Thus, while the adult industry may
not go out of its way to target minors, an aggressive marketing campaign
on the Internet that seeks to exclude minors will be more expensive than
one that is fully inclusive, and hence much of the adult industry does not
make any particular effort to exclude minors from receiving or accessing
its promotional materials, and exposing some children to its materials is
an inevitable byproduct of its business practices.  A firm that did make

special efforts to exclude minors would place itself at a financial disad-
vantage because of the extra expense involved.  It would also limit its

adult audience to a greater degree than a firm that did not make such
efforts, because any attempt to exclude minors would inevitably exclude
some adults as well.Such considerations are also likely to play a role in the evolution of thecontent offered by the industry.  For example, the committee heard from

well-established firms in the industry that noted that adult Web sites were
becoming increasingly specialized to accommodate any imaginable sexual
preference or taste (including those that might be regarded as more Òex-tremeÓ), and that predicted that marketing to these various sexual ÒnichesÓwould be the route to growth in the future.  Indeed, it is possible to see

intimations of this prediction today.  One can find with reasonable ease

sites whose sexual content depicts primarily older women, gay and lesbian21A short survey of such devices can be found online at <http://www.stanford.edu/~ereyna/pornsite2/main.html>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.83THE ADULT ONLINE ENTERTAINMENT INDUSTRYsex, women with large breasts, sex with animals, bondage, and anythingelse one might desire.22  This phenomenon is explained by the incentives in
a crowded market to differentiate oneÕs particular Web site from all of therest.These comments should not be taken to imply that no adult Web siteoperator takes precautions against exposing minors to its products.  On the

contrary, there are a variety that doÑand some of them testified to the commit-tee.  But the committee took testimony from and interviewed only individuals
who represented well-established firms in the industry, and was unsuccessful
in its attempts to hear from smaller Òmom and popÓ entrepreneurs.  Even
among these latter firms, there are some that do take such precautions.  Never-

theless, the committee believes that a small-time entrepreneur is more likely
than a well-established firm to fail to take such precautions.Note also that the highly fragmented structure of the industry in-creases significantly the difficulty of successful self-regulation.  Success-

ful self-regulation is commonly associated with the existence of a small
number of firms that control a very large fraction of the market and whose
behavior can be coordinated in a reasonable manner.  This condition does

not apply to the adult online industry.Finally, as in defining Òinappropriate sexually explicit material,Ó dif-
ferent people will have different definitions of actions that should count
as Òtaking precautions.Ó   There are two aspects to the home page that a
user sees when visiting a Web site. The first is content:  some possibilities

for site content include uncensored sexually explicit images; sexually ex-
plicit images with strategically placed blurrings or black spots; images
that are merely suggestive but not sexually explicit; text that describes the
content of the rest of the Web site; and/or text that tells the user to leave
if he or she is a minor.  The second is navigation:  some possibilities

include links that allow the user to see other pages on the site only with
payment, links that allow the user to see some other pages on the site
without payment, and/or links to other Web sites.A site whose home page included uncensored sexually explicit im-ages and links allowing the user to see other pages on the site without
payment is clearly not taking precautions against minors viewing sexu-
ally explicit materialÑand there are many such sites available on theInternet.  But there is a range of precautions that can be taken, and no

objective standard for Òwhat is enough.Ó  Some of these precautions in-
clude offering a text-only page describing the contents of the site in gen-
eral terms and a warning that one must not be a minor to proceed further.
However, nothing prevents a site taking such precautions from also pro-
viding free entry to sexually explicit imagery.22Note that such specialization is not limited to sexual content.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84A variety of legal issues come into play in efforts to protect childrenfrom inappropriate sexually explicit material on the Internet.  The U.S.

Constitution, state and federal statutes, and regulations issued by execu-
tive branch agencies all play important roles.  In addition, the threat of

law and regulation can also push the regulated parties into taking un-
mandated actions that they would not otherwise take.4.1THE FIRST AMENDMENT
4.1.1First Principles
The First Amendment states that ÒCongress shall make no law abridg-ing the freedom of speech or of the press.Ó  Through a complex process of

constitutional amendment and judicial interpretation, over the past 150
years the Constitution has come to mean that Ògovernment shall make no
law abridging the freedom of speechÓÑthat is, the First Amendment re-
stricts the actions not only of the Congress, but also of the President, the
State of Montana, the city of Pittsburgh, the University of Nebraska, and
police officers in Decatur.On the other hand, like other provisions of the Constitution, the FirstAmendment restricts only the government.  It does not restrict private

individuals.  Thus, a private individual cannot be said to unconstitutionally

ÒabridgeÓ another private individualÕs Òfreedom of speech and press.Ó
Only the government, or its agents, can be charged with violating the First
Amendment.4Legal and Regulatory IssuesYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.85LEGAL AND REGULATORY ISSUESTo give meaning to the First Amendment, scholars have identified threeprimary reasons for giving constitutional protection to free expression.First, freedom of speech and press is a necessary corollary of self-governance.  In a self-governing society, it is the citizens and not the

government who ultimately must decide on issues of public policy.  To

exercise this responsibility effectively, citizens must have access to theentire spectrum of information, opinions, and ideas, without interference
from the government.Second, in the words of Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, ÒThe best testof truth is the power of the thought to get itself accepted in the competi-
tion of the market.Ó  The idea here is that in all areas of decision making,
reaching far beyond the political, and including such questions as whether
to marry, or whether to have children, or whether to go to collegeÑthebest way of reaching the best decisions for both the individual and thecommunity is to allow all ideas and opinions to contest in a free and open
encounter, without interference from the government.Third, freedom of expression is guaranteed as a means of ensuringindividual self-fulfillment.  The notion here is that, as, human beings, we

have a fundamental need to speak our minds, to express our emotions
and desires, and to create and to learn from one another.  The constitu-

tional protection of free expression is an essential adjunct of ensuring our
common humanity and the opportunity for individual development.These three bases for providing constitutional protection to the free-dom of speech and press are not always consistent with one another and
sometimes point in different directions.  But, in very general terms, they

state the primary values that the First Amendment is thought to serve.Building on these values, the Supreme Court has identified severalvery basic principles that have shaped its interpretation and application
of the First Amendment.  Three such principles are most directly relevant

to the issues of interest to this committee:¥First, the Supreme Court has held that the government cannot con-stitutionally restrict speech because the speech advocates ideas, opinions,
or values that the government (or perhaps more accurately the majority of
citizens) believe to be ÒwrongÓ or 
Òimproper.Ó  Thus, for example, the
government cannot constitutionally prohibit speech calling for the legal
repeal of the draft on the ground that such expression might persuade the
public to vote unwisely to end the draft, even if the government pro-
foundly believes that the draft is a good thing and that it is essential to our
national welfare.  The explanation here is simple: under the First Amend-

ment, it is for the citizens themselves to make such decisions, after hear-
ing all the arguments; it is not for the governmentÑor for the majorityÑto prevent such decisions by shutting off debate.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET¥Second, the Court has generally held that, except in the most ex-traordinary circumstances, the government cannot constitutionally restrict
speech because the ideas expressed might cause readers or listeners to
engage in unlawful or otherwise socially undesirable conduct.  For ex-

ample, the government cannot prohibit opposition to the draft on the
ground that such expression might cause others to refuse induction or
even to blow up induction centers.  Indeed, although the Court has often

said that such speech can be restricted if it creates a Òclear and presentdangerÓ of grave harm, in fact the Court has not upheld a governmental
effort to restrict speech on this basis for some 50 years.¥Third, the Court has generally held that the second principle isinapplicable to specific categories of speech that the Court has defined
as having only ÒlowÓ First Amendment value.  That is, as the Court ex-
plained some 60 years ago:1There are certain well defined and narrowly limited classes of speech,[such as the obscene and the libelous, that] are no essential part of anyexposition of ideas and are of such slight social value as a step to truththat any benefit that may be derived from them is clearly outweighed by
the social interest in order and morality.For these categories of expression, which include not only the ob-scene and the libelous, but also fighting words, commercial advertising,
express incitement, and threats, the Court has held that some forms of
government regulation are permissible.These are the three basic principles that most directly informed thecommitteeÕs work.  They are not exhaustive
Ñthey do not deal with a hostof other First Amendment issues that are largely beyond the bounds of
the committeeÕs concern.  But they helped frame most of the questions the
committee considered concerning the regulation of sexually explicit ma-
terials on the Internet.4.1.2The First Amendment, Pornography, and Obscenity
How does the concept of ÒpornographyÓ square with the First
Amendment?  It is important to note that there is a potentially confusing

issue of terminology.  Historically, the term 
ÒpornographyÓ has been used
in at least four different ways.  First, the terms 
ÒobscenityÓ and 
Òpornog-raphyÓ traditionally were used interchangeably.  Second, beginning about
20 years ago, the term ÒpornographyÓ began to be used by feminist schol-
ars to refer to a concept quite distinct from the legal concept of Òobscen-ityÓ; this feminist concept focused specifically on sexually explicit mate-1Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire, 315 U.S. 568 (1942).Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.87LEGAL AND REGULATORY ISSUESrial harmful to women.   Third, there is the concept of child pornography,
which deals with a very specific problem involving the abuse of children
in order to make certain kinds of sexually explicit material.  Fourth, the

term ÒpornographyÓ is often used as a catch-all synonym for the generic
idea of Òsexually explicit material,Ó especially that intended to create
sexual arousal.   For the sake of clarity, it is important to note that the term

ÒpornographyÓ does not have a legal meaning under the First Amend-
ment.  To avoid confusion, the committee therefore focuses on the three

distinct concepts of Òobscenity,Ó Òchild pornography,Ó and 
Òsexually ex-plicit material.ÓHow does the concept of ÒobscenityÓ square with the First Amend-
ment?   Throughout the first half of the 20th century, it was generally

assumed that the First Amendment posed no barrier to the suppression of
obscene expression.   The assumption was that obscene expression is of

only ÒlowÓ First Amendment value and can therefore be regulated more
readily than other forms of expression.The Supreme Court did not have occasion to rule on the constitution-ality of anti-obscenity legislation until its 1957 decision in Roth v. UnitedStates.2  The Court reasoned as follows:
All ideas having even the slightest redeeming social importanceÑunor-thodox ideas, controversial ideas, even ideas hateful to the prevailingclimate of opinionÑhave the full protection of the [First Amendment].But implicit in the history of the First Amendment is the rejection of
obscenity as utterly without redeeming social importance.  Indeed, it is
apparent that obscenity, like libel, is outside the protection intended forspeech and press. Accordingly, obscene material may be suppressed
without proof that it will create a clear and present danger of antisocialconduct.ÒHowever, sex and obscenity,Ó the Court continued,
are not synonymous.  Obscene material is material which deals with sexin a manner appealing to prurient interest.  The portrayal of sex, for
example in art, literature, and scientific works, is not itself sufficient
reason to deny material constitutional protection.  Sex, a great and mys-
terious motivating force in human life, has indisputably been a subjectof absorbing interest to humankind though the ages; it is one of the vital
problems of human interest and public concern.  It is therefore essential
that the standards for judging obscenity safeguard the protection of free-
dom of speech and press for material which does not treat sex in a man-
ner appealing to prurient interest.  The proper test is whether to the
average person, applying contemporary community standards, the dom-2354 U.S. 476 (1957).Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETinant theme of the material taken as a whole appeals to the prurientinterest.Thus, the specific holding of Roth was that if material meets the defi-nition of obscenity, it is not protected by the First Amendment and may
thus be restricted without any showing that its sale, exhibition, or distri-
bution will cause any particular harm to any particular person.For the next 17 years, the Court wrestled with the problem of refiningthe Roth definition of obscenity, which proved difficult because of its
inherent subjectivity.  It was in this era that Justice Potter Stewart offered
his famous quip that ÒI canÕt define it [obscenity], but I know it when I seeit.Ó  As Justice Stewart understood, this observation did not bode well for
having a clear and consistently applied constitutional standard.In 1973, the Court revisited the question.  In 
Miller v. California,3 the
Court reaffirmed the idea that obscene expression is of such ÒlowÓ consti-
tutional value that it is outside the protection of the First Amendment.
However, the Court redefined the concept as having three components.
Miller concluded that, to be obscene, a work, taken as a whole, and judgedby contemporary community standards, must appeal to the prurient in-
terest in sex, must depict sexual conduct in a patently offensive manner,
and must lack serious literary, artistic, political, and scientific value.This definition has now been in place for the past quarter-century.Under this regime, and as community standards have tended to evolve
toward a greater degree of acceptance of sexually oriented expression, it
is generally thought today that only the most hard-core forms of sexually
explicit material are sufficient to satisfy the constitutional definition of
obscenity.  As of this writing (May 2002), prosecutions for obscenity are

rare though not unheard of at both the federal and local level.Nonetheless, it remains the case that the government, consistent withthe First Amendment as it has been interpreted, may prohibit the sale,
exhibition, or distribution of obscene material, and there is no Constitu-
tional obstacle to a more aggressive policy of prosecuting obscenity on the
Internet, subject to the caveats below.One caveat is the narrowness of the definition of obscenity, as de-scribed above.  Moreover, enforcing an anti-obscenity prohibition on the

Internet presents three additional problems.  First, because the definition

of obscenity turns on contemporary community standards, there is con-
siderable uncertainty about how one defines the relevant ÒcommunityÓfor purposes of the Internet.  For example, if X creates a sexually explicit

Web site in Amsterdam that Y views in St. Louis, what is the relevant3413 U.S. 15 (1973).Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.89LEGAL AND REGULATORY ISSUEScommunityÑAmsterdam?  St. Louis?  Is the 
ÒInternetÓ itself
 a Òcommu-nityÓ for these purposes?
4Second, there is often a tricky problem of assigning legal responsibil-ity.  For example, suppose X makes a threat over the telephone.  Can

AT&T be held responsible for this criminal use of its phone line?  Because

AT&T is legally a Òcommon carrier,Ó the answer is no.  However, the
same type of question can be asked about obscenity on the Internet.   If X
puts obscene material on a Web site that Y views through, say, America
Online, can AOL be held legally responsible for XÕs conduct?   For Inter-
net service providers, the law is evolving in this area.5Third, content transmitted through the Internet presents the issue ofwhat counts as Òwork as a whole.Ó  In the physical world, the work as a
whole would include a book, film, or magazine.  In an online environ-

ment, is the Òwork as a wholeÓ the Web page on which an image resides,or the entire Web site of which it is a part?  No court cases have addressed

this point to the best of the committeeÕs knowledge.4.1.3The First Amendment and Protecting Children
from Exposure to Sexually Explicit MaterialAs already noted, even if obscenity can constitutionally be prohibitedon the Internet, this does not solve the broader problem of the exposure of
children to sexually explicit material because of the very narrow defini-
tion of obscenity required by the Constitution.  This raises the question of

whether there are other steps the government can take, consistent with
the First Amendment, to protect children from non-obscene, sexually ex-
plicit material.In recognition of the special problems posed by the exposure of chil-dren to such material, the Supreme Court has recognized the concept of
Òvariable obscenity.Ó  Thus, in its 1968 decision in 
Ginsberg v. New York,6 the
Court recognized that the Òpower of the state to control the conduct of4Indeed, one of the primary challenges posed by the Internet is to the traditional associa-tion of geographical co-location with the definition of community.  To date, most construc-
tions of ÒcommunityÓ have, in practice, reduced to some kind of geographical delineation
to identify the community in question.5Some analysts argue, for example, that cyberspace calls for the creation of new law andlegal institutions that apply specifically to it.  See, for example, David R. Johnson and David

G. Post, 1996, ÒLaw and BordersÑThe Rise of Law in Cyberspace,Ó Stanford Law Review 48:
1367.  Others challenge this view, arguing that it underestimates the potential of traditionallegal tools and technology to resolve the multijurisdictional regulatory problems implied
by cyberspace.  See, for example, Jack L. Goldsmith, 1998, ÒAgainst Cyberanarchy,Ó Univer-sity of Chicago Law Review 65(Fall): 1199.
6390 U.S. 629 (1968).Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETchildren reaches beyond the scope of its authority over adults,Ó that the
claim of parents Òto direct the rearing of their children is basic in the struc-ture of our society,Ó and that the state 
Òhas an independent interest in thewell-being of its youth.Ó   With these factors in mind, the Court held in
Ginsberg that the government can constitutionally prohibit 
Òthe sale to mi-nors . . . of material defined to be obscene on the basis of its appeal to them
whether or not it would be obscene to adults.Ó  In other words, the govern-
ment can prohibit children from having access to certain types of sexually
explicit material that it cannot constitutionally ban for adults. (Recent legis-
lation (e.g., the COPA, discussed below) defined such speech as Òharmfulto minors.Ó  In this report, the phrase 
Òobscene with respect to minorsÓ or
Òobscene for minorsÓ is used interchangeably with 
Òharmful to minors.Ó)Although this distinction compounds still further the problems of vague-ness and subjectivity inherent in the very concept of obscenityÑby nowcreating multiple definitions of obscenityÑit is also a useful tool, for it is thedoctrine of variable obscenity that enables the government constitutionally to
prohibit minors from buying, renting, or viewing certain sexually explicit
movies, magazines, or books that would not be obscene for adults.The key limitation of this doctrine, however, is that it works best(perhaps only) in those situations in which it is possible to individuate the
audienceÑthat is, to separate the children from the adults.  Thus, the
doctrine of variable obscenity works reasonably well for movie theaters,
video rental shops, and book stores, but not for television and radio.  For

in those latter means of communication, it is not as easy to separate the
children from the adults.  And as the Supreme Court recognized in its

1957 decision in Butler v. Michigan,7 the government 
Òmay not reduce theadult population . . . to reading only what is fit for children.ÓTo understand this precept, it is useful to consider several recentdecisions of the Supreme Court.  In 
Sable Communications v. FCC,8 decided
in 1989, the Court unanimously held unconstitutional a federal statute
prohibiting ÒindecentÓ commercial telephone messages
Ñso-called Òdial-a-pornÓ services.  The Court said that if the government wants to protect
children in this context, it must do so by technical means rather than by a
total ban on the transmission of such messages, for although some limited
numbers of children might be able to defeat these devices, a prohibition
would have the impermissible effect of Òlimiting the content of adulttelephone conversations to that which is suitable for children to hear.ÓIn Reno v. ACLU,9 decided in 1997, the Court unanimously held un-
constitutional the Communications Decency Act of 1996, which prohib-7352 U.S. 380 (1957).8492 U.S. 115 (1989).9521 U.S. 844 (1997).Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.91LEGAL AND REGULATORY ISSUESited any person from making any ÒindecentÓ communication over the
Internet with knowledge that a recipient might be under the age of 18.
ÒIndecentÓ was defined in the statute as expression that 
Òdepicts or de-scribes, in terms patently offensive as measured by contemporary com-
munity standards, sexual or excretory activities or organs.ÓAlthough acknowledging the importance of the governmentÕs inter-est Òin protecting children from harmful materials,Ó the Court reaffirmed
that that Òinterest does not justify an unnecessarily broad suppression ofspeech addressed to adults,Ó and that the government 
Òmay not reducethe adult population to only what is fit for children.ÓThe Court suggested that the government should explore less speech-restrictive means of serving this interest, such as requiring indecent mate-
rial to be ÒtaggedÓ in a way that facilitates parental control of material
entering the home, exempting from regulation indecent messages with
artistic or educational value, and perhaps regulating only some portions
of the InternetÑsuch as commercial Web sitesÑwhile leaving unregu-lated non-commercial uses of the Internet, such as chat rooms.The lesson of these decisions10 is this:  outside the realm of speech that
is constitutionally obscene, the government may not prohibit ÒindecentÓor ÒoffensiveÓ or 
Òsexually explicitÓ or 
ÒprofaneÓ speech on the Internet
in order to protect children, unless the speech is obscene with respect to
minors and government regulation does not unduly interfere with the
rights of adults to have access to such material.  The challenge is thus to
10See also the following Supreme Court cases.  In 
Cohen v. California, 403 U.S. 15 (1971),the Court rejected the idea that profanity could be analogized to obscenity as a form ofÒlow-valueÓ speech and dismissed the notion that such language, which can serve a useful
role in public debate, can be prohibited merely because it is offensive to others.  In 
FCC v.Pacifica Foundation, 438 U.S. 726 (1978), the Court upheld the constitutionality of a FederalCommunications Commission order that a radio station had impermissibly broadcast inde-cent material when it broadcast in the middle of the day a satirical monologue that involved
[the] Òseven words you cannot say on the public airwaves.Ó  In doing so, the Court sug-
gested some latitude for the regulation of offensive but non-obscene speech in order toshield children, even at some intrusion on what otherwise would be the rights of adults.  In
Erznoznik v. City of Jacksonville, 422 U.S. 205 (1975), the Court held that a city could notconstitutionally prohibit drive-in movie theaters whose screens were visible to the publicfrom exhibiting movies that contain nudity, even if the goal was to protect children from
exposure to such scenes.  In 
Denver Area v. FCC, 422 U.S. 205 (1996), the Court held that theFCC could not constitutionally require cable operators to segregate ÒindecentÓ program-
ming on a single, blocked channel and to unblock that channel only on a subscriberÕs writ-ten request.  In
 United States v. Playboy Entertainment,
 529 U.S. 803 (2000), 120 S. Ct. 1878
(2000), the Court held unconstitutional a provision of the 1996 Federal TelecommunicationsAct that required cable operators who provide channels devoted Òprimarily to sexually-oriented programmingÓ either to limit their transmission of such channels to between 10:00p.m. and 6:00 a.m. or to Òfully scrambleÓ those channels so that they cannot even inadvert-
ently Òbleed throughÓ to those households that do not want them.
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETdevise mechanisms that reconcile these two powerfully competing inter-ests, where the Court has made clear the strong First Amendment pre-
sumption that the governmentÕs legitimate interests in protecting chil-dren will have to yield to the constitutional interests of adults, to theextent that those interests cannot otherwise be reconciled.
4.1.4The First Amendment Rights of Minors
Because the First Amendment relates only to government action, chil-dren have no First Amendment rights against their parents.  Thus, if a

parent prevents a child from reading a book or watching a movie, the
child cannot sue the parent for violating the First Amendment.  But mi-

nors Òare ÔpersonsÕ under our Constitution. . . .  possessed of fundamental
rights which the State must respectÓ11 and 
Òare entitled to a significantmeasure of First Amendment protection.Ó12Moreover, a constitutional issue can arise if the government intrudesin the parent-child relationship.  For example, if the government passed a

law prohibiting any person from permitting a minor to view a movie that
includes nudity without the written permission of the minorÕs parent, acourt would likely hold such a law unconstitutional, at least as applied to
older minors, and especially if the nudity were not further qualified.
(Note, however, that materials deemed to be illegalÑthat is, to be childpornography or obscenityÑdo not enjoy First Amendment protection,either for adults or for minors.  Thus, even if a minor has permission from

his/her parents to obtain child pornography or obscenity, he or she does
not have a First Amendment right to do so.)It is important to note that the constitutionality of any particular regu-lation of the speech rights of minors may turn on the age of the particular
minor in question. Indeed, as this report discusses in Chapter 5, minors
range from 0 to 18 years old, and there are large developmental differ-
ences between an 8-year-old and a 17-year-old.  The Supreme Court has

held that Òthe strength of the GovernmentÕs interest in protecting minorsis not equally strong throughout the [age] coverage.Ó13  The constitutional
rights of minors, including their First Amendment rights, get stronger as
they grow older.  As the Court has said, 
Òconstitutional rights do not11Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District, 393 U.S. 503, 511 (1969); seePlanned Parenthood v. Casey, 505 U.S. 833, 899 (1992), parental consent statute must containmethod by which minor can obtain abortion without parental consent; see In re Gault, 387U.S. 1, 13 (1967), minorsÕ right to criminal due process.
12Erznoznik v. City of Jacksonville, 422 U.S. 205, 212-213 (1975) (citation omitted).13Reno, 521 U.S. at 878 (using examples of 17-year-olds); American Booksellers Association v.Webb, 919 F.2d 1493, 1504-05 (11th Cir. 1990); American Booksellers Association v. Virginia, 882F.2d 125, 127 (4th Cir. 1989).Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.93LEGAL AND REGULATORY ISSUESmature and come into being magically only when one attains the state-defined age of majority,Ó14 and these rights ripen at different times and in
different contexts.The precise contours of the First Amendment rights of minors, evenacknowledging that they may well vary with age and maturity, are uncer-
tain.  The Supreme Court has held that certain minors have constitutional

rights in certain circumstances that trump a general deference to parental
authority, for example, in the case of a mature minor seeking an abor-
tion15 or privacy rights about the use of contraception.
16  Further, it is
arguable that mature minors have a First Amendment right to receive
information relevant to the exercise of these substantive rights.  Whether

and in what circumstances a minor has a First Amendment right of access
to adult-oriented entertainment Web sites remains an open question.  But

even if minors do not themselves have a constitutional right to access
such material, the government cannot unduly burden the rights of adults
to such material in order to keep it away from children.4.1.5The First Amendment and Child Pornography
Another facet of protecting children concerns the issue of child por-nography.  Here, the primary concern is not the exposure of children to

sexually explicit material, but the use (or, possibly, the apparent use) of
children to make such material.  In 
New York v. Ferber,17 the Supreme
Court upheld the constitutionality of a state statute that prohibited any
person from knowingly producing, promoting, directing, exhibiting, or
selling any material depicting a Òsexual performanceÓ by a child under
the age of 16.  The statute defined 
Òsexual performanceÓ as any perfor-
mance that includes Òactual or simulated sexual intercourse, deviatesexual intercourse, sexual bestiality, masturbation, sado-masochistic
abuse, or lewd exhibition of the genitals.Ó  The Court explained that, like
obscenity, child pornography is of only ÒlowÓ First Amendment value
and that the Òuse of childrenÓ in such materials 
Òis harmful to the physi-14Planned Parenthood of Central Missouri v. Danforth, 428 U.S. 52, 74 (1976), minorsÕ right toabortion.15Id. at 640-3; Planned Parenthood v. Casey, 505 U.S. 833, 899 (1992); Lambert v. Wicklund, 520U.S. 292 (1997).16See Carey v. Population Services International, 431 U.S. 678 (1977) (plurality opinion).Although Carey was a plurality opinion, the holding that teenagers have privacy rightsregarding procreation commanded five votes.  See 431 U.S. at 681 (plurality opinion) (Jus-
tice Brennan, joined by Justices Stewart, Marshall, and Blackmun); Id. at 693, 702 (JusticeWhite, concurring) (agreeing with plurality in result and including Òwith respect to PartIVÓ in which plurality recognized privacy interests of minors in contraception).
17458 U.S. 747 (1982).Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETological, emotional, and mental health of the child.Ó  The Court added
that, unlike obscenity, child pornography does not have to meet all of the
requirements of Miller.4.1.6The First Amendment in Public Libraries
The general principles of the First Amendment are designed primar-ily for those circumstances in which the government attempts to regulate
the free speech rights of individuals in the larger society.  Those prin-

ciples may apply differently in special contexts, such as public libraries
and schools.  In public libraries, for example, the government has limited
resources.  It cannot buy all books.  It must therefore make choices.  In

making those choices, it inevitably must decide which books are most
necessary and most appropriate for the particular collection.  This gives

the government, in the form of the library board or the librarian, the
authority and the responsibility to make decisions based on content that it
could not make in more general regulations of public discourse.  For

example, although the government cannot constitutionally prohibit all
books on any subject but art history, it can constitutionally create a library
dedicated only to art history.  And although the government cannot con-

stitutionally prohibit all books that are not appropriate for children, it can
constitutionally create a library dedicated only to childrenÕs books.On the other hand, even a public library is not free to engage inÒviewpoint discrimination.Ó  For example, in 
Board of Education of IslandTrees Union Free School District v. Pico,18 the members of a public school
board of education decided to remove from the school library certain
books, including Soul on Ice by Eldridge Cleaver and Slaughterhouse Fiveby Kurt Vonnegut, because they were Òimproper fare for children.Ó  The
board members described the books as Òanti-American, anti-Christian,anti-Semitic, and just plain filthy.Ó  The Supreme Court held that this
action would violate the First Amendment if the intent of the board mem-
bers was to deny Òaccess to ideasÓ with which they 
Òdisagreed.Ó19It should be noted that an important reason for granting a publiclibrary broad (but not absolute) discretion to decide which books to in-
clude in its collection is the fact of limited resources.  This fact is not

present in the same way in the Internet context.  To the contrary, in the

Internet context, where filters may be at issue, it will generally cost more18457 U.S. 853 (1982).19As a matter of legal precedent, Pico has specific relevance to public school libraries;
however, the applicability of its logic to other settings such as public libraries has yet to bedetermined.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.95LEGAL AND REGULATORY ISSUESto reduce rather than to expand the Òcollection.Ó  It is unclear how this
will affect the constitutional calculus.20Another facet of the public library situation concerns the appropriaterole of parents.  For example, although a public library cannot constitu-

tionally select which books it will make available to students on the basis
of whether the library officials agree or disagree with the ideas presented
in particular books, it presumably could decline to lend books to minors
(at least younger minors) without parental permission, as long as the
library acts in a content-neutral manner itself.  That is, a library could

insist on parental permission for younger minors to borrow any book
from the library, but probably could not limit this requirement only to, for
example, ÒracistÓ books or books about Scientology.
4.1.7The First Amendment in Public Schools
In the context of public schools, the Supreme Court has expresslyrecognized, in Tinker v. Des Moines School District,21 that neither 
Òstudentsnor teachers shed their constitutional rights to freedom of speech or ex-
pression at the schoolhouse gate.Ó On the other hand, the Court has also
recognized that, in light of Òthe special characteristics of the school envi-ronment,Ó public school officials may restrict expression that would 
Òma-terially and substantially interfereÓ with the core activities of the school.
Thus, in Bethel School District v. Fraser,22 the Court upheld a public high
schoolÕs decision to discipline a student for using Òvulgar and lewdspeechÓ in a public assembly because such expression 
Òwould underminethe schoolÕs basic educational mission.Ó  Similarly, although a public
school may not generally deny a studentÕs right to speak or to accessinformation on school grounds or through school facilities, it may restrict20For example, in Mainstream Loudon v. Board of Trustees of Loudon County, 2 F. Supp. 783(ED Va. 1998), the Court held invalid a public libraryÕs use of filters (for all patrons) as anunconstitutional prior restraint.  More generally, opponents of filtering in public libraries
have argued that the use of filters constitutes an unconstitutional prior restraint because the
government is technologically preventing the censored material from even reaching poten-tial users.  They argue that this is prior restraint because the filter relies not on the threat of
criminal punishment after the speech takes place, but on an actual blocking of the speech
itself.  For relevant Supreme Court decisions, see 
Freedman v. Maryland, 380 U.S. 51 (1965),holding that a movie censorship board that makes decisions about what may or may not beshown publicly is constitutionally permissible if the board is screening for obscenity, but
only if the board is required immediately to go to court to obtain a prompt judicial determi-nation that the movie is in fact obscene; and Southeastern Promotions v. Conrad, 420 U.S. 546(1975), holding that a city manager would be required to abide by the Freedman v. Marylandrequirements.21393 U.S. 503 (1969).22478 U.S. 675 (1986).Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETexpression or access to information that Òwould undermine the schoolÕsbasic educational mission,Ó so long as school officials do not attempt to
deny access to ideas because they disagree with them.4.1.8The First Amendment and the Commercial
Advertising of Sexually Explicit MaterialThe Supreme Court has held that commercial advertising may insome circumstances be regulated more readily than other forms of ex-
pression.  For example, the Court has permitted government to regulate

such advertising when it is false or deceptive in circumstances in which
similar regulation of political expression would not be permitted.  The

interestingÑand openÑquestion in this context is whether the govern-ment can constitutionally regulate or even prohibit the commercial adver-
tising of constitutionally protected sexually explicit material.  In general,

the Court has suggested that such regulations would not be constitution-
ally permissible.  In 
Bolger v. Youngs Drug Products Corp.,23 for example,
the Court held unconstitutional a federal statute prohibiting the mailing
of unsolicited advertisements for contraceptives because the interest in
shielding Òrecipients from materials that they are likely to find offensiveÓis not sufficiently substantial to justify the suppression of Òprotectedspeech.ÓThis does not mean that all restrictions on the e-mailing of unsolicitedcommercial advertisements for sexually explicit Web sites would neces-
sarily be unconstitutional.  For example, such a restriction might arguably

be distinguishable from Bolger if it focused specifically on material that
is obscene for minors under Ginsberg.  Moreover, a restriction on the
e-mailing of all unsolicited commercial advertisements might be constitu-
tional on the theory that it is justified not by the offensiveness of any
particular material but because this practice has the potential to over-
whelm electronic mailboxes and thus to discourage the use of this valu-
able means of communication.4.2RELEVANT STATUTES AND COMMON LAW
4.2.1Federal Obscenity Statutes
Federal obscenity statutes restrict the use of computers and the Inter-net to distribute obscene materials.24 Section 1465 of Title 18 of the U.S.
Code prohibits the use of any means of interstate or foreign commerce or23463 U.S. 60 (1983).24Chapter 71 of Title 18 (Criminal Code) contains the federal obscenity statutes.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.97LEGAL AND REGULATORY ISSUESan interactive computer service to sell or distribute obscenity, and thisprohibition applies to adults as well as to children.  Section 1470 of Title

18 of the U.S. Code prohibits the use of any facility or means of interstate
or foreign commerce to transfer obscene materials to someone under the
age of 16 if the person knows that the recipient is under the age of 16.
Whether material is within the restrictions of either of these statutes de-
pends on whether a reasonable person in the community would interpret
the work, taken as a whole, to appeal to the prurient interest; whether the
work, as a whole, is patently offensive; and whether the work, as a whole
and in context, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value.254.2.2Child Pornography Statutes
In general, Chapter 110 of Title 18 provides for civil and criminalpenalties for the production, possession, distribution, and sale of child
pornography.  Historically, child pornography has been defined as a vi-

sual depiction involving the use of an individual under 18 engaging in
sexually explicit conduct (18 U.S.C. 2256, Chapter 110).26  The Child Por-
nography Prevention Act of 1996 (CPPA) amended this definition to in-
clude three additional elements: a visual depiction Òthat is or appears tobe of a minor engaging in sexually explicit conduct,Ó a visual depiction
that Òhas been created, adapted, or modified to appear that an identifiableminor is engaging in sexually explicit conduct,Ó or a visual depiction that
is Òadvertised, promoted, presented, described, or distributed in such amanner that conveys the impression that the material is or contains a
visual depiction of a minor engaging in sexually explicit conduct.Ó  The
CPPA also expanded the definition of ÒdistributionÓ or 
ÒreceiptÓ of such
depictions through interstate or foreign commerce to include computer
channels.27On April 16, 2002, the Supreme Court ruled that the provisions of theCPPA regarding the portion of the definition that refers to Òappearing tobe a minor engaging in sexually explicit conductÓ were unconstitutional.
Box 4.1 describes the CourtÕs reasoning on this decision.25Eckstein v. Cullen, 803 F. Supp. 1107 (ED Va. 1992).26ÒSexually explicit conductÕÕ is defined as 
Òactual or simulated sexual intercourse, in-cluding genital-genital, oral-genital, anal-genital, or oral-anal, whether between persons ofthe same or opposite sex; bestiality; masturbation; sadistic or masochistic abuse; or lascivi-ous exhibition of the genitals or pubic area of any person.Ó27P.L. 104-208, Title 1, ¤ 121(a), 110 Stat. 3009.  The CPPA amends 18 U.S.C. 
¤ 2241, 18
U.S.C. ¤ 2243, 18 U.S.C. 
¤ 2251, 18 U.S.C. 
¤ 2252, 18 U.S.C. 
¤ 2256, and 42 U.S.C 
¤ 2000(a) and
adds 12 U.S.C. ¤ 2252(a).  In addition, the Sex Crimes Against Children Prevention Act of
1995 increases the base-level penalty for creating, distributing, or receiving visual depic-tions that show, or purport to show, minors engaging in sexually explicit conduct (P.L. 104-71, 28 U.S.C. ¤ 994 nt).  The act amends 18 U.S.C. 
¤ 2251(c)(1)(A) and 18 U.S.C. 
¤ 2252(a).
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETBox 4.1Computer-Generated Child Pornographyand the Child Pornography Prevention ActThe Child Pornography Prevention Act of 1996 (CPPA) was enacted in part toaddress the challenges resulting from the technological advances in the computer-
aided creation and production of visual images.  In particular, the CPPA incorpor-
ated into the definition of child pornography Òany visual depictionÓ that Òappears tobe of a minor engaging in sexually explicit conduct.Ó   Increasingly, graphics software

packages and computer animation have the capability to create ÒvirtualÓ imagesindistinguishable from photographic depictions of actual human beingsÑincludingfictitious children engaged in apparently sexual activity.On April 16, 2002, in Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition, the Supreme Court heldthis part of the CPPA unconstitutional.  The Court explained that 
Òby prohibitingchild pornography that does not depict an actual child, the statute goes beyondFerber, which distinguished child pornography from other sexually explicit speechbecause of the StateÕs interest in protecting the children exploited by the productionprocess.Ó  The Court added that Òthe sexual abuse of a child is a most serious crimeand an act repugnant to the moral instincts of a decent people.Ó  Thus, Congress
Òmay pass valid laws to protect children from abuse, and it has.Ó  But 
Òthe prospectof crime . . . by itself does not justify laws suppressing protected speech.ÓThe Court emphasized that Òwhere the images are themselves the product ofchild sexual abuse, Ferber recognized that the State had an interest in stamping itoutÓ because the 
Òproduction of the work, not its content, was the target of thestatute.Ó  ÒIn contrast to the speech in Ferber, [the] CPPA prohibits speech thatrecords no crime and creates no victims by its production. Virtual child pornographyis not Ôintrinsically relatedÕ to the sexual abuse of children, as were the materials in
Ferber.  While the Government asserts that the images can lead to actual instances of
child abuse, the causal link is contingent and indirect. The harm does not necessarilyfollow from the speech, but depends upon some unquantified potential for subse-
quent criminal acts.Ó  The Court reaffirmed that 
Òthe mere tendency of speech toencourage unlawful acts is not a sufficient reason for banning it.ÓThe Government also defended the CPPA on the ground that the existence ofvirtual child pornography will make it more difficult Òto prosecute those who pro-duce pornography by using real childrenÓ and that the 
Ònecessary solutionÓ is to
prohibit virtual as well as real child pornography.   The Court rejected this argument,

noting that Òthis analysis turns the First Amendment upside down.  The Government
may not suppress lawful speech as the means to suppress unlawful speech.  Protect-
ed speech does not become unprotected merely because it resembles the latter.ÓFinally, the Court made clear that the CPPA does not deal with obscenity.  As the
Court explained, under Miller v. California, to establish that a work is obscene, ÒtheGovernment must prove that the work, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient
interest, is patently offensive in light of community standards, and lacks serious liter-ary, artistic, political, or scientific value.Ó The Court noted that the CPPA contained
none of the Miller requirements.  In the Court
Õs view, this was fatal, for although Òthefreedom of speech has its limits,Ó the CPPA reached beyond the limits of permissible
regulation.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.99LEGAL AND REGULATORY ISSUESFinally, the Child Protection and Obscenity Enforcement Act of 1988and amendments of the Child Protection Restoration and Penalties En-
hancement Act of 1990 added requirements associated with 18 U.S.C.
2257.  These requirements call for certain parties in the adult entertain-

ment industry to create and maintain records that allow law enforcement
authorities to verify the names and birth dates of models and performers
depicted in sexually explicit activity if such depictions were made after
November 1, 1990.  These requirements were developed in 1988 in re-

sponse to the avoidance of prosecution by producers and distributors of
child pornography through claims of ignorance regarding a modelÕs trueage.28   The record-keeping requirements of 18 U.S.C. 2257 call for:
¥Records to be maintained that indicate the legal name, stage names,and all other names used by a performer, and date of birth of each per-
former, obtained by the producerÕs examination of an appropriate identi-fication document.  For depictions made after May 26, 1992, a legible copy

of the identification document examined (and a photo) are also required,
and names must be indexed by the title or the identifying number of the
depiction involved.¥Records to be categorized and retrievable by the name(s) of eachperformer and according to the title, number, or other similar identifier of
the depiction in question.¥Records to be available at the producerÕs place of business, andmade available for inspection to the Attorney General or his delegate for
inspection at all reasonable times.4.2.3The Communications Decency Act
The CongressÕs first attempt to regulate childrenÕs access to sexuallyexplicit materials on the Internet was the Communications Decency Act
of 1996 (CDA).29  The CDA, enacted as part of the Telecommunications
Act of 1996, amended 47 U.S.C. ¤ 223 to prohibit the use of an interactive
computer service to send or display, in a manner available to those under
the age of 18, any communication that describes or depicts sexual or
excretory activities or organs in terms that are patently offensive as mea-
sured by contemporary community standards.28The text of 18 U.S.C. 2257 and associated implementing regulations can be found onlineat <http://www.execpc.com/~xxxlaw/sec2257.html>.29P.L. 104-104, Title V, 47 U.S.C.S. ¤ 994 nt.  The CDA was enacted on October 21, 1998.
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETThe Supreme Court, reviewing the CDA, determined that the provi-sions of the CDA relating to the dissemination of indecent or patently
offensive material to individuals under 18 violated the First Amend-
ment.30  The Court struck down these sections of the act as overbroad and
unconstitutionally vague, reasoning that the restrictions chilled protected
speech and unduly restricted adultsÕ access to constitutionally protected
materials.31   The Court severed the provisions concerning obscene mate-rial because obscenity receives no protection under the First Amendment;
thus, the obscenity provisions were found not to suffer from the same
constitutional infirmities as the provisions regulating indecent speech.Another aspect of the CDA that remains in force is protection forÒGood SamaritanÓ blocking and screening of offensive material.  Prior to
the CDA, a service provider that filtered certain kinds of material (e.g.,
adult-oriented, sexually explicit material) might have incurred liability as
a publisher if its filtering of such material was not perfect.  (So, for ex-

ample, an ISP that filtered could not be said to be acting in a ÒcommoncarrierÓ mode, and thus might have incurred some liability for the content
it made available to the end user.)  The CDA provided that service pro-

viders could not be held liable on account of any action voluntarily taken
in good faith to restrict access to or availability of material that the pro-
vider considers to be Òobscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy, excessively vio-lent, harassing, or otherwise objectionable, whether or not such material
is constitutionally protected.Ó32One consequence of this provision in the CDA is that ISPs cannot beheld liable for deciding to refrain from carrying Usenet newsgroups that
are, in its judgment, obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy, excessively violent,
harassing, or otherwise objectionable.One analyst further believes that another section of the CDA absolvesschools and libraries of civil liability if students or patrons access inappro-
priate material.  This analyst
Õs reasoning is based on the fact that underthe CDA, an Òinteractive computer serviceÓ cannot be treated as the pub-
lisher of any information provided by another information content pro-
vider, and further that libraries and schools are providers of interactive
computer services.3330Reno v. ACLU, 521 U.S. 844, 117 S. Ct. 2329, 138 L. Ed. 2d 874 (1997).31Reno v. ACLU, 521 U.S. 844, 117 S. Ct. 2329, 138 L. Ed. 2d 874 (1997).3247 U.S.C. 230.33Nancy Willard (University of Oregon), the analyst, cites two cases in support of thisview.  First, in 
Zeran v. America Online, Inc. (129 F.3d 327 (4th Cir. 1997)), the Fourth CircuitCourt of Appeals expressly held that Ò[b]y its plain language, ¤230 (a provision of the CDA)creates a federal immunity to any cause of action that would make service providers liablefor information originating with a third-party user of the service.Ó  Second, in 
Kathleen R. v.City of Livermore (Cal. Ct. App., 1st App. Dist., A086349, 3/6/01), a mother of a teenage boyYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.101LEGAL AND REGULATORY ISSUES4.2.4The Child Online Protection Act
CongressÕs next attempt to regulate minorsÕ access to sexually explicit
material on the Internet was the Child Online Protection Act (COPA).34COPA amended 47 U.S.C. ¤ 231 to prohibit the communication of mate-
rial that is Òharmful to minorsÓ in interstate or foreign commerce by
means of the World Wide Web if it is available to minors.  Congress

included provisions in COPA that were designed to remedy the problems
identified by the Supreme Court in the CDA.  Specifically:
¥COPA defined a minor as one under the age of 17, whereas theCDA defined minors as individuals under the age of 18.¥COPA applied only to the World Wide Web, whereas the CDAapplied to all communications over the entire Internet.¥COPA applied only to Web sites that exist for a commercial pur-pose, whereas the CDA applied to commercial and non-commercial sites
alike.  Under COPA, a commercial purpose is found if the site
Õs operatoror owner is Òengaged in the business of making such communications.ÓThe phrase Òengaged in the businessÓ is defined as applying to 
Òthe per-son who makes a communication, or offers to make a communication, by
means of the World Wide Web, that includes any material that is harmful
to minors, devotes time, attention, or labor to such activities, as a regular
course of such personÕs trade or business, with the objective of earning aprofit as a result of such activities (although it is not necessary that the
person make a profit or that the making or offering to make such commu-
nication be the personÕs sole or principal business or source of income).Ó35¥Whereas the CDA provided a vague definition of Òindecent mate-rial,Ó COPA restricts only material that is 
Òharmful to minorsÓÑthat is,material that satisfies all three prongs of the Miller36 test, as applied to
minors.  Thus, COPA restricts sexually explicit material only if (1) 
Òtheaverage person, applying contemporary community standards, would
find, taking the material as a whole and with respect to minors, [that it]
is designed to appeal to . . . the prurient interestÓ; (2) it Òdepicts, describesor represents, in a manner patently offensive with respect to minors, ansued the library because her son had accessed sexually explicit pictures through the libraryÕsInternet service.  The case was dismissed, and the dismissal was upheld in appellate court.
The appellate court found that under the CDA, the library was an interactive service pro-
vider and was entitled to immunity, and noted that although the purpose of the CDA wasto prevent minors from obtaining access to pornography, Congress made a deliberate policychoice not to subject those providing Internet access to tort liability.34P.L. 105-227, Div. C, Title XIV, ¤ 231.  COPA was enacted on October 21, 1998.
3547 U.S.C. ¤ 231(e)(2)(B).
36Miller v. California, 413 U.S. 15 (1973).Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETactual or simulated sexual act or sexual contact, an actual or simulatednormal or perverted sexual act, or a lewd exhibition of the genitals or
post-pubescent female breastsÓ; and (3) Òtaken as a whole, lacks seriousliterary, artistic, political or scientific value for minors.Ó37Both the CDA and COPA provide an affirmative defense to prosecu-tion if the defendant, in good faith, took reasonable measures to restrict
access to regulated material, such as requiring a credit card, debit ac-
count, adult access code, or adult personal identification number, or ac-
cepting a digital certificate that verifies age.  (The use of age verification

technologies is discussed in Chapter 13.)As of this writing (May 2002), a preliminary injunction issued by theU.S. District Court of the Eastern District of Pennsylvania (and upheld in
the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit) currently prohibits the
enforcement of COPA because the court found that the standard used to
determine whether material is harmful to minors places an impermissible
burden on protected speech.38  The court explained that using community
standards to assess the nature of material is inappropriate in the context
of material on the Internet because Web publishers do not have the tech-
nological ability to restrict access to their sites on the basis of visitorsÕgeographical location.  Without this ability to restrict access on a geo-

graphical basis, Web publishers must publish only materials that would
not be considered obscene for minors under the standards of the most
restrictive community that might gain access to the material or subject
themselves to potential liability if a viewer in a more restrictive commu-
nity finds the material obscene.  To avoid the liability that would be

imposed by COPA, a Web publisher would have to publish only those
materials that would not be considered obscene for minors by Internet
users in the community with the most restrictive definition of obscenity.The Supreme Court heard oral arguments on COPA in late Novem-ber 2001 and is expected to render a decision by the summer of 2002.Note added in proof: On May 13, 2002, the Supreme Court held thatCOPAÕs reliance on Òcommunity standardsÓ to identify what material 
Òisharmful to minorsÓ did not by itself render the statute substantially over-
broad for First Amendment purposes.  However, it expressed no view as to

whether COPA suffers from substantial overbreadth for reasons other than
its use of community standards, whether the statute is unconstitutionally
vague, or whether the statute survives strict scrutiny.  It directed the U.S.
3747 U.S.C. ¤ 231(e)(6).
38ACLU v. Reno, 31 F. Supp. 2d 473 (ED Pa. 1999).  The Third Circuit Court of Appealsupheld this decision.  ACLU v. Reno, 217 F. 3d 162 (3d Cir. 2000), cert. granted, Ashcroft v.ACLU, 121 S. Ct. 1997 (2001).Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.103LEGAL AND REGULATORY ISSUESCourt of Appeals for the Third Circuit to examine these issues, and leftstanding the preliminary injunction against COPAÔs enforcement absentfurther action by the lower courts.394.2.5The ChildrenÕs Internet Protection Act
In December 2000, Congress enacted the ChildrenÕs Internet Protec-tion Act (CIPA).40  CIPA took effect on April 21, 2001.  CIPA requires
schools and libraries that receive federal funds for Internet access from
the FCCÕs E-Rate program,41 the Department of Education, or the Institute
of Museum and Library Services to enforce a policy of Internet safety for
minors that includes limiting the online activities of those under the age
of 17 through the operation of a Òtechnology protection measureÓ that
Òblocks or filters Internet access to visual depictions that are obscene,child pornography, or Ôharmful to minors.ÕÓ  Accordingly, public schools
and public libraries that wish to receive these federal funds must install
on computers that have Internet access a specific technology protection
measure that blocks or filters access to child pornography, obscene mate-
rials, or material that is harmful to minors.42  The technology protection
measure must be operative with respect to obscenity and child pornogra-
phy when adults are using those computers, and with respect to obscen-
ity, child pornography, and material that is harmful to minors when mi-
nors are using those computers.  (The CIPA also allows, but does not

require, giving an authorized person the ability to disable the technology
protection measure during any use by an adult to enable access for bona
fide research or other lawful purpose.)39Ashcroft v. American Civil Liberties Union, Ñ U.S. 
Ñ (2002).
40P.L. 106-554, ¤ 1(a)(4), 114 Stat. 2763 (2001).  A good summary of the provisions of CIPA
can be found online at <http://www.cybertelecom.org/cda/cipatext.htm#1712>.41The ÒE-rateÓ program was mandated by the Telecommunications Act of 1996.  In that
program, phone companies contribute to a fund that the FCC administers to help finance thewiring of K-12 public schools.  The program has been important in enabling Internet access
for many schools.  For more information, see <http://www.sl.universalservice.org/>.
42One additional requirement placed on schools (but not on libraries) receiving federalfunding for Internet access is that their policy of Internet safety must include monitoringthe online activities of minors, though the tracking of Internet use by any identifiable minor
or adult user is not required.  Further, it is not clear whether technologies other than filters
as defined in Chapter 12 will qualify as appropriate Òtechnology protection measuresÓ;some parties have advanced the argument that according to the principles of statutory
construction, the use of the phrase Òblock or filterÓ rather than simply ÒblockÓ means that adevice that ÒfiltersÓ but does not 
ÒblockÓ is consistent with the definition of 
Òtechnologyprotection measure.Ó  Since CIPA does not provide a definition of the term 
Òfilter,Ó at least
one of these parties has argued that products that rely on the identification of inappropriatesites (filtering) but which also record access to those sites will be compliant (personal com-munication, Nancy Willard, University of Oregon).Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETUnder CIPA, material is Òharmful to minorsÓ if
taken as a whole and with respect to minors, [it] appeals to a prurientinterest in nudity, sex, or excretion; depicts, describes or represents, in apatently offensive way with respect to what is suitable for minors, anactual or simulated normal or perverted sexual act, or a lewd exhibition
of the genitals, and taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, polit-ical or scientific value to minors.43The American Civil Liberties Union and the American Library Asso-ciation have both filed suit to challenge CIPA on First Amendment
grounds as the act is applied to libraries.44Note added in proof:  On May 31, 2002, a three-judge panel of the U.S.
District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania entered a final
judgment declaring Sections 1712(a)(2) and 1721(b) of the ChildrenÕsInternet Protection Act (i.e., the provisions that required libraries receiv-
ing federal funds for Internet access to employ technology protection
measures) to be facially invalid under the First Amendment and perma-
nently enjoining the defendants from enforcing those provisions.45  As ofJune 13, it is unknown if the U.S. government will appeal the decision to
the Supreme Court.4.2.6The Children
Õs Online Privacy Protection ActThe ChildrenÕs Online Privacy Protection Act of 1998 (COPPA) pro-hibits the collection, maintenance, and use or disclosure46 of personal
information47 from children under the age of 13 on commercial Web sitesthat are directed at children48 or if the operator has actual knowledge that
4347 U.S.C. ¤ 254(h)(7)(G) (2001).
44Multnomah County Library v. United States.  No. 01-CV-1322 (ED Pa. 2001).  Available
online at <http://www.aclu.org/court/multnomah.pdf>.45See <http://www.paed.uscourts.gov/documents/opinions/02D0414P.HTM>.46Disclosure of information means the release of personal information collected from achild in identifiable form for any purpose, except where such information is used for inter-nal purposes only and the operator does not disclose or use that information for any otherpurpose, or making personal information collected from a child publicly available in identi-
fiable form.47For purposes of COPPA, personal information is Òindividually identifiable informationabout an individual collected online, including: first and last name, a home or other physi-
cal address, an e-mail address, a telephone number, a social security number, anything thatthe FTC determines permits the physical or online contacting of a specific individual, andinformation concerning the child or the parents of the child that the Web site collects online
from the child and combines with any of the previously mentioned information.Ó48A Web site directed at children is a commercial Web site that is targeted to children orthe portion of a commercial site that is targeted to children.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.105LEGAL AND REGULATORY ISSUESthe child is under 13, if the information is collected without notice andwithout verifiable parental consent.49  COPPA provides that the site op-
erator50 must allow the parent to refuse to permit the operator
Õs further orcontinued use, maintenance, or collection of information at any time.  It

further provides that the site operator may not condition participation in
a game, a prize offer, or other activity on a disclosure of information
where the information requested is more than necessary to participate in
the activity.  To ensure the effectiveness of these prohibitions, COPPA

authorizes the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) to enact regulations con-
cerning the method and content of the notification provisions and its
parental consent provisions.COPPA provides that a site that is directed at children and collectspersonal information, or any operator that knowingly collects informa-
tion from a child, must provide notice on the Web site that discloses the
type of information collected, how the operator uses the information col-
lected, and the operatorÕs disclosure practices.  The FTC regulations
adopted pursuant to COPPA require the operator to place the notice on
the home page of the site, as well as at each area where personal informa-
tion is collected.51The FTC regulations further require that the notice be clearly andprominently displayed.  A site that uses a link to the notice must ensure

that the link is clearly distinguishable from other links.  The FTC regula-

tions also prescribe the necessary content of the notice, which must be
clearly written and understandable (Box 4.2).COPPA also requires the operator to obtain verifiable parental con-sent to the collection, maintenance, and use of personal information.
Under COPPA, the operator must use Òany reasonable effortÓ to ensure
that a parent of a child receives notice of the operatorÕs collection, mainte-nance, use, or disclosure of personal information and that a parent autho-
rizes any collection, maintenance, use, or disclosure of his or her childÕsinformation before the information is collected from the child.52The FTC has stated that, until April 2002, it will use a sliding scale to49P.L. No. 105-277, Division C, Title XIII, 112 Stat. 2681, 15 U.S.C. ¤ 650 nt.  The act
amends 15 U.S.C. ¤ 41, et seq.
50For purposes of COPPA, a site operator is any person who operates a Web site andcollects or maintains personal information from or about site visitors, or the person forwhom the information is collected, if the site is operated for commercial purposes.51How to Comply with the ChildrenÕs Online Privacy Protection Rule, November 1999, avail-able online at <http://www.ftc.gov/bcp/conline/pubs/buspubs/coppa.htm>.52COPPA provides exceptions to the requirement that the operator obtain verifiable pa-rental consent in certain circumstances.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETBox 4.2FTC Regulations Implementing theChildrenÕs Online Privacy Protection ActThe privacy policy notice that must be displayed at a Web site that collectspersonal information from a child must include:¥The name and contact information for all operators collecting or maintaininginformation collected through the site;¥The type of personal information collected from the child, the method ofcollection, and how the operator uses the information collected;¥Whether the operator discloses the information to third parties; if so, the op-erator must also disclose the kinds of business that the third parties are engaged in,the general purposes the information is used for, and whether the third parties haveagreed to maintain the confidentiality and security of the information;¥The parentÕs option to agree to the collection and use of the informationwithout consenting to disclosure to third parties;¥A notice that the operator may not require the child to disclose more infor-mation than is reasonably necessary to participate in an activity as a condition ofparticipation; and¥A notice that the parent can review the information provided by the child,can ask to have it deleted, and can refuse to allow any further collection or use of thechildÕs information, as well as the procedures for the parent to do so.The regulations make clear that the notice may not include unrelated or confus-ing materials.SOURCE: Adapted from information available online at <http://www.ftc.gov/bcp/conline/pubs/
buspubs/coppa.htm>.assess the measures used to obtain verifiable parental consent.53  Under
the sliding-scale approach the required effectiveness of the method used
depends upon the use that the operator makes of the information col-
lected.  If the information is only used internally for purposes such as

marketing back to the child, the operator may use e-mail to obtain paren-
tal consent, as long as the operator also takes additional steps to increase
the likelihood that the parent has, in fact, provided consent.  However, if

the information is disclosed to third parties or made publicly available, a
more reliable method must be used to obtain parental consent. A more
reliable method includes such measures as getting a signed form from the
parent via facsimile or mail, accepting and verifying a credit card num-53How to Comply with the ChildrenÕs Online Privacy Protection Rule, November 1999, avail-able online at <http://www.ftc.gov/bcp/conline/pubs/buspubs/coppa.htm>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.107LEGAL AND REGULATORY ISSUESber, taking calls from parents through a toll-free number, or accepting e-mails accompanied by a digital signature.  COPPA also provides a safe

harbor for Web site operators: an operator will be found to have satisfied
the notice and the consent requirements if it is shown that the site imple-
mented a set of self-regulatory guidelines issued by representatives of the
marketing or online industries.4.2.7State Statutes
All states prohibit the production, sale, or exhibition of obscenity.  A
typical state law on this subject would incorporate the Miller definition, as
applied to the community standards of the state.  To regulate the distribu-

tion specifically to minors of sexually explicit material that does not meetthe Miller test for obscenity, states have often used the phrase Òharmful tominors,Ó which derives from Ginsberg.  For example, the California penalcode Section 313 defines Òharmful matterÓ as matter that, 
Òtaken as awhole, which to the average person, applying contemporary statewide
standards, appeals to the prurient interest, and is matter which, taken as a
whole, depicts or describes in a patently offensive way sexual conduct
and which, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or
scientific value for minors.Ó  For the remainder of this report, the term
Òharmful to minorsÓ should be understood as meaning 
Òobscene withrespect to minorsÓ (or equivalently, 
Òobscene for minorsÓ), as defined bythe Supreme Court in Ginsberg.4.2.8Regulatory Efforts
The Federal Trade CommissionThe Federal Trade Commission enforces the Federal Trade Commis-sion Act (15 U.S.C. ¤¤ 41-58) (the FTC Act), which prohibits deceptive or
unfair acts or practices in commerce.  A representation or practice is de-

ceptive under the FTC Act if it is likely to mislead consumers acting
reasonably under the circumstances and it is material, meaning that the
representation or practice is likely to affect consumersÕ conduct or deci-
sions with respect to the product or service at issue.  An act or practice is

unfair under the FTC Act if it causes or is likely to cause injury to consum-
ers that is substantial, not outweighed by countervailing benefits to con-
sumers or to competition, and not reasonably avoidable by consumers
themselves.  Practices within the adult entertainment industry may vio-

late the FTC Act if they utilize deceptive or unfair methods that facilitate
minorsÕ access to adult content.  In recent years, the FTC has brought
eight law enforcement actions focusing on the deceptive or unfair use ofYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETnew technology that has the effect of luring minors to sexually explicitmaterial on the Internet.54In one action, the FTC filed suit in September 1999 in the U.S. DistrictCourt for the Eastern District of Virginia against a number of companies
for Òpage-jackingÓ and 
ÒmousetrappingÓ in a way that exposed users not
seeking it to sexually explicit material.55Page-jacking refers to a practice in which almost-exact copies aremade of innocuous Web pages, including all the metadata that informs
search engines about the subject matter of the site.  These new pages differ

from the original pages only in that they redirect a user coming to the new
page to another Web site containing sexually explicit, adult-oriented ma-
terial.  Using the metadata, the sham copy of a legitimate Web site would

be registered in the databases of search engines along with the legitimate
Web site itself, but any user clicking on a search-engine-generated link to
the sham copy would be directed to the adult Web site.  In this case, the

defendants located overseas produced look-alike versions of U.S.-based
Web sites that were indexed by search engines. This process diverted
unsuspecting consumers, including minors, to a sequence of pornogra-
phy sites from which they could not easily exit, essentially ÒtrappingÓthem at the site. The defendants cloned as many as 25 million Web pages,
including kidsÕ game sites and movie review sites.
The United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginiagranted a temporary injunction against these practices.  Subsequently,

one of the defendants settled out of court and agreed to refrain from
undertaking such practices, and another was never located (though its
actions have ceased).In a second case, the FTC also took action against the use of execut-able dialer programs that hijack consumersÕ modems and connect them to
adult sites. Companies advertising ÒfreeÓ adult images disconnected con-
sumers from their local Internet service without their knowledge and
reconnected them to long-distance lines, resulting in enormous telephone
bills. Consumers victimized by this scheme included a substantial num-
ber of minors. The FTC obtained orders halting these schemes and pro-
viding redress for financial injury.56In a third case, the FTC has targeted the deceptive use of unsolicited54The FTC has a broad program of enforcement in the area of e-commerce and theInternet; the first FTC actions involving the Internet date to the mid-1990s.  See <http://
www.ftc.gov/bcp/menu-internet.htm>.55FTC v. Carlos Pereira d/b/a atariz.com, No. 99-1367-A (ED Va. filed Sept. 14, 1999); pressrelease available online at <http://www.ftc.gov/opa/1999/9909/atariz.htm>.56FTC v. RJB Telecom, Inc. et al., No. 002017 PHX (D. Az., filed Sept. 26, 2001); FTC v. TyAnderson et al., No. C 00-1843P (WD Wa., filed Oct. 27, 2000); FTC v. Verity International, Ltd.,
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.109LEGAL AND REGULATORY ISSUEScommercial e-mail to attract consumers, including minors, to adult enter-tainment.  Defendants
Õ e-mail messages advised each consumer contacted
that his ÒorderÓ had been received, that his credit card had been charged
$250, and that he should call a specified number to cancel the order.  This

ploy deceived numerous consumers, including minors, into making ex-
pensive international calls that connected to an audiotext entertainment
service with sexual content.  The FTC obtained a court order stopping the

scheme and also obtained monetary redress for consumers.57In addition to law enforcement action, the FTC is sometimes able toobtain modification of potentially deceptive practices through informal
action.  For example, one company set up an adult Web site with the

domain name nasa.com, leading consumers to sexually explicit, adult-
oriented sites, not the National Aeronautics and Space Administration
(www.nasa.gov). At the request of FTC staff, the domain name registry
Network Solutions Inc. immediately deactivated nasa.com.  In October

2001, the FTC charged an online firm with the use of thousands of Òcopy-catÓ Web addresses to divert Web users from their intended Internet
destinations to one of its sites; in response, the United States District
Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia enjoined its
activities pending further order of the court.58  These copycat addresses
were based on the use of domain names that are confusingly similar
misspellings of domain names or famous marks of interest to children.
(For example, the firm registered 15 variations of the popular childrenÕscartoon site, <www.cartoonnetwork.com>, and 41 variations on the name
of teen pop star, Britney Spears.)  Users who misspelled a Web address

were taken to the firmÕs Web sites, where they received a rapid series ofadvertisements for goods and services ranging from Internet gambling to
pornography.   Users seeking to leave one of these sites were also mouse-

trapped.FTC staff currently are investigating additional, potentially decep-tive, adult content industry practices that may target minors. These in-
clude the use of domain names that are confusingly similar misspellings
of domain names or famous marks of interest to children.Finally, the FTC has launched what it describes as a crackdown ondeceptive unsolicited commercial e-mail (also known as ÒspamÓ).59  In
February 2002, seven defendants caught in an FTC sting operation agreedNo. 00 Civ. 7422 (LAK) (SDNY, filed Oct. 2, 2000); FTC v. Sheinkin, No. 00-CV-03636 (DSC,filed Nov. 11, 2000); FTC v. Audiotex Connection, Inc., CV-97-0726 (EDNY, filed Feb. 13,1997); Beylen Telecom, Ltd., No. C-3782 (court, final consent Jan. 23, 1998).57FTC v. Benoit, No. 3:99 CV 181 (WDNC, filed May 11, 1999).
58See <http://www.ftc.gov/opa/2001/10/cupcake.htm>.59See <http://www.ftc.gov/opa/2002/02/eileenspam1.htm>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.110YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETto settle charges that they were spamming consumers with deceptivechain letters.  In addition, the FTC announced that it would mail warning

letters to an additional 2,000+ individuals who were involved in this chain
letter scheme.   Further, the agency will launch a public/private educa-

tion effort in conjunction with various Internet service provider associa-
tions.  Though the spam in these cases did not involve adult-oriented,

sexually explicit material, spam that does involve such materials is a
source of many complaints regarding the exposure of children to inap-
propriate sexually explicit material.The Federal Communications CommissionThe Federal Communications Commission (FCC) has promulgatedrules requiring all television sets with picture screens 13 inches or larger
to be equipped with the V-chip, a technology that enables the blocking of
the display of television programming based on its rating.  (The rating is

encoded in the program broadcast, and the V-chip blocks programs from
the set based on the rating selected by the parent.)  Ratings identify pro-

gramming with sexual, violent, or other material parents may deem inap-
propriate (Box 4.3).  However, despite much political support for the V-

chip initiative, its use remains relatively uncommon in U.S. households.
An Annenberg study, Media in the Home,60 found that while 40 percent ofparents have access to the V-chip or similar blocking technologies, only
half of them use it.  Only 50 percent of parents are aware of the content

ratings associated with the V-chip, and only 10 percent can correctly iden-
tify the age ratings for programs watched by their children.  (This survey
also found that although parents are more concerned about childrenÕstelevision use than their use of any other medium, over half of the chil-
dren surveyed (57 percent) had a television in their bedroom.)The FCC has issued regulations governing practices in the pay-per-call industry, which includes dial-a-porn services.  For example, FCC

regulations require use of credit cards, access codes, or scrambling as
ways to prevent minors from accessing such services.The FCC is responsible for the development of guidelines for Òinde-cent materialÓ broadcast on the public airwaves.  Such guidelines include
definitions of indecency (such as the famous Òseven dirty wordsÓ61 or the
description or depiction of sexual or excretory organs or activities in a60Media in the Home 2000: The Fifth Annual Survey of Parents and Children, a national pollconducted for the Annenberg Public Policy Center of the University of Pennsylvania, Phila-delphia, and released on June 26, 2000.  Available online at <http://www.appcpenn.org/
mediainhome/conference/report-39.pdf>.61See footnote 10.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.111LEGAL AND REGULATORY ISSUESBox 4.3V-chip Ratings Rating Categories for Programs Designed Solely for Children
¥TV-Y (All ChildrenÑThis program is designed to be appropriate for all chil-dren.)  Whether animated or live-action, the themes and elements in this program
are specifically designed for a very young audience, including children from ages 2
to 6. This program is not expected to frighten younger children.¥TV-Y7 (Directed to Older ChildrenÑThis program is designed for childrenage 7 and above.)  It may be more appropriate for children who have acquired the

developmental skills needed to distinguish between make-believe and reality.Themes and elements in this program may include mild fantasy or comedic vio-lence, or may frighten children under the age of 7. Therefore, parents may wish to
consider the suitability of this program for their very young children.  Note: For those
programs in which fantasy violence may be more intense or more combative than inother programs in this category, such programs will be designated TV-Y7-FV.Rating Categories for Programs Designed for the Entire Audience¥TV-G (General AudienceÑMost parents would find this program suitable forall ages.) Although this rating does not signify a program designed specifically forchildren, most parents may let younger children watch this program unattended.The program contains little or no violence, no strong language, and little or no sex-
ual dialog or situations.¥TV-PG (Parental Guidance SuggestedÑThis program contains material thatparents may find unsuitable for younger children.)  Many parents may want to watch

it with their younger children. The theme itself may call for parental guidance and/orthe program contains one or more of the following: moderate violence (V), somesexual situations (S), infrequent coarse language (L), or some suggestive dialog (D).¥TV-14 (Parents Strongly CautionedÑThis program contains some materialthat many parents would find unsuitable for children under 14 years of age.)  Parents
are strongly urged to exercise greater care in monitoring this program and are cau-
tioned against letting children under the age of 14 watch unattended. This programcontains one or more of the following: intense violence (V), intense sexual situations(S), strong coarse language (L), or intensely suggestive dialog (D).¥TV-MA (Mature Audience OnlyÑThis program is specifically designed to beviewed by adults and therefore may be unsuitable for children under the age of 17.)This program contains one or more of the following: graphic violence (V), explicit
sexual activity (S), or crude indecent language (L).SOURCE: Adapted from information available online at <http://www.vchipeducation.org/pages/
under.html>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETmanner that is patently offensive to an average viewer or listener) andregulations that prohibit broadcast of such material during times that
children are likely to be listening or watching.Finally, under the ChildrenÕs Internet Protection Act, the FCC is re-sponsible for promulgating and enforcing regulations to implement the
CIPA.624.2.9International Dimensions
Today, the Internet is a global medium that presents challenges totraditional systems of national governance that are based on the existence
of geographical borders.63  Because different nations have different sensi-
tivities toward various types of material (e.g., hate, politics, sexually ex-
plicit materials), international consensus on an appropriate regulatory
environment for materials on the Internet is hard (if not impossible) to
obtain, and few attempts have been made to do so beyond the outlawing
of child pornography.Given this state of affairs, the behavior of foreign parties (e.g., contentproviders, ISPs, foreign citizens) is difficult to affect directly through the
application of U.S. law.  Nevertheless, foreign institutional parties (i.e.,

non-individual foreign players) often operate through the use of facilities
and equipment subject to U.S. jurisdiction, and how the United States will
be able to use this jurisdiction has yet to be seen.4.3LAW ENFORCEMENT, TRAINING, AND EDUCATION
The effectiveness of a statutory framework for regulating the accessof minors to sexually explicit material depends on a number of factors.
One factor, of course, is the extent to which it can withstand constitutional
challenge.  But assuming that it is constitutional, factors such as enforce-

ment, training, and education are also relevant.For example, testimony to the committee from the Department ofJustice in October 2000 indicated that it was department policy to pros-
ecute obscenity cases where major producers and major distribution of
obscenity are involved, rather than local cases in which community stan-
dards are at issue.  Moreover, the department
Õs priorities at the time wereto prosecute matters related to the production and online distribution of62See <http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-01-120A1.pdf>.63For more discussion, see Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, NationalResearch Council, 2001, Global Networks and Local Values, National Academy Press, Wash-ington, D.C.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.113LEGAL AND REGULATORY ISSUES64For example, pursuing an online sexual predator of children through a sting operationis a personnel-intensive enterprise.  Because a sexual predator works slowly to build up a
relationship of trust with his victims, law enforcement officials must operate in a similar
fashion. Participating in such an enterprise is time-consuming.  In any event, the number of
potentially law-breaking interactions far outstrips any plausible enforcement efforts thatcould be made.child pornography and the luring of minors into illegal sexual activity,with the consequence that federal obscenity prosecutions had declined
significantly.  This policy emphasis, as described, indicated a significant

difference from the emphasis of the previous administration, which had
prosecuted obscenity cases with greater vigor.This is an important point.  In the 1980s, the Department of Justice
undertook an aggressive approach to the prosecution of obscenity.  As

noted in Chapter 3, many of the most graphic forms of sexually explicit
material that can now readily be found on the Internet (including graphic
depictions of sexual intercourse both heterosexual and homosexual, fella-
tio, cunnilingus, anal intercourse, incest, and bestiality) would have fallen
within the prosecutorial policies of the Department of Justice in the 1980s. By the mid-1990s, however, prosecutorial attention began to shift to
concerns about child pornography and sexual predators of children.  Be-

cause resource limitations inevitably constrain what investigators and
prosecutors can do,64 this shift of attention led to a substantial reduction
at both the national and local levels in the number of prosecutions for the
sale, production, or exhibition of traditional obscenity.Today, the conventional wisdom seems to be that community stan-dards about sexually explicit material may well have changed to the point
that only the most hard-core depictions could any longer be classified as
legally Òobscene.Ó  But this is speculative.  Because of the relative dearth
of obscenity prosecutions in recent years, it is in fact impossible to say for
certain that a more aggressive prosecutorial strategy directed at online
Òobscenity,Ó as legally defined by the Supreme Court in 
Miller, could nothave a significant impact on the availability of such material on the Inter-
net. Whether the current state of affairs with respect to obscenity prosecu-
tions is due to changes in community standards or a mere lack of prosecu-
tions is an open question.  (This point is discussed further in Section 9.1.)
Moreover, the concept of material that is Òobscene for minorsÓ has
not been fully developed.  Although this concept was recognized by the

Supreme Court in Ginsberg, it has rarely been applied since.  In 
ACLU v.Reno, the Court made clear that any effort to regulate such material mustbe careful not to interfere with the right of adults to gain access to mate-
rial that is constitutionally protected for them.  But with a more creative
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETuse of technology to develop effective and simple age verification pro-cesses, this concept could take on a more significant role in the future, at
least with respect to commercial Web sites.Another key implementation issue in law enforcement is interagencycooperation and citizen involvement.  Jurisdiction for anti-obscenity and

anti-child-pornography efforts is shared among the FBI, the U.S. Customs
Service, and the U.S. Postal Service, as well as state and local law enforce-
ment authorities.  In addition, the National Center for Missing and Ex-

ploited Children (NCMEC) has responsibility for providing technical
assistance and training to federal, state, and local law enforcement in
identifying and investigating cases of child exploitation.An example of bureaucratic impediments to coordination can be seenin the relationship of the NCMEC to law enforcement agencies.  One of

the NCMECÕs functions is to take reports from the field on child pornog-raphy, provide analysis on these cases, and then relay those reports to law
enforcement agencies of jurisdiction. To expedite law enforcement action
in cases involving ongoing exploitation of a child (and hence calling for
immediate intervention by law enforcement to prevent further exploita-
tion), it is desirable that the NCMEC analysis forwarded to law enforce-
ment agencies contain as much information as possible on the alleged
perpetrator.  Thus, the NCMEC, as a congressionally mandated quasi-law

enforcement agency, would benefit from access to information in the FBIÕsCRS records systems, FBI investigative files, the National Crime Informa-
tion Center (NCIC), the Interstate Identification Index system within the
NCIC, the FBIÕs Sex Offender Data Base, state motor vehicle registrationand driversÕ license systems, the wanted-persons index within NCIC, and
the National Law Enforcement Telecommunications System (NLETS).

However, it does not currently have such access.Finally, training is an issue.  No case is brought unless a prosecutor is
willing and able to bring such a case, and prosecutors and investigators
vary in the knowledge and ability they bring to the enforcement of laws
related to sexually explicit material.  For example, a prosecutor must be

familiar with the concept of Òcommunity standardsÓ relevant and essen-
tial to a successful prosecution.   In the United States, the NCMEC pro-

vides training to law enforcement agencies in all aspects of missing- and
exploited-child cases.  Training topics include child sexual exploitation

investigations, responding to missing and exploited children cases, re-
sponse planning, and policy development.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1155.1CHILDREN AND HOW THEY USE MEDIA
The term ÒminorsÓ spans an enormous developmental range.  Spe-
cialists in child development distinguish between infancy, early child-
hood, childhood, preadolescence, early adolescence, and late adolescence.
Table 5.1 summarizes some important characteristics of different age

ranges.As a general rule, young children do not have the cognitive skillsneeded to navigate the Internet independently.  Knowledge of search

strategies is limited if not nonexistent, and typing skills are undeveloped.
These factors tend to limit young childrenÕs potential exposure to sexu-
ally explicit material on the Internet until about age 10, the transition from
childhood to the preadolescent years.The years between preadolescence and late adolescence can be tur-bulent times in which youth struggle to develop their own identities.
They are eager to be heard, seen, and taken seriously but often lack the
experience and maturity to make responsible choices consistently.  They

test boundaries in developing their emerging adult personalities, and
they take risks that adults would deem unwise. They are often socially
uncertain, and they value peer approval highly.  And, in pre- and early

adolescence, hormonal changes generally stimulate their interest in
sexual matters.  Because of the intensely personal nature of such matters

(both sexual and social), the Òat-a-distanceÓ nature of Internet commu-
nication and the anonymity with which one can seek out a great variety5Children, Media, and Exposure
to Sexually Explicit MaterialYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETTABLE 5.1  Some Important Dimensions of Child Development
AgeCharacteristics
Infancy (0-2)¥Preverbal and early language skills emerging¥Lacks framework for assimilating and understanding sexualconcepts¥Information needs can generally be met by primary caregivers and others in childÕs immediate environmentEarly Childhood¥Finds it difficult to distinguish between fantasy and reality;(3-5)is more easily frightened by 
Òscary thingsÓ¥Continues to lack cognitive framework for assimilating andunderstanding sexual concepts, though sexual behaviorsuch as masturbation may occur¥Information needs can generally be met by those in childÕsenvironment and easily accessible resources such aschildrenÕs books¥Begins to have empathy for othersChildhood (6-9)¥Increasing ability to distinguish between fantasy and reality¥Typing and writing skills emerging, but poor at youngerages (e.g., misspellings common)¥Decision-making skills on the Internet (as in many areas oflife) not well developed¥Some emerging information needs require reference booksand other materials to support researchPreadolescence¥Much better ability to distinguish between fantasy and(10-12)reality
¥Better able to use inferential reasoning skills¥Decision-making skills developing in more abstract waydue to metamemory skills (knowing about knowing,knowing how to know, i.e., strategy)¥Typing and spelling skills still problematic¥Sexual development beginning for many or at least for theirpeers; sexuality becoming more interesting; likely a
sensitive period for exposure to sexual content¥Information needs expanding and increasingly requirematerials that are not in the immediate physical
environmentEarly adolescence¥Abstract cognitive skills in place that are the same ones that(13-15)adults have, though skill set not fully developed
¥Decision-making skills and reasoning skills betterdeveloped than in preadolescence, but often impulsive;faith in own decision-making skills (especially in the face of
parental positions) may well exceed actual skill¥Age of puberty, growing awareness of sexual developmentand highly curious about his or her own sexuality; some
become sexually active with intercourse; most will havesome kind of sexual experience (e.g., kissing)¥Information needs are broader and relate to the world atlarge, and the availability of some external sources isimportant(continues)Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.117CHILDREN, MEDIA, AND EXPOSURE TO SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIALof information on the Internet are highly appealing to very social butalso sensitive individuals.Note also that adolescence is a cultural inventionÑin earlier times,people aged 13 and 14 were regarded as small adults.  Children and

teenagers had jobs.  Many older minors (minors by today
Õs standards)were getting married, having sex, and raising their families.  Put another

way, these older minors had the rights and the responsibilities of adult-
hood.  Also, there is some debate in the scientific literature about how

rebellious adolescents are.  For example, even in later adolescence, youth
often agree with their parents on very important decisions such as where
to go to college.  The storm-and-stress view of adolescents is tied to par-

ticular theoretical views, namely EriksonÕs psychoanalytic theory, but notso much to social learning theory, which argues for more continuity in
development.American youth from preadolescence to late adolescence are also in-tense consumers of various media.  As do other individuals, youth use

mediaÑincluding the InternetÑfor a variety of purposes, for example,news, education, entertainment, information, stimulation, relief from
boredom, and emotional arousal. Media use is heavy among adolescents,
with television, music, teen magazines, and movies as well as the Internet
and video games being important elements.Television use tends to peak at about age 12 and decreases duringmiddle and late adolescence, and use of other mediaÑmusic, music vid-eos, magazines, and the InternetÑincreases during this period.  Further,
there are some gender differences and differences of socioeconomic statusLate adolescence¥Highly aware personally of sexual issues and may well be(16-18)sexually active (80 percent have intercourse by age 20; the
mean age of first intercourse is approximately 17 1/2 years
today)¥Decision-making skills and reasoning ability improved overearly adolescence¥Physically and cognitively mature¥Legal rights approaching those of adults, though rights mayvary by state¥Historically, many were married and having children at thisage¥Information needs extensive in scope and depth andcommonly require access to a wide range of resourcesbeyond the individuals in their immediate environmentTABLE 5.1  continued
AgeCharacteristics
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET(SES).  Adolescent girls read teen magazines and watch soap operas more
than boys do, while boys play video games and watch television more
than girls do.   Lower SES tends to correlate with more watching of enter-

tainment television,1 and African Americans watch more television than
other Americans, even when SES is controlled for.2  Children and adoles-cents also prefer watching programs with characters from their own eth-
nic group.3American adolescents use various forms of media primarily becauseof their entertainment value.  But media use also helps to socialize adoles-

cents into various adult roles and relationships, contributes to the forma-
tion of their individual identities as adolescents, provides assistance in
coping with their problems and emotional mood states, and helps to as-
similate them into various youth subcultures.  For example, private, soli-

tary use of both music and television by adolescents is important in pro-
viding them an opportunity to deal with the stress and intense emotions
of this stage of development.  Teen girls use their bedrooms to read maga-

zines, watch television, listen to music, do their homework, and talk on
the phone.  For such girls, the bedroom is a place where they use media to

help them make sense of themselves and their lives.  Preference for cer-

tain kinds of music and films helps to connect youth from across the
country and the world into a common youth subculture.  In short, media

are part of the process by which adolescents acquire, or resist acquiring,
the behaviors and beliefs of the social world and the adult culture in
which they live.Most childrenÕs media useÑincluding time on the computer andonlineÑdoes not involve parental supervision.  Many children have ra-
dios, CD players, a television, and even a computer in their rooms.  As a

result, many parents are not in a position to monitor their childrenÕsmedia activity, nor can they readily provide any feedback or support for
childrenÕs online activities.The Kaiser Family FoundationÕs report Kids and Media at the New Mil-lennium: A Comprehensive National Analysis of ChildrenÕs Media Use (1999)
described the childrenÕs media landscape, identifying how much time1A.C. Huston and J.C. Wright.  1997.  
ÒMass Media and ChildrenÕs Development.Ó   Pp.
999-1058 in Handbook of Child Psychology, 5th Ed., Vol. 4, W. Damon, I. Sigel, and K. Renniger,eds. Wiley, New York.2G. Comstock, 1991, Television and the American Child, Academic Press, Orlando, Fla.; J.Condry, 1989, The Psychology of Television, Erlbaum, Hillsdale, N.J.; and Huston and Wright,1997, ÒMass Media and ChildrenÕs Development.Ó3J.E. Brand and B.S. Greenberg.  1994.  ÒMinorities and the Mass Media: 1970Õs to 1990Õs.ÓPp. 273-314 in Media Effects: Advances in Theory and Research, J. Bryant and D. Zillmann, eds.Erlbaum, Hillsdale, N.J.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.119CHILDREN, MEDIA, AND EXPOSURE TO SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIALyoung people spend with media and what types of media draw theirattention. The average child spends about 5.5 hours daily using media,
including television, radio, CDs, or the computer. Young people often use
more than one type of media at the same time (e.g., listening to a CD
while surfing the Internet) which means that children do a lot of parallel
processing in their media use. Children aged 8 to 14 tend to spend more
hours using media than do teens aged 14 to 18. This is likely because of
the busier and more diverse schedules of older teens.4Perhaps surprisingly, time using the computer in all venues averagedonly 31 minutes per day for children aged 8 to 18, with only a portion of
that time devoted to online and Internet activities. Television, by far, was
still the most commonly used form of media, and this age group had the
television on an average of 3.25 hours per day. In this study 62 percent of
children had a computer at home. Of families living in affluent communi-
ties in which the community income averaged above $40,000, 81 percent
had computers compared to 49 percent of families in communities with
an average income under $25,000. Schools seemed to mitigate some of
these differences, often providing access for children who did not have a
personal computer in their homes.5Of the 31 minutes spent on the computer in recreation, children usedthe computer primarily for games but did spend some time in chat rooms,
sending e-mail, and surfing Web sites. Of the group of children who
reported using the computer the previous day, games occupied the ma-
jority of their recreational time online. The 8- to 13-year-olds using a
computer in the previous day logged the longest average recreation times
on the computer (over 1 hour), spending 32 minutes playing games, 14
minutes looking at Web sites, 11 minutes in chat rooms, and 8 minutes
sending e-mails.6  Note also that time spent online may increase in the
future as the result of two factors:  a greater dependence on Web-based

information sources and more interaction with online electronic devices
(e.g., Nintendo games) that are not online today.The amount of time children spend using computers and going onlineis likely to increase as computer use continues to penetrate homes and
schools.  For example, a 2002 survey by the National Telecommunications

and Information Administration found that 89.5 percent of all children
aged 5 to 17 use computers, and 58.5 percent of all those children use the4Donald F. Roberts, Ulla G. Foehr, Victoria J. Rideout, and Mollyann Brodie.  1999.  
Kidsand Media at the New Millennium: A Comprehensive National Analysis of ChildrenÕs Media Use.The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, Menlo Park, Calif.5Roberts et al., 1999, Kids and Media at the New Millennium.6Roberts et al., 1999, Kids and Media at the New Millennium.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETInternet.7  The report also found that Internet use is particularly high for
teens and preteens (75.6 percent of 14- to 17-year-olds and 65.4 percent of
10- to 13-year-olds, up from 51.2 and 39.2 percent, respectively, in 1998).
Furthermore, computer usage (and possibly Internet usage as well) varies
by age:  in one national survey, 26 percent of 2- to 7-year-olds reported

using a computer out of school the day before compared to 44 percent of
14- to 18-year-olds.8According to a survey by Grunwald Associates, family decisions topurchase computers and to obtain Internet access were based on parental
perceptions of their childrenÕs educational needs.9  While children and
youth are most likely to use the Internet for schoolwork, an important
(and large) percentage of their online time is spent for other purposes,
including e-mail, chat, and entertainment.10  A report by the Pew Internet
and American Life Project found that about half of regular Internet users
of any age (an estimated 52 million) use the Internet for information on
health issues such as diseases, clinical trials, treatment, and nutrition, as
well as for assistance in making health-related decisions.11  According to
the Kaiser Family Foundation, about two out of three young people (aged
15-24) have used the Internet to search for health information, and 25
percent say they get Òa lotÓ of health information online.
12  These data
suggest that the Internet is of great use to adolescents seeking health-
related information (including information related to sexual health).5.2SEXUALITY IN CULTURE
This report is concerned with the protection of children from inap-propriate sexually explicit material on the Internet.  But children share a

cultural space with adults, and so it is helpful to understand a contempo-7National Telecommunications and Information Administration.  2002.  
A Nation Online:How Americans Are Expanding Their Use of the Internet.  U.S. Department of Commerce,
Washington, D.C.  Available online at <http://www.ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/dn/html/
anationonline2.htm>.8Roberts et al., 1999, Kids and Media at the New Millennium.9See <http://cyberatlas.internet.com/big_picture/demographics/article/0,,5901_ 390941,00.html> for a summary of the Grunwald study.  The full study is available online at

<http://www.grunwald.com/survey/index.htm>.10National Telecommunications and Information Administration, 2002, A Nation Online.11Susannah Fox and Lee Rainie.  2000.  
The Online Health Care Revolution: How the WebHelps Americans Take Better Care of Themselves.  Pew Internet and American Life Project,
November.  Available online at <http://www.pewinternet.org/reports/pdfs/PIP_Health_
Report.pdf>.12Victoria Rideout.  2001.  
Generation Rx.com: How Young People Use the Internet for HealthInformation.  The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, Menlo Park, Calif.  Available online at<http://www.kff.org/content/2001/20011211a/GenerationRx.pdf>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.121CHILDREN, MEDIA, AND EXPOSURE TO SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIALrary society in which sexual images and references are common.  Media
images of sexuality abound, and the children of today are exposed to a
wide range of images through many media, including entertainment tele-
vision (especially sitcom and dramatic programming in prime-time broad-
casts, soap operas, music videos, and talk shows), magazines, advertis-
ing, film and movies, and news.13¥In prime-time broadcast television, references to heterosexual in-tercourse have increased and have become much more explicit in the last
20 years.  The dominant messages of these references suggest that sexual

behavior typically takes place between two adults who are not married to
each other and that sexual intercourse does not have the consequences
with which intercourse may be associated in real life (e.g., pregnancy,
sexually transmitted diseases).  Talk about sex is more common than the

depiction of sex, and sexual intercourse is often implied by context and
partial nudity rather than being portrayed explicitly (that is, with full
nudity) on the screen.  Some programs on cable networks
Ñespeciallyprograms carried late at nightÑoften push the envelope further.¥Movies (many of them R-rated, and usually available in theaters,on pay-TV channels, and in video rentals) contain more frequent and
more explicit portrayals of sexual behavior than broadcast TV.  As in TV,
the most frequent sexual activity shown is unmarried sexual intercourse.
Sex is often depicted in the context of profanity, alcohol and drug use, and
nudity. And sex is often mixed with violence in an attempt to seek further
commercial success.¥Newsstands routinely carry adult magazines whose imagery rangesfrom that depicting simple frontal nudity to very graphic, sexually explicit
acts.¥Soap operas have a long history in broadcast entertainment.  The
sexual behavior portrayed usually involves unmarried sexual intercourse
and extended and passionate kissing, with prostitution, rape, petting, and
homosexuality occurring less often.  Discussions and portrayals of safe

sex and contraception are infrequent, though recent soap operas appear
to refer increasingly to Òtaking sexual precautionsÓ and have focused
more on pregnancy, both wanted and unwanted, than in previous years.¥Music videos are increasingly common, and many of the visualelements are implicitly or explicitly sexual.  These videos often combine

sexuality with violence or aggression, and with objectification and sex-13Material in the list below has been adapted from Aletha C. Huston, Ellen Wartella, andEdward Donnerstein, 1998, Measuring the Effects of Sexual Content in the Media: A Report tothe Kaiser Family Foundation, The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, Menlo Park, Calif.Available online at <http://www.kff.org/content/archive/1389/>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETrole stereotyping.  Visual presentations of sexual activity are common,
and a majority of music videos containing violence also contain sexual
imagery.  Rap music is particularly explicit about both sex and violence;

MTV frequently shows combinations of aggression, sex-role stereotypes,
and sexual imagery; country music videos also use sexual images, but
common themes include breakups and divorce, dating, and romantic love.¥Informational magazines are an important source of informationabout sex, birth control, and sexually transmitted diseases for many teens,
especially teen girls.  A significant fraction of the sexual content in teen

magazines is devoted to sexual health, with other topics including a focus
on decision making about becoming sexually active.  Magazines incorpo-

rate a substantial amount of information about sexual issues into their ar-
ticles and serve as an important source of information for young readers.Although sexual images and behavior are common in the media de-scribed above, most of those media generally do not portray sexually
explicit material involving full frontal nudity.  Rather, they are important

elements of a culture at large that seems to accept such portrayals of
sexuality.On the other hand, media portrayals of easy and loose sexuality arenot generally reflected in the actual sexual behavior of Americans, and in
fact the statistics on actual sexual behavior have changed far less over the
last 30 years than media portrayals of sexual behavior.  For example,

Americans do have more sexual partners in their personal histories than
they had two decades ago; nevertheless, most Americans report that in
the past year they had zero or one sexual partner.  The reason for this

phenomenon seems to be that on average, Americans are marrying later
but are nevertheless engaging in monogamous sexual activity prior to
marriage.14Although 80 percent of individuals have intercourse by age 20, themean age of first intercourse has dropped only from age 18 for those born
in the period from 1933 to 1942 to age 17 1/2 years for those born two and
three decades later.   Furthermore, teenagers have intercourse only spo-

radically during the teen years.  For example, 19-year-old men surveyed

in 1978 had sex on average four times in the past 4 weeks, while a compa-
rable group surveyed in 1988 had sex three times in the past 4 weeks.1514Robert T. Michael et al.  1995.  
Sex in America: A Definitive Survey.  Warner Books, pp. 88-
91.  Sex in America: A Definitive Survey is based on a scholarly volume by Edward O.
Laumann et al., 1995, The Social Organization of Sexuality: Sexual Practices in the United States,University of Chicago Press.15Michael et al., 1995, Sex in America, p. 94.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.123CHILDREN, MEDIA, AND EXPOSURE TO SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIAL5.3THE ROLE OF MEDIA IN PROVIDING
INFORMATION ON SEXUALITY TO YOUTH16It is hardly news that adolescents are very interested in matters of asexual nature and, beginning in early adolescence, go through a develop-
mental process in which they begin to look for information on sex and
their bodies as they begin to develop a sense of themselves as sexual
beings.Most people would agree that in an ideal world, young people wouldseek out their parents for information on sexuality.  Parents and children

would be able to talk about sex, sexuality, and relationships in a mutually
respectful manner in an atmosphere of shared values.  In this world,

children could raise questions without fear and parents could answer
them without embarrassment, anger, or apprehension.However, in practice, parents are often reluctant to talk to their chil-dren about sex.  When they do, the information they provide is often

more about physiological changes than about the emotional terrain that
accompanies sexuality or about managing oneÕs own sexuality appropri-ately and healthfully. Adolescents are trying to find out if their bodies are
developing normally, and they also begin to have questions about rela-
tionships and how to manage sexual interactions.  They want answers to

personal and even embarrassing questions such as, Am I normal? Is my
body normal? Am I developing appropriately at the right speed?  What is

a tampon and how do I use it? How do you date? How do you kiss?  How

do you say no without hurting someoneÕs feelings?  What is a sexually
transmitted disease?  How do you use contraception?  In addition, be-

cause it is often difficult for parents to talk about passion and desire and
other such matters with their children, young people sometimes find it
difficult to Òbuy intoÓ a clinical discussion.
17  Considering that young
people are often surrounded by media images of sexuality that are com-16The discussion in Section 5.3 is based largely on Aletha C. Huston, Ellen Wartella, andEdward Donnerstein, 1998, Measuring the Effects of Sexual Content in the Media: A Report tothe Kaiser Family Foundation, The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, Menlo Park, Calif.Available online at <http://www.kff.org/content/archive/1389/content.html>.17J.D. Brown, K.W. Childers, and C.S. Waszak, 1990, ÒTelevision and Adolescent Sexual-ity,Ó Journal of Adolescent Health Care 11: 62-70; V. Strasburger, 1989, ÒAdolescent Sexualityand the Media,Ó Adolescent Gynecology 36: 747-773; J. Strouse and R.A. Fabes, 1985, ÒFormalVersus Informal Informational Sources of Sex Education: Competing Forces in the Sexual
Socialization of Adolescents,Ó Adolescence 20: 251-263; and B.M. King and J. LoRusso, 1997,ÒDiscussions in the Home About Sex: Different Recollections by Parents and Children,ÓJournal of Sex and Marital Therapy 33: 52-60.
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETpletely centered around desire, it is not hard to understand why parentsand children often do not communicate effectively about sex.18Sex education provided in schools also does not provide a compre-hensive picture.  Indeed, sex education in schools is sufficiently contro-

versial that its content is very tightly prescribed in terms that will gener-
ate the least amount of political argument and heat.  For example, 14

states have required that sex education (if it is taught) must teach absti-
nence or abstinence until marriage. These states do not, however, also
require that schools teach information about other forms of contraception,
though abstinence-based curricula do emphasize contraceptive failure
rates.19In practice, if parents and schools are not providing young peoplewith answers to the questions that they actually have, many will turn
elsewhere to get additional information about sexuality.  These other

sources include their friendsÑwho often have much misinformation toshareÑas well as the media.20  The media may be a particularly appealing
source of information for adolescents because it can be accessed anony-
mously.21  One can imagine (or perhaps even recall) the types of reactions
and resulting feelings of embarrassment that might accompany question-
ing a peer or parent about sexuality (e.g., from a peer, ÒYou mean youdonÕt know that,Ó or from a parent, 
ÒWhy are you asking that?Ó).  The
anonymity of the media, and of the Internet especially, offers a way to
obtain information about very sensitive matters about sexuality and
sexual health and allows the adolescent to avoid embarrassing face-to-18For example, one survey indicated that 72 percent of mothers believed that they hadtalked with their teenagers about sex, while only 45 percent of those teens agreed.  See J.
Jaccard and P. Dittus, 1993, ÒParent-Adolescent Communication About Premarital Preg-nancy,Ó Families in Society 74(6): 329-343.19M. Sutton, J.D. Brown, K. Wilson, and J. Klein, 2001, ÒShaking the Tree of Knowledgefor Forbidden Fruit: Where Adolescents Learn About Sexuality and Contraception,Ó SexualTeens, Sexual Media, J.D. Brown, J.R. Steele, and K.W. Childers, eds., Erlbaum, Hillsdale,
N.J.; J.D. Brown and S. Stern, ÒSex and the Media,Ó Encyclopedia of Communication and Infor-mation, Macmillan, New  York, in press; and Kaiser Family Foundation, 2000, 
Sex Educationin the U.S.: Policy and Practice, Report No. 3049, available online at <www.kff.org/content/2000/3048/Issue percent20Update.PDF> (October 3, 2001).20Sutton et al., 2001, ÒShaking the Tree of Knowledge for Forbidden Fruit;Ó Brown and
Stern, ÒSex and the Media,Ó in press.
21As one data point, consider that sexual health information is rated by online youth asÒvery important for people their ageÓ in larger percentages (84 percent) than any other type
of online information.  (Information about drugs and alcohol are regarded as very impor-
tant by 75 percent of online youth.)  See Rideout, 2001, Generation Rx.com: How Young PeopleUse the Internet for Health Information.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.125CHILDREN, MEDIA, AND EXPOSURE TO SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIALface encounters.22 (A major disadvantage of media
Ñespecially InternetmediaÑas a source of sexual information is that its accuracy is often notverified.  School-age children may be far less cognizant of this fact than

would be appropriate, and they are likely to search out information, aware
of the advantages of anonymity but unaware of the disadvantages of
potential inaccuracy.)In the absence of other comfortable venues for seeking information,media sources help to fill information gaps for young people, providing
information about topics that parents and schools are not discussing.  As

early as 1980, studies documented the strong influence of the media on an
individualÕs sexual self-evaluation and the lack of influence exerted byfamily variables.23 Given the increasing role of the Internet as a source of
reliable information for young people as they conduct research for school
papers and seek homework help, one can imagine that the mediaÕs influ-ence will only increase. In fact, more recent studies have documented that
the mass media is a particularly significant resource for sexual informa-
tion for adolescents.24Research on print media suggests that turning to the media for infor-mation on sexuality is also a normative behavior among teens. The major-
ity of adolescent boys have seen at least one issue of Playboy, while girlstend to turn to womenÕs magazinesÑfor example, Seventeen Magazine foryoung teens, and for girls older than 14 Glamour and 
Cosmopolitan.  Maga-
zines like Glamour provide very explicit information on topics such as
relationships with boys and content devoted to sex, flirting, and various
romantic aspects of relationships.The fact that young people often turn to the media to help deal withsome of the issues associated with their changing selves has both positive
and negative dimensions.  On the one hand, many young people may find
22On the flip side, the anonymity of the Internet is highly attractive for children activelyseeking sexually explicit materials for fantasy purposes.  This anonymity provides a free-
dom to explore a wide range of material without having to reveal oneÕs identity or toengage an adult to assist in the search.  Consequently, the embarrassment or shame that he
or she might feel is absent (though some of those to whom the committee spoke expressedconcerns about Ògetting caughtÓ), and with it many of the social inhibitions against seekingsuch content.23J.A. Courtright and S.J. Baran.  1980.  ÒThe Acquisition of Sexual Information by YoungPeople,Ó Journalism Quarterly 1: 107-114.24Brown et al., 1990, ÒTelevision and Adolescent SexualityÓ; Strasburger, 1989, ÒAdoles-cent Sexuality and the MediaÓ;  Strouse and Fabes, 1985, ÒFormal Versus Informal Informa-tional Sources of Sex Education: Competing Forces in the Sexual Socialization of Adoles-
centsÓ; King and LoRusso, 1997, ÒDiscussions in the Home About Sex: DifferentRecollections by Parents and Children.ÓYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.126YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETreassurance that their curiosity about sexuality, and the changes in theirbodies, are normal and they need not feel ashamed of their changing
physiques.  Television and movies in particular, and to some extent print
media, may provide information about ÒscriptsÓ for romantic interaction
by depicting scenes in which these activities take place.25  Teens can watch
to see how other people resolve these situations and make judgments as
to whether they feel this is an appropriate path to resolution for their
situations.26  In searching the Internet, young people also have a very
good chance of finding valid and responsibly presented information on
sexual health from reliable sources such as the Surgeon General,27 Planned
Parenthood,28 or the American Social Health Association,
29 all of which
can be reassuring and also may help young people to be more responsible
in the choices they make with regard to their sexuality.On the other hand, using the media as a primary source for informa-tion about sexuality has a variety of risks. It can create unrealistic expecta-
tions for oneself.  For example, bodies portrayed in the media as sexually
attractive are often unattainable (e.g., very thin physiques for girls and
well-defined, sizable muscles for boys), and a young person who per-
ceives his or her body as not fitting into these norms may be troubled
rather than reassured.30 Another study found that virgin adolescents who
believed that media characters experienced high levels of sexual satisfac-
tion were less satisfied with their own state of virginity.31  Still another
25L.J. Heinberg and J.K. Thompson. 1995. ÒBody Image and Televised Images of Thinnessand Attractiveness: A Controlled Laboratory Investigation,Ó Journal of Social and ClinicalPsychology 14: 325-338.  A script is a set of expectations about how certain kinds of interac-
tion will unfold and about how one will act in those interactions.  More discussion can be
found in Chapter 6.26National Research Council and Institute of Medicine.  2001.  
Nontechnical Strategies toReduce ChildrenÕs Exposure to Inappropriate Material on the Internet: Summary of a Workshop.Board on Children, Youth, and Families and Computer Science and TelecommunicationsBoard.  Joah G. Iannotta, ed.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.  See also the

discussion by Jane Brown on pp. 21-26, C. Pardun, 2001, ÒRomancing the Script: Identifyingthe Romantic Agenda in Top-grossing Movies,Ó Sexual Teens, Sexual Media, J.D. Brown, J.R.Steele, and K.W. Childers, eds., Erlbaum, Hillsdale, N.J.27See <http://www.sexualhealth.com/>.28See <http://www.plannedparenthood.org/health/>.29See <http://www.plannedparenthood.org/health/>.30Heinberg and Thompson, 1995, ÒBody Image and Televised Images of Thinness andAttractiveness: A Controlled Laboratory Investigation,Ó L. Hofschire and B. Greenberg,
2001, ÒMediaÕs Impact on AdolescentsÕ Body Dissatisfaction,
Ó Sexual Teens, Sexual Media.31S.J Baran.  1976.  
ÒSex on TV and Adolescent Self-Image,Ó Journal of Broadcasting 20: 61-68.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.127CHILDREN, MEDIA, AND EXPOSURE TO SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIALstudy found that adolescents were most likely to be dissatisfied with theirfirst sexual experience (intercourse) if they relied on media messages

about sexuality.32  Perhaps more important, media sources often depict in
a positive light behavior that is inconsistent with the stated values of
many parents and other adults.  The messages about sexuality contained

in the traditional media romantic script tend to be irresponsible and po-
tentially emotionally and physically unhealthy.  These sources answer

adolescentsÕ questions about sexuality with messages that do not always
represent safe or healthy choices.  Adult-oriented sexually explicit mate-

rial may Òup the anteÓ in that the messages are very explicit and overt,
and certainly this type of material can be found easily online.5.4DIMENSIONS OF EXPOSURE AND ACCESS
TO THE INTERNET5.4.1Venues of Access
As noted in Chapter 2, individuals obtain access to the Internetthrough an Internet service provider (ISP).  However, it is quite common

for many individuals to have more than one.  For many youth, multiple

venues for access to the Internet are likely, with home, school, and library
access as perhaps the most common channels but with many others as
well, all of which have (potentially) different ISPs and thus may offer
different terms of service.  For example, youth are likely to have access to

the Internet at the homes of a friend, in which the operative rules of
supervision and/or access are most likely to be those governing the friend.
Internet cafes are open to anyone willing to pay access fees by the hour.
Museums (especially those with after-school or weekend programs) often
provide Internet access and operate under less stringent rules than do
libraries or schools.  Many youth after-school programs and other com-

munity-based programs are providing Internet access and courses on how
to use the Internet.  Even commercial establishments are beginning to

provide terminals for Internet access.33The most frequent venues for youth Internet use are home (74 per-cent) and school (73 percent).  Almost as many youth use the Internet

from someone elseÕs household (68 percent).  Public libraries account for a
32Huston et al., 1998, Measuring the Effects of Sexual Content in the Media: A Report to theKaiser Family Foundation.33See, for example, <http://www.eetimes.com/story/OEG20010412S0040> and <http://siliconvalley.com/docs/opinion/techtest/ml071201.htm>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETmuch smaller fraction of Internet useÑonly 32 percent of youth used alibrary for Internet access in the last year.  Internet usage is frequent, with

76 percent using the Internet in the week prior to being interviewed, and
with an average frequency of 3 to 4 times per week.  On the other hand, 61

percent reported that their typical Internet usage is an hour or less on a
typical dayÑ26 percent reported spending 1 to 2 hours on a typical day.34One important distinction to make about different venues is the de-gree to which any given venue is private (or can be made so).  A person

wishing to view material that may be subject to social sanction is highly
unlikely to do so where he or she can be seen doing so.  For example, an

Internet access terminal in a mall that faces a walkway with many passers-
by is unlikely to be the venue of choice for viewers interested in becoming
sexually aroused (though it might well be the preferred venue for some-
one intending to shock those passers-by).  By contrast, someone with

unsupervised access at home (e.g., in a bedroom with a lockable door) is
not subject to social sanctions, and thus can view material free of such
constraints.Note also that the availability of multiple venues of private and/orunsupervised access means that venue-specific approaches are easily cir-
cumvented.  A child denied access to various types of content at school,

for example, is likely to seek it in another venue where it is more easily
available.  For this reason, approaches to protecting children from expo-

sure to inappropriate material that are venue-specific are not likely to be
effective in serving their stated purpose.5.4.2Sources and Channels of Exposure
Sexually explicit material can be made available to youth from a vari-ety of different sources and in a variety of ways.  One major distinction

that often drives the means by which sexually explicit material is made
available is whether the source carrying such material is doing so for
commercial purposes or has no financial motivations. The commercial
online adult entertainment industry that makes sexually explicit material
available for profit is generally thought of as the most significant source
of sexually explicit material that may be regarded as inappropriate for
minors.  As described in Chapters 1 and 3, the type of content on such

Web sites includes images equivalent to those viewed in music videos34Joseph Turow with Lilach Nir.  2000.  
ÒThe Internet and the Family: The View of U.S.Parents,Ó in 
Children in the New Media Landscape: Games, Pornography, Perceptions, Cecilia vonFeilitzen and Ulla Carlsson, eds.  UNESCO International Clearinghouse on Children and
Violence on the Screen, Sweden.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.129CHILDREN, MEDIA, AND EXPOSURE TO SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIALand those seen in R-rated movies, as well as other images that are extraor-dinarily graphic, are sexually explicit, and cater to specialized sexual
tastes.  In most cases, the images that are available for free serve as Òteas-ersÓ for subscription Web sites that contain much more of the same.  Less
graphic but still sexually suggestive images may sometimes be found on
Web sites associated with firms with a significant Òbricks-and-mortarÓpresence that are using the Web essentially as an advertising medium to
draw attention to their products and services (for example, FrederickÕs ofHollywood and VictoriaÕs Secret).Noncommercial carriers of sexually explicit content are much morevariedÑas varied as the motivations for carrying such content. Forexample:¥Child pornography is often carried by individuals who are notmotivated by the prospect of financial reward.  Rather, these individuals

are often part of a community in which the ethos is that Òto get pictures,you must contribute pictures.Ó¥Friends sharing pictures onlineÑthe online equivalent of showinga friend a purloined centerfold prior to the InternetÑare not motivatedby financial reward or even by a community ethos.¥Electronically sending a sexually explicit picture to someoneanonymously for purposes of harassment is generally not motivated by
the prospect of financial reward.¥Newsgroups containing sexually explicit material do not exist asthe result of any financial reward inherent in their existence.  Instead,

they provide a convenient method for exchanging material according to a
much less rigid ethos than that which governs those who exchange child
pornography.¥People engage interactively in ÒcybersexÓÑonline real-time dialogwith someone (usually text-based) that interactively describes sexual be-
havior and actions with oneÕs online partner for erotic purposes and ex-pression.  The intent can vary:  sometimes, such interactive chat provides
fodder for a masturbatory fantasy.  In other cases, it is simply a ÒhackÓÑmaking fun of someone else for taking cybersex seriously.  In still other

cases, it is a prelude to face-to-face meetings and a possible sexual connec-
tion.  (Interactive chat of a non-sexual sort is also a key element of preda-
tory connections that entice young people to meet face-to-face with other
users, an action that may put them in potential physical danger.)¥Individuals often have personal profiles or Web pages on the Inter-net, which in general are intended to be found by others.  For those

seeking sexual contact, either in person or online, these profiles may be
sexually provocative and explicit, so as to draw attention from those simi-
larly interested.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.130YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET¥Individuals with exhibitionist tendencies find the Internet an easyway to satisfy such desires without the expectation of making money in
the enterprise.The channels through which individuals can be exposed to such con-tent are also diverse. Because the Internet is not merely a repository of
Web sites to be passively browsed, but rather a dynamic and interactive
system, the opportunity for users to be exposed to inappropriate content
is not limited to viewing commercial Web sites alone.  For example:
¥Bulletin boards or newsgroups may contain explicit imagery orgraphic language and may center on inappropriate themes.¥ÒSpamÓÑe-mail that is unsolicitedÑcan contain links to inappro-priate sexually explicit images. Spam is often associated with operators of
adult Web sites seeking to increase traffic to their sites.  As noted in

Chapter 2, participants in chat room conversations and users of IM soft-
ware often receive links to such sites.¥Publicly accessible user ÒprofilesÓ associated with a screen name
or a login name are used to provide information about the owner of that
name, and often contain links to Web sites.  Sometimes, the operator of an

adult-oriented Web site will use a sexually provocative screen name to
draw attention to the profile, and include a link to that site.  Someone who

reads the profile will often click on the link, thinking that the profileÕsowner is an individual and with the expectation of receiving personal
information.  Because such links often do take the user to a Web site with
personal information about the owner, this expectation is not unreason-
able.  But when the profile owner is the operator of an adult Web site, the

link takes the userÑunexpectedlyÑto one containing sexually explicitmaterial.¥Open chat rooms in which Internet users can communicate via textmessages in real time are a participatory public forum in which the norms
of behavior and communication are often outside of societal norms of
decency regarding the representation and discussion of sexuality, aggres-
sion, and intergroup relations.35¥Instant messages (IMs) are another kind of interactive form thatrelies on text-based, real-time interaction.  However, they are based on a
35Note also that there can be private chat rooms, in which those who participate do so byinvitation or because they know of the chat roomsÕ existence.  For the most part, such chat
rooms are not generally subject to intrusions from uninvited guests.  Some high school

students to whom the committee spoke commented that Òwhen they were youngerÓ they
participated in public chat rooms, but as they had become older, they found private chatrooms more congenial and better matched to their interests and needs.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.131CHILDREN, MEDIA, AND EXPOSURE TO SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIALone-to-one interaction (and hence are more private, unlike a chat room),and as a general rule, IMs require at least one party to have some prior
knowledge of the otherÑnamely the other partyÕs screen name.  (As noted
in Chapter 2, screen names or e-mail addresses, which are sometimes the
same thing, can be found in public chat rooms, searches for profiles with
particular characteristics, and harvesting e-mail addresses from public
postings.)  Note that depending on the technology, IMs can also allow

transmission and receipt of images and sounds, enabling both real-time
voice interaction, videoconferencing, and image exchange on a peer-to-
peer basis, without the need for sending e-mail or going to a Web site.¥Peer-to-peer networks enable file sharing between individuals.  In
such networks, the files themselvesÑthe information content of interestto end usersÑalways remain on client systems and never pass through acentralized server (such as one that would host a Web page).   Instead, the

peer-to-peer network gives end users the ability to search for particular
files of interest and to initiate a direct transfer between the users willing to
share (and receive) files without the payment of a fee.36  In addition, peer-
to-peer file transfers (as with file transfers effected through e-mail) bypass
content filtering, although the function itself can be blocked by certain
filters.  Box 5.1 highlights one recent report on the use of peer-to-peer

networks for obtaining sexually explicit material.The role of Usenet is important as well.  As a broad generalization, the
frequency with which minors access sexually explicit content through
Usenet is low, especially if these individuals are younger than high school
age.  The reasons are that Usenet often requires some technical sophistica-

tion to use (and is generally text-based), and that the sexually explicit
content on the World Wide Web is much easier to obtain and more inter-
esting in addition.  (To the extent that minors do use Usenet, it tends to be

for the downloading of information objects such as popular music, block-
buster movies, and pirated software.)  This should not be taken as an

assertion that young people never make use of Usenet, but the committee
believes that the primary use of Usenet with respect to sexually explicit36In Napster-like peer-to-peer file-sharing networks, a central server holds a publiclyaccessible index to the files available from end users (but not the files themselves).  (Napster
was originally designed to handle sharing of digital music files, but there is no particularreason that the files in question must be music filesÑand indeed, extensions of the Napsterprotocol can handle other file types.)  Other peer-to-peer file-sharing networks, such as
Gnutella, eliminate even the centralized server index function.  Users of Gnutella-like sys-
tems are connected in a Web (rather than to a centralized index), and a query from one user
goes to an immediate circle of possible respondents.  If not satisfied, the query then goes
from those respondents to other respondents.  Furthermore, such queries are highly anony-
mous, though file transfers between end users are not.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETBox 5.1The Use of Peer-to-Peer Networks forObtaining Sexually Explicit MaterialA report issued in July 2001 by the Minority Staff of the Special InvestigationsDivision of the House Committee on Government Reform drew several conclusions
about the use of peer-to-peer networks.  Using the terminology ÒInternet file-sharing
programs,Ó the report found that Internet file-sharing programs are rapidly gainingusers and that these programs provide free access to thousands of pornographic
videos and images.  Some peer-to-peer networks are established for the purpose of
exchanging such content, while others are created for purposes such as music ex-change but nevertheless contain some of these videos and images.  Further, it found

that the number of children using file-sharing programs is unknown, but is believedto be high.The inference drawn from the report by the public media was that a large numberof children are gaining access to pornography through Internet file-sharing programs,but the report never states such a conclusion explicitly.  Based on data regarding
popular search terms in Internet file-sharing systems,1 the report did conclude that
one of the major uses of Internet file-sharing programs is to exchange pornographicmaterials, such as adult videos.The report further concluded that children in search of music on Internet file-sharing programs are directed to pornographic files.  This conclusion was based on
the fact that a search for ÒBritney SpearsÓ videos on one file-sharing service resultedin ÒhitsÓ more than 70 percent of which were videos with pornographic titles.

Searches for other popular musicians, such as Christina Aguilera and Madonna, alsoproduced significant numbers of pornographic files.SOURCE: ChildrenÕs Access to Pornography Through Internet File-Sharing Programs, prepared
for Rep. Henry A. Waxman and Rep. Steve Largent, Minority Staff, Special Investigations Divi-
sion, Committee on Government Reform, U.S. House of Representatives, July 27, 2001.1For example, the report noted that on one day sampled by the Special Investigations Divi-sion, 6 of the top 10 searches were for Òporn,Ó Òsex,Ó Òxxx,Ó and other terms intended to elicit
pornography.  One search for the term 
ÒpornÓ on a particular file-sharing system yielded over
25,000 entries, more than 10,000 of which were video files.material tends to be among adultsÑand it is a prime channel for theexchange of child pornography and other highly ÒextremeÓ material.
5.4.3Extent of Exposure
In 2000, the Crimes Against Children Research Center (CACRC) con-ducted a nationally representative, interview-based survey with 1,501
youths aged 10 to 17 who use the Internet regularly (Box 5.2). This survey
measured the extent to which young people came in contact with sexually
explicit material, received sexual solicitations from other users, and wereYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.133CHILDREN, MEDIA, AND EXPOSURE TO SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIALdistressed by the incident.37  Twenty-five percent of youth reported hav-
ing had at least one unwanted exposure to sexual pictures in the year
before the survey was taken.  These figures are approximately consistent

with findings of a Kaiser Family Foundation/NPR survey taken in 2001.38In this survey, 31 percent of children aged 10 to 17 with computers at
home reported seeing a ÒpornographicÓ Web site, even if by accident.
Breaking down by age, 45 percent of those aged 14 to 17 had seen such a
site, compared with 15 percent of those aged 10 to 13.   Another study by

the Kaiser Family Foundation found that among teens (aged 15 to 17)
online, 70 percent say they have accidentally come across ÒpornographyÓon the Web, though 77 percent said they have never come across it or
come across it Ònot too often.Ó39One in 5 young people reported receiving a sexual solicitation orapproach in the last year, and 1 in 30 received an aggressive sexual solici-
tation.40  (In the lexicon of the CACRC study, a solicitation is defined as a
37David Finkelhor, Kimberly Mitchell, and Janis Wolak.  2001.  
Youth Internet Safety Sur-vey.  Crimes Against Children Research Center, University of New Hampshire.  See <http:
//www.ncjrs.org/txtfiles1/ojjdp/fs200104.txt>.38See <http://www.npr.org/programs/specials/poll/technology/>.39Victoria Rideout.  2001.  
Generation Rx.com: How Young People Use the Internet for HealthInformation.  The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, Menlo Park, Calif.  Available online at<http://www.kff.org/content/2001/20011211a/GenerationRx.pdf>.  Note that the use of
the term ÒpornographyÓ in a survey questionnaire is subject to all of the problems dis-
cussed in Chapter 1 regarding the definition of Òpornography.Ó  As that discussion indi-
cates, different people have different understandings of what counts as Òpornographic,Ó so
one party (but not another) might regard a VictoriaÕs Secret advertisement, the swimsuitissue of Sports Illustrated, or a site devoted to gay and lesbian rights as Òpornographic.Ó  The
author of Generation Rx.com (personal communication, March 2002) spoke with a 14-year-old girl who reported that a lot of kids her age had seen ÒpornÓ movies.  When asked to
provide an example, she said, ÒYou wouldnÕt believe how many of them have seen Ameri-can Pie.Ó  (ÒAmerican PieÓ and 
ÒAmerican Pie 2Ó carry movie-industry ratings of R, which
indicate admission forbidden for minors without a parent or guardian.  The enforcement ofsuch ratings varies across communities and even across theaters within an individual com-
munity, and even if enforcement were uniform, the ratingÑby assumptionÑindicates thatminors can obtain access to such movies with parental permission and consent verified bythe parentÕs presence.)  Perhaps the most that can be said from a survey based on an
undefined term such as ÒpornographyÓ is that those who reported coming across 
Òpornog-raphyÓ on the Internet have some sexually oriented concept in mind, even if that concept
(and hence the material in question) may vary definitionally (and substantially so) from
person to person.40Note also that these figures may well underrepresent the actual incidence of solicita-tions, because many youth who know that adults are concerned about such solicitations
may worry that reporting such incidents could lead to greater parental restrictions on them.Since many older teens think they can deal with such situations, they may not think theyare worth reporting.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.134YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETrequest to engage in sexual activities or sexual talk or to give personalsexual information that was either unwanted or made by an adult whether

wanted or not.  An aggressive sexual solicitation is a sexual solicitation

involving offline contact with the perpetrator through regular mail, by
telephone, or in person or attempts or requests for offline contactÑall ofwhich constitute a potential risk of physical safety for young people.)
Girls in the survey were targeted for sexual solicitations and approachesBox 5.2The Youth Internet Safety SurveyIn the period from August 1999 to February 2000, the Crimes Against ChildrenResearch Center at the University of New Hampshire conducted the Youth InternetSafety Survey, a telephone survey of a representative national sample of 1,501 young
people, ages 10 through 17, who use the Internet regularly (defined as using theInternet at least once a month for the past 6 months at home, school, a library, orsome other place).  Parents or guardians were interviewed first for about 10 minutes,

and if they consented, young people were interviewed for about 15 to 30 minutes,with the interviewer taking care to preserve privacy and confidentiality during theyouth interview.Youth survey participants were 53 percent male and 47 percent female.  Ethni-
cally, they were 73 percent non-Hispanic white, 10 percent African American, 3percent American Indian or Alaskan native, 3 percent Asian, and 2 percent Hispanic
white; 7 percent were in other ethnic categories, and 2 percent did not answer.Seventy-five percent of the households approached completed the screening nec-essary to determine their eligibility for participation in the survey. The completion rate
among households with eligible respondents was 82 percent. Five percent of parentsin eligible households refused the adult interview. Another 11 percent of parents com-pleted the adult interview but refused permission for their child to participate in the
youth interview. In 2 percent of eligible households, parents consented to the youthinterview, but youth refused to participate. An additional 1 percent of eligible house-holds were in Òcall-backÓ status when 1,501 interviews were completed.
The final sample consisted of 796 boys and 705 girls. This is not a representativesample of all youth within the United States because Internet use is not evenly dis-tributed among the population. Internet users tend to have higher incomes and more
education than non-Internet users, and, among lower income groups, Internet usersare more likely to be white, although this racial difference disappears at higher in-come levels.  While boys are somewhat more likely than girls to use the Internet, the

difference is small and is attributable to boysÕ propensity to play computer games.
The sample for the Youth Internet Safety Survey generally matches other representa-tive samples of youth Internet users.SOURCE: David Finkelhor, Kimberly Mitchell, and Janis Wolak. 2001. 
Youth Internet SafetySurvey. Crimes Against Children Research Center, University of New Hampshire.  See <http://
www.ncjrs.org/txtfiles1/ojjdp/fs200104.txt>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.135CHILDREN, MEDIA, AND EXPOSURE TO SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIALat almost twice the rate of boys (66 percent compared with 34 percent,respectively).In general, the young people participating in this study were not verydistressed by these experiences. Notably, only 6 percent of youth reported

that accidentally viewing a sexually explicit image was distressing to
them, and 75 percent of youth who had experienced an online solicitation
were not very upset or afraid.  (Another survey by the Kaiser Family
Foundation found that of online youth aged 15 to 17 who have been
exposed to pornography, 45 percent reported being upset by the experi-
ence, with 55 percent saying that they were not at all upset or Ònot tooupset.Ó41)  More young people were very or extremely upset by aggres-
sive solicitations (36 percent), and 25 percent were very or extremely
afraid.  Younger users (aged 10 to 13) were more distressed by solicita-

tions than were older usersÑalthough 22 percent of youth surveyed were10 to 13 years old, they reported 37 percent of the distressing episodes.
This may suggest that younger users have not learned coping strategies
for such incidents and have a more difficult time shrugging off such
solicitations and that preadolescents are the age group most emotionally
vulnerable to sexual solicitations.The CACRC and Kaiser reports are generally consistent with whatthe committee heard during its site visits.   For example, the children to

whom the committee spoke during site visits (mostly older adolescents)
were in general not particularly concerned by exposure to sexually ex-
plicit material.   Some were upset by what they saw, but the large majority

brushed it off.  (In general, there was a correlation with ageÑthose in the16 to 17 age bracket tended to be much less bothered by sexually explicit
material than those aged 14 to 16.)Of course, self-reporting can be questioned on the grounds that theseteenagers would not have been likely to tell a group of adults about an
abiding interest in sexually explicit material or about being upset by such
exposure (it would be too ÒuncoolÓ to do so).  On the other hand, what
todayÕs adults remember about their own searches of sexually explicitmaterial in their own youths does not necessarily apply to the youth of
today.  Today
Õs social environment, compared to that of 30 to 40 yearsago, is a more sexual one, and much of the material that todayÕs adultssought as teenagers is much more freely available and is thus arguably
much less of a Òbig problemÓ than in the past.
41Rideout,  2001,  
Generation Rx.com: How Young People Use the Internet for Health Informa-tion.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET5.5INTERNET EXPOSURE TO SEXUALLY EXPLICIT
 MATERIAL, SOLICITATIONS, AND HARASSMENT
The impact on children of Internet exposure to sexually explicit con-tent must be seen in the context of a much greater availability and wider
range of sexual content than in the past.  Although it has long been nor-

mative behavior for adolescents to seek out images that are sexually ex-
plicit (e.g., viewing oneÕs first National Geographic and Playboy were oncerites of passage for many boys), adolescents are bombarded with sexual
content in everyday media sources that are to some extent difficult to
escape.  Images meant to tantalize are embedded in most advertising in

television, billboards, and print media, and programming such as music
videos, soap operas, and movies contains highly sexualized images and
content.  Carrying original material and content from many forms of

media, the Internet also has a broad range of sexual content.For many it would appear that the range of contentÑincluding nu-dity, romance, and depictions of sex and intercourse, as well as a variety
of sexual proclivities (rape, bondage, bestiality, and so on)Ñseems to belarger and more accessible than what was easily available in the past.
Such changes lead some to speculate that there may be a wider range of
social mores and a greater permissiveness about sexuality today.42Given both a broad range of sexually explicit material on the Internetand the numerous ways in which this content can be viewed and ac-
cessed, it is worth considering two broad categories of how young people
come into contact with this content.  Exposure to sexually explicit mate-

rial on the Internet can occur inadvertently or intrusively (as when one
user deliberately seeks to expose another user to this content), or it can
occur as a result of a young personÕs deliberate choice to seek and viewsexually explicit material.Table 5.2 summarizes the various types of inappropriate sexually ex-plicit materials and experiences discussed in this report.42One suggestion of such a wider range comes from the case of a Utah video-store-chainowner who was indicted in 2000 for selling obscene material.  At trial, his attorney sought

and obtained records demonstrating a large consumption of erotic video through the pay-per-view channels of a local hotel chain and through cable and satellite television provid-ers.  According to these records, residents of Utah County
Ñby all accounts a highly conser-vative area of the nationÑare larger per capita consumers of such material than the rest ofthe nation.  Thus, his attorney argued, the community standards of Utah County in fact
were not breached by the sales of erotic video, which could not be held to be obscene under
those standards.  The chain owner was acquitted on all counts.  See Timothy Egan, 2000,
ÒEROTICA INC.ÑA Special Report: Technology Sent Wall Street into Market for Pornogra-phy,Ó New York Times, October 23.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.137CHILDREN, MEDIA, AND EXPOSURE TO SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIALTABLE 5.2  Types of Inappropriate Internet Material or Experience
Types of Material or ExperienceCharacterization
Inappropriate sexually explicitWith a few exceptions, such materials are generallymaterialdelivered to a user for passive non-interactiveviewing (e.g., through a Web site or via e-mail).Child pornographyA category of speech unprotected by the First
Amendment, involving material visually depictingminors engaging in sexually explicit conduct,
including actual or simulated sexual intercourse,
bestiality, masturbation, sadistic or masochistic
abuse, or the lascivious exhibition of the genitals or
pubic area of the minor.ObscenityA category of speech unprotected by the First
Amendment, involving sexually explicit material that
the average person, applying contemporary
community standards, would find, taken as a whole,
appeals to the prurient interest, depicts or describes,
in a patently offensive way, sexual conductspecifically defined by the applicable state law, andlacks, when taken as a whole, serious literary, artistic,
political, or scientific value.Material obscene withA category of speech involving material that meets

respect to minorsthe legal test of obscenity as applied in the context of
exposing minors to such material.  Under the First
Amendment, material in this category is protectedfor adults, though distribution to minors can be
regulated.ÒOffensiveÓ materialA broad category of speech involving material that
some party or another finds offensive to his or her
sensibilities (e.g., so-called ÒindecentÓ material).  If
offensive material does not fall into one of the abovecategories, it is protected for both adults and minorsunder the First Amendment.Inappropriate interactionInteraction is by definition interactiveÑthe user is anwith othersactive participant in a dialog with another humanbeing.Sexual solicitations fromSolicitations in the absence of physical meetings can
strangersbe bothersome or frightening to young people.
However, if such solicitations lead to face-to-face
encounters with predators, the consequences can be
catastrophic.Harassment (victim thereof)A young person can suffer as the victim of online
harassment.  Such harassment can take the form of
threats, taunts, insults, or the public posting ofdisparagingly altered images (e.g., a composite of a
head shot grafted onto a picture of an animal) and
may be delivered anonymously or with an identity
associated with it.Other inappropriate materialA broad category, generally protected under the FirstAmendment, into which various parties have placedmaterials promoting hate and racism, violence (e.g.,bomb making), religious cults, and so on.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET5.5.1Deliberate Search for Sexually Explicit Material
Deliberate access results from a childÕs conscious choice.  For ex-
ample, a child learns of a Web site providing sexually explicit materials
that does not require a password, and uses an Internet browser to view
that Web site.  Or he or she may search for sexually explicit material using

a search engine, typing in terms likely to return links to such material
(such as Òsex picsÓ).   Or a minor in a chat room might broadcast a mes-
sage to other chat room participants asking for pictures with explicit
sexual content.  Or he or she may visit a chat room named so as to attract
visitors interested in sexual dialog.  Or he or she may sign up to be on a

mailing list known to send sexually explicit images to its members via
e-mail.Eight percent of those surveyed in the CACRC survey acknowledgedchoosing to seek out X-rated Internet sites.43  Less than 1 percent said they
had used a credit card without permission.   Of youth who said they

talked online with people they did not know in person, 12 percent had
sent a picture to someone they met online, and 7 percent had willingly
talked about sex online with someone they had never met in person.  Five

percent had posted a picture of themselves for general viewing; eleven
percent had posted some personal information in a public Internet space,
mostly their last name.  Twenty-seven percent of e-mail users knew that

they had posted their e-mail address in a public place on the Internet.Some of the paths for deliberate and inadvertent exposure to sexuallyexplicit material on the Internet are described in Box 5.3.5.5.2Inadvertent Exposure to or Intrusion
of Sexually Explicit MaterialInadvertent exposure occurs through no deliberate action on thechildÕs part.  In the reference scenario described in Chapter 2, the studentintends to search for information on a particular (innocuous) topic, but
because the term he uses to search is ambiguous, information on more
than one topic is returned to the user.  A poor search strategy or misspell-

ings in the terms used for a search can also result in the inadvertent
receipt of sexually explicit material: links to sexually explicit material
may be returned even if they were not desired by the child.  A child may
43Even though the survey was anonymous and privacy was guaranteed to the surveyrespondents, such figures are likely to understate the true incidence of such behavior, be-cause of concerns that promises of anonymity might not be kept and reluctance to admitthis activity to anyone (anonymous researcher or not).Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.139CHILDREN, MEDIA, AND EXPOSURE TO SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIALmisspell the address of a Web site, and the mistakenly spelled Web ad-dress points to an adult-oriented Web site that has obtained the misspell-
ing.44  Or domain names that are most likely innocuous may have been
appropriated by owners of adult Web sites.45  Confusion between .com
and .gov or .edu suffixes can also be exploited to the advantage of theBox 5.3Some Paths for Deliberate and Inadvertent Exposure to SexuallyExplicit Material on the InternetDeliberate Exposure¥Searching for sexually explicit terms in a search engine and clicking on thelinks returned¥Receiving e-mail with sexually oriented content after subscribing to a mailinglist known to provide such content¥Going deliberately to a Web site that the user is told contains sexually explicitmaterial¥Trading sexually explicit stories and images among friends and acquaintan-ces through e-mail and other forms of online interactionInadvertent Exposure¥Receiving unsolicited e-mail containing sexually explicit material or links tosuch material (as the result of having been in a chat roomÑthereby displaying e-mailaddressesÑor subject to some other technique of ÒharvestingÓ e-mail addresses)
¥Improperly guessing the address of a Web site and receiving inappropriatematerial as a result¥Searching for terms with both sexual and non-sexual meaning in a searchengine and clicking on the links returned (some of which may contain sexually
oriented material)¥Mistyping a request for information or the address of a Web site¥Clicking on a link without really knowing what is to be expected at the site towhich the link refers44Note that exploitation of misspellings is a time-honored tradition in marketing.  One of
the most famous stories in this area involved the AT&T 1-800-OPERATOR advertising
campaign for collect calls.  By dialing 1-800-O-P-E-R-A-T-O-R, the caller was connected to
an AT&T operator.  MCI owned the number 1-800-O-P-E-R-A-T-E-R (note the misspelling)
and took enough of AT&TÕs business that AT&T discontinued the ad campaign andswitched numbers (Business Week, June 13, 1994, p. 78).45For example, the name of an indoor professional football team in Texas with a .comsuffix leads to an adult-oriented Web site.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.140YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETadult Web site owner.46  A user may also mistype the address of a Web
site, or improperly guess the address of a Web site,47 and receive inappro-
priate material as a result.  From time to time, e-mail containing sexually

explicit material can be misaddressed.Intrusion occurs when another party ÒpushesÓ such material on the
child even though he or she has not asked to receive it.  Spam e-mail with

links to Web sites containing inappropriate sexually explicit material is
one example.  Web sites that have pop-up windows that open as quickly

as a user can close them are another way this exposure can occur.  As

stated earlier, users can also send IMs to each other and attach images or
provide a link to a sexually explicit Web site.Inadvertent exposure is not an uncommon experience. According tothe CACRC survey, one minor in four (about 25 percent) had at least one
inadvertent exposure to sexually explicit images in 1999, with the major-
ity of these exposures occurring to youth 15 years of age or older.  In the

vast majority of cases (94 percent), the images involved naked persons; in
a substantial minority of the cases (38 percent), they involved people
having sex.  About 8 percent of the images involved violence, in addition
to nudity and/or sex.  The children who inadvertently viewed these im-

ages saw them while searching or surfing the Internet (71 percent), and
while opening e-mail, or clicking on links in e-mail or IMs (29 percent).48Most of these exposures (67 percent) happened at home, but 15 percent
happened at school, and 3 percent happened in libraries.For those surfing the Web, the inadvertent exposures happened as theresult of searches (47 percent), misspelled addresses (17 percent), and
links in Web sites (17 percent).  And, in 26 percent of these exposed-while-

surfing incidents, youth reported that they were brought to another sex
site when they tried to exit the site they were in.  For those receiving e-

mail that resulted in inadvertent exposure, 63 percent were associated
with an e-mail address used solely by the individual; for 93 percent of the
inadvertent exposures resulting from e-mail, the sender of the e-mail was
unknown to the individual.46For example, the New York Times reported on a childrenÕs financial Web siteÑdesignedto teach children about moneyÑthat had been closely associated with a Web site offeringadult-oriented sexually explicit material.  The original Web site for children, produced by

Ernst & Young, was located at <http://www.moneyopolis.com>, while the adult Web sitewas located at <http://www.moneyopolis.org>.  See Susan Stellin, 2001, 
ÒPornographyTakes Over Financial Site for Children,Ó New York Times, October 26.47A common method of guessing the address of a Web site is to try Òwww.searchterm.com,Ó where 
ÒsearchtermÓ is a term of interest to the user.
48In 17 percent of all incidents of unwanted exposure, the youth said they did know thesite was X-rated before entering, but it is not clear to what extent inadvertent exposureresulted from curiosity or navigational naivete despite prior knowledge of the siteÕs X-ratednature.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.141CHILDREN, MEDIA, AND EXPOSURE TO SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIALNote that the line between deliberate access and inadvertent expo-sure is not always clear.  For example, many search engines return links to

Web pages that include a few lines of text associated with each page.  If

the child intends to search for an innocuous topic, but uses a search term
with ambiguous meaning (e.g., ÒbeaverÓ), a number of links to sexuallyexplicit pages may be returned, along with those few lines of text. If that
text includes terms such as Òhot sexÓ and 
ÒXXX,Ó careful users can avoid
such materials.5.5.3Sexual Solicitations and Approaches
About 3 percent of youth Internet users surveyed by the CACRCreceived an aggressive sexual solicitation, a rate of exposure far lower
than the rate of exposure to sexually explicit material.  In addition, 5

percent of youth Internet users were approached sexually, e.g., by being
asked sexual questions in a way that caused them to be very or extremely
upset or afraid.  Girls were aggressively solicited or approached at almost

twice the rate of boys, and most of those individuals solicited (77 percent)
were 14 or older.The CACRC survey found that adults were responsible for 34 percentof the aggressive solicitations, with most of the adult solicitors reported to
be aged 18 to 25. About 4 percent of all solicitors were believed to be older
than 25, and 67 percent of all solicitors were believed to be male.  Children

made 48 percent of the aggressive solicitations.  However, in almost all of

the cases where the surveyed youth gave an age or gender for a perpetra-
tor, the youth had never met the perpetrator in person, thus leaving the
accuracy of the identifying information in question.  (For perspective, a

report of the University of Pennsylvania Center for the Study of Youth
Policy found that 47 percent of confirmed sexual assaults on children
(defined as those under the age of 18) were committed by relatives and 49
percent were committed by acquaintances, such as a teacher, coach, or
neighbor, while only 4 percent of sexual assaults were committed by
strangers.49)The concern with solicitations is based on a troubling pattern of be-havior that often characterizes a childÕs online conversation with a solici-tor in a chat room or via instant messaging.  In a typical interaction be-

tween predator and victim, the predator begins with dialog that is entirely
innocuous.50  Over time (perhaps weeks or even months), the predator
49Richard J. Estes and Neil Alan Weiner.  2001.  
The Commercial Sexual Exploitation ofChildren in the U.S., Canada, and Mexico, University of Pennsylvania, School of Social Work,Center for the Study of Youth Policy, Philadelphia, September 18.50See, for example, Kenneth V. Lanning, 2001, Child Molesters: A Behavioral Analysis, 5thEdition, National Center for Missing and Exploited Children, Alexandria, Va.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.142YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETgrooms his target, seeking to build rapport and trust.  No single piece of
dialog is necessarily sexual or even suggestive, but as the victim begins to
trust the (anonymous) predator, conversations become increasingly per-
sonal.  A young adolescent is strongly motivated by the need to separate

from parental authority and to gain acceptance for his or her growing
adulthood.  Further, he or she is usually inexperienced in dialog with

adults (especially adults with cunning and guile) and is likely to be rela-
tively honest in sharing his or her emotional state or feelings.  The preda-

tor plays on this need for acceptance and a childÕs naivete.  Sexually
explicit dialog and/or material is unlikely to be a part of this dialog in its
early stages, and may never emerge.  When it does, it is introduced gradu-

ally and slowly in order to reduce the inhibitions of the victim and make
him or her more likely to be willing to meet.5.5.4Harassment
In addition to encountering sexual solicitations and inadvertent expo-sure to sexually explicit material, youth on the Internet are subject to
other threatening or offensive behavior directed toward them, including
threats of assault aimed at them, their friends, family, or property, as well
as efforts to embarrass or humiliate them.  Six percent of regular youth

Internet users experienced feeling either worried or threatened because
someone was bothering or harassing them online, or because someone
used the Internet to threaten or embarrass them by posting or sending
messages about them for other people to see.  Boys and girls were tar-

geted about equally, while about 70 percent of the episodes involved
youth 14 and older.  Nearly two-thirds (63 percent) of those harassing

youth were other juveniles, and almost a quarter of harassment perpetra-
tors lived within a 1-hour drive of the youth.  The primary forms of

harassment were IMs (33 percent), chat-room exchanges (32 percent), and
e-mails (19 percent).  About 12 percent included an actual or attempted

contact by telephone or regular mail, or in person.  According to the

CACRC, an important feature of harassment is that, more than sexual
solicitation, it involves people known to the youth and people known to
live nearby.  Some of the threatening character of these episodes stems

from the fact that the targets do not feel completely protected by distance
and anonymity, and that the harasser could actually carry out his or her
threats.5151D. Finkelhor, K.J. Mitchell, and J. Wolak.  2000.  
Online Victimization: A Report on theNationÕs Youth.  Crimes Against Children Research Center and the National Center for
Missing and Exploited Children, Alexandria, Va.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1436The Research Base on the Impact of
Exposure to Sexually Explicit Material:
What Theory and Empirical Studies Offer
The empirical research base for understanding the impact of sexuallyexplicit material on children (discussed in Section 6.2) is not extensive, for
reasons described in Box 6.1.  Thus, reliable information in this domain is

hard to obtain, and in the absence of reliable information, controversy
abounds (as discussed in Chapter 7).  Material in this chapter is derived

largely from the Kaiser Family Foundation report, Measuring the Effects ofSexual Content in the Media: A Report to the Kaiser Family Foundation, 1998.
 16.1THEORETICAL CONSIDERATIONS
A number of psychological theories suggest some of the impact thatmedia exposure might have on young people.  These theories sometimes

conflict, and so theoretical predictions regarding the developmental im-
pact of exposure to sexually explicit material are not always consistent
with one another.  It is also possible that more than one theory may be

valid or useful in understanding psychological phenomena.  Furthermore,

the impact of such exposure will depend on the individual, the context in
which the exposure occurs, and the social structure in which the young
person is engaged, as well as other factors.1Aletha C. Huston, Ellen Wartella, and Edward Donnerstein.  1998.  
Measuring the Effectsof Sexual Content in the Media: A Report to the Kaiser Family Foundation.  The Henry J. Kaiser
Family Foundation, Menlo Park, Calif.  Available online at <http://www.kff.org/content/
archive/1389/content.html>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.144YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETIt is important to note that young people are not passive recipients ofmedia content.2  They select what they watch and interpret material using
their own experiences and frames of reference.  Thus, while some theories

may focus on how content may affect young people in general and can
suggest ways in which certain content can lead to positive or negative
outcomes, all theories acknowledge that this is an interactive process that
can yield many different outcomes depending on the person and the2See, for example, Henry Jenkins, ÒCongressional Testimony on Media Violence,Ó testi-mony presented before the U.S. Senate Commerce Committee, Washington, D.C., May 4,1999.  Available online at <http://media-in-transition.mit.edu/articles/index_dc.html>.
Box 6.1Reasons for a Sparse Research Base on the Impactof Sexually Explicit Material on ChildrenEthical and Legal ConsiderationsEthical and legal considerations limit experiments that would demonstrate the im-pact that exposure to sexually explicit material has or does not have on young people.
For example, consider a study design that called for children to be shown sexuallyexplicit material in order to identify short- and long-term effects of exposure:¥A researcher might run afoul of legal restrictions that limit the showing of
sexually explicit material to minors.¥It is generally regarded as unethical to conduct studies that might place par-
ticipants at risk, even if there is no evidence that it would do so.  In general, all thatis required is a well-articulated concern about risk, a condition that is clearly met forexposing children to sexually explicit material (e.g., the behavior might be imitated).¥Research involving children without parental consent is regarded as unethi-
cal.  Furthermore, a high rate of parental refusal of consentÑlikely in the case of
research involving exposing children to sexually explicit materialsÑundermines the
extent to which such research can be generalized, and limits its value.For these reasons, such a study would be unlikely to be initiated.  However, it
should be noted that such studies are routinely performed when images of violencerather than images of sexual activity are at issue.Increasing Conservatism of Institutional Review BoardsResearchers have been able to skirt this issue by measuring the impact of mediacontent of which society is more tolerant.  For example, it might be possible for a
researcher to study the impact of sexually oriented material or violent material onYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.145THE RESEARCH BASE ON THE IMPACT OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIALsituation.3  The following list describes several prominent theories that
conceptualize the underlying mechanisms through which media expo-
sure may affect young people.  None of these theories suggest that view-

ing sexually explicit material will always have a particular outcome.
Rather, they imply that multiple factors, such as childrenÕs media use andinterpretation of material, affect (and greatly complicate the analysis of)
outcomes.  These theories are considered in light of sexually explicit ma-

terial, though they are by no means limited to this type of content alone.3Huston et al., 1998, Measuring the Effects of Sexual Content in the Media: A Report to theKaiser Family Foundation.young people if the researcher uses media content that the participants would likelywatch as a part their normal viewing patterns (e.g., shows on prime-time television orprograms on during after-school hours that are targeted to young people).This approach, however, can be foreclosed as Human Subjects Review Boardsbecome increasingly more conservative and universities grow more cautious aboutthe possibility of a future lawsuit. For example, Dorothy Singer, co-director of the
Yale University Family Television Research and Consultation Center, was not per-mitted by her Institutional Review Board to conduct a study that would have mea-sured the impact and short-term behavioral responses of children watching the Power
Rangers. Ironically, shortly after Singer was prevented from doing this study,a local television station videotaped childrenÕs activities on the playground afterwatching a Power Rangers episode.Lack of Research FundingPrivate foundations such as the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation have support-ed several recent reports on the media.1  Support from foundations is extremely
important and provides the possibility of stimulating new and creative research.However, private funding is rarely stable enough to support longitudinal research,and a foundationÕs direction often changes in focus every few years.  Federal funding
is therefore a pre-condition for developing a field of knowledge in a systematic andcumulative manner; such support would contribute to longitudinal, developmentalstudies and nationally representative tracking surveys to stay abreast of changing
patterns in childrenÕs media use and media impact.  However, federal funding in this
areaÑespecially with respect to sexual behaviorÑhas been essentially absent.1Huston et al., 1998, Measuring the Effects of Sexual Content in the Media: A Report to theKaiser Family Foundation; D.F. Roberts, U.G. Foehr, V.J. Rideout, and M. Brodie, 1999, Kids and
Media at the New Millennium, The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, Menlo Park, Calif.,  avail-
able online at <http://www.kff.org/content/1999/1535/>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.146YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET¥Psychoanalytic theory.
  Psychoanalytic theory
4 predicts potentially
positive effects from exposure to sexually explicit material presented in
media.  In psychoanalytic theory, two major drives are sex and aggres-

sion.  These drives must be released in some way, and one path that

psychoanalytic theory develops for drive reduction is fantasy in the form
of catharsis.  More specifically, in catharsis, sexual drives can be released

through fantasy experiences with sexual material, thereby reducing the
drive state.¥Arousal theory.
  Zillmann
Õs arousal theory focuses primarily on theimmediate effects that sexually explicit material may have on behavior.5Television content, for example, can produce emotional and physiological
arousal (i.e., activation of the nervous system as opposed to sexual
arousal), and increased levels of arousal are likely to produce some type
of behavior.  However, Zillmann
Õs theory does not imply what thesebehavioral outcomes will be.  Rather, arousal theory states that the per-

sonality of the viewer, the environmental circumstances, and oneÕs frameof reference for interpretation will determine the ensuing behavior.6  In
the context of ZillmannÕs theory, arousal is non-specific.  Thus, other
factors will determine whether sexually explicit material will result in
behavior that is sexual, aggressive, or altruistic.  In media research, auto-

nomic arousal, which is related to emotional experiences, is often the
focus of inquiries.An adaptation of arousal theory has been used to understand thepossible implications of repeated exposure to sexually explicit material.
One possibility is that, in a similar fashion to desensitization to violent
material, a viewer continually exposed to sexually explicit material will
habituate to that type of content and become desensitized to it as well.
Becoming physiologically or emotionally aroused in the near future would
then require different material, perhaps more explicit depictions. An al-
ternative outcome is that a viewer who has habituated to material will
simply grow uninterested in it, an outcome mentioned by a number of
male students interviewed by the committee during site visits who as-
serted that they initially used the Internet to view adult-oriented Web
sites a great deal but that they soon became bored with such material.
Habituation does wear off, so a viewer might return to similar material4Freudian theory is historically the foundation of psychoanalytic thought.  See, for ex-
ample, Calvin S. Hall, 1954, A Primer of Freudian Psychology, The World Publishing Com-pany, New York and Scarborough, Ontario.5D. Zillmann.  1982.  
ÒTransfer of Excitation in Emotional Behavior,Ó in 
Social Psychophysi-ology, J.T. Cacioppo and R.E. Petty, eds., Guilford, New York.6Huston et al., 1998, Measuring the Effects of Sexual Content in the Media: A Report to theKaiser Family Foundation.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.147THE RESEARCH BASE ON THE IMPACT OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIALonce this has occurred, or the viewer might not return to regularly view-ing material because the viewer has lost interest.7¥Social learning theory.  In Bandura
Õs social learning theory,8 young
people can learn about sexuality from observing others depicted in the
media.  Specifically, they may observe the mechanics of sexual behavior,

but they will also learn about the contexts in which behaviors occur, the
motives and intentions behind the interactions represented, and the con-
sequences for those participating in those behaviors. The messages im-
plicit in media portrayals of sexuality may be particularly powerful when
the participants are attractive, are shown as powerful, are rewarded in
some way for their actions, or represent characters with whom the young
person identifies.  In this theory, the behavioral implications are not short-

term reactions; rather, this information is used when the young person
becomes engaged in a similar real-world sexual situation.Social learning theory implies three major impacts on an observer: (1)imitation, in which the observer copies a novel behavior that has been
seen before; (2) disinhibition, in which a behavior that was previously
inhibited is now acted on because there are no negative consequences for
the action; and (3) response facilitation, in which a socially desirable be-
havior increases in frequency as one observes another perform it. 9  Social
learning theory separates learning a behavior from performing it.  That is,

knowledge about how to act in a certain way does not mean that one will
do so.  Performance requires some form of reinforcement for action to

take place. Therefore, in contrast to cognitive approaches, social learning
theory is based on reinforcement and traditional learning theory ap-
proaches.  For example, for a person to imitate a sexual behavior or to

have a sexual behavior disinhibited, there must be situational contingen-
cies and reinforcements to support the behavior that has been observed.Over time, Bandura increasingly incorporated cognitive mechanismsinto his theory.  Attention to information, retention of that knowledge,

production of the learned behavior, and the motivation to do so were
always key elements of his theory, but he added to it the concept of self-
efficacy, the belief that a person can control the events around him or her.
He reframed his theory as social cognitive theory to emphasize cognitive
elements, but the mechanistic element of reinforcement remained a key
facet of his approach.107Sandra L. Calvert.  1999.  
ChildrenÕs Journeys Through the Information Age.  McGraw-Hill,
Boston.8A. Bandura.  1971.  
Social Learning Theory.  General Learning Press, New York.
9Calvert, 1999, ChildrenÕs Journeys Through the Information Age.10Calvert, 1999, ChildrenÕs Journeys Through the Information Age.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.148YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET¥Cognitive approaches: information processing theory.  Information pro-
cessing theories are focused on cognitive constructs that develop as a func-
tion of experiences.  Media provide one such venue for these experiences.

Based on experiences, children construct scripts (also known as schemas),
which are learned expectations that guide perception, memory, and infer-
ences.  These scripts are used to predict how one is to act and how others

will act.11  Stereotypes about sexual behavior are one type of sexual script.
Young children have very few sexual schemas, but as a growing rep-ertoire of expectations develops, these schemas shape future perceptions,
memories, and interpretations.  Both sexual content in the media and real

life experiences shape an individualÕs schema.  As a result, sexual content
in the media may have a greater impact on individuals who do not have
real sexual experiences.  Media that depict sexuality that is safe and posi-
tive may help to develop healthy sexual schemas, while content that is
permissive of sexual violence or other negative sexual encounters could
help to construct sexual schemas that are not beneficial forÑor may evenbe harmful toÑthe young person.12Theories on schemas and scripts for sexual interactions suggest thatany understanding of how the media shape this type of development
must include a careful analysis of the messages conveyed by the circum-
stances of sexual activity, as well as of the types of communication, nego-
tiation, and decision making that occur before, during, and after depic-
tions of sexuality.  It also involves a close examination of the preexisting

schemas that the individual brings to the media situation.¥Cultivation theory.  In the field of communications, Gerbner de-
scribes cultivation theory, a paradigm based on how media content inter-
faces with the person who is experiencing it.13  Media messages that are
often depicted can shape the beliefs of viewers, a process that is not unlike
the development of schemas.  For Gerbner, there are two main effects of

media exposure: (1) mainstreaming, in which dominant cultural mes-
sages come to be taken as true, even if they are not; and (2) resonance, in
which media messages that resonate with oneÕs own experiences have avery strong impact on the viewer.  In this approach, heavy exposure to

sexual material in the media leads to a view of sexuality based on the
predominant media message.  If that media message rings true with an

individualÕs own life, that message will be further enhanced.1411Huston et al., 1998, Measuring the Effects of Sexual Content in the Media: A Report to theKaiser Family Foundation.12Calvert, 1999, ChildrenÕs Journeys Through the Information Age.13G. Gerbner, 1966, ÒOn Defining Communication: Still Another View,Ó Journal of Com-munication 16(2): 99-103; G. Gerbner, 1972, 
ÒCommunication and Social Environment,Ó Sci-entific American 227(3): 152-160.
14Calvert, 1999, ChildrenÕs Journeys Through the Information Age.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.149THE RESEARCH BASE ON THE IMPACT OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIAL¥Uses and gratification theory.  In the field of communications, uses
and gratification theory emphasizes the reasons people have for viewing
and interacting with various media content.  Essentially, individuals use

the media for various needs, including information, entertainment, com-
panionship, escapism, and exploration of various aspects of their own
sexuality.15  From this perspective, knowing why a young person chooses
a particular type of media content is essential to understanding what the
impact of that content will be.6.2EMPIRICAL WORK
As noted above, there are few empirical studies on the impact ofsexually explicit media on young people.  However, researchers have

been able to conduct empirical studies using media content other than
sexually explicit materialÑresearch on violent material is one such ex-ample. This is because our society has more permissive attitudes about
allowing young people to view violent material than about allowing them
to see sexually explicit material.  For research purposes, a few studies of

sexually explicit material have used college-age viewers as a way of un-
derstanding the impact this material may have on children.16   Note,
however, that a college student differs considerably in cognitive, phys-
ical, and social maturity compared with a primary- or middle-school
student.6.2.1Violence
Several correlations have been observed in studies of violent mediacontent and children:  exposure to such content is correlated with desen-

sitization, increases in hostility, imitation and disinhibition, and fear and
anxiety responses.  Desensitization (described in arousal theory) occurs

when an emotional response to a stimulus is diminished after repeated
exposure to that stimulus. This can be adaptiveÑa doctor who becomesaccustomed to seeing blood and does not have the strong emotional re-
sponse he or she experienced in medical school can more effectively help
patients. The media, however, create fantasy exposures to content that15Huston et al., 1998, Measuring the Effects of Sexual Content in the Media: A Report to theKaiser Family Foundation.16E.I. Donnerstein and D.G. Linz, 1986, ÒMass Media Sexual Violence and Male Viewers:Current Theory and Research,Ó American Behavioral Scientist 29(5): 601-618; D. Zillmann and
J. Bryant, 1982, ÒPornography, Sexual Callousness, and the Trivialization of Rape,Ó Journalof Communication 32(4):
 10-21; D. Zillman and J.B. Weaver, 1999, ÒEffects of Prolonged Ex-posure to Gratuitous Media Violence on Provoked and Unprovoked Hostile Behavior,ÓJournal of Applied Social Psychology 29(1): 145-165.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.150YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETcan cause arousal and, over time, desensitization that is not necessarily(and often not) adaptive. For example, a child who sees a graphic, violent
image might become angry or frightened. If this image is a representation
and not an actual event, then the typical reactions of Òfight or flightÓ are
not appropriate or functional.  With repeated exposure, the child may

cease to have these emotional responses.17  Research has shown that de-
sensitization to media violence can result in reduced arousal and emo-
tional disturbance while witnessing actual violence, greater hesitancy to
call an adult to intervene in a witnessed physical altercation, and less
sympathy for victims of abuse and assault.18Emotional expressions of hostility, fear, and anxiety are also mea-sured within arousal theory.  Increases in hostility can correlate with

watching violent content in the media.  In one study, college students

who watched violent films for 4 days were more likely to interfere with
another individualÕs future employment chances (an anti-social act).19Repeated viewing of violent material seemed to create an enduring hos-tile mental framework that discouraged viewers from interacting posi-
tively with others, even those who had not provoked them.Young people of a wide range of ages sometimes experience fear andanxiety as a result of exposure to television.20  Results can range from
nightmares and temporary sleep disturbances to more lasting effects, such
as a fear of swimming in the ocean, after watching the movie Jaws.21 The
17Calvert, 1999, ChildrenÕs Journeys Through the Information Age; J. Cantor, ÒMedia Violenceand ChildrenÕs Emotions: Beyond the ÔSmoking GunÕ,Ó paper presented at the annual con-
vention of the American Psychological Association, Washington, D.C., October 5, 2001,available online at <http://joannecantor.com/EMOTIONS2_sgl.htm>.18V.B. Cline, R.G. Croft, and S. Courrier, 1973, ÒDesensitization of Children to TelevisionViolence,Ó Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 27(3): 516-546; F. Molitor and K.W.Hirsch, 1994, ÒChildrenÕs Toleration of Real-Life Aggression After Exposure to Media Vio-lence: A Replication of the Drabman and Thomas Studies,Ó Child Study Journal 24(3): 191-207; and C.R. Mullin and D. Linz, 1995, ÒDesensitization and Resensitization to ViolenceAgainst Women: Effects of Exposure to Sexually Violent Films on Judgments of DomesticViolence Victims,Ó Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 69(3): 449-459.
19D. Zillman and J.B. Weaver, 1999, ÒEffects of Prolonged Exposure to Gratuitous MediaViolence on Provoked and Unprovoked Hostile Behavior,Ó Journal of Applied Social Psychol-ogy 29(1): 145-165.20J. Owens, R. Maxim, M. McGuinn, C. Nobile, M. Msall, and A. Alario, 1999, ÒTelevi-sion-Viewing Habits and Sleep Disturbance in School Children,Ó Pediatrics 104(3): 552 (Ab-stract), available online at <http://www.pediatrics.org/cgi/content/full/104/3/c27> (May
25, 2001); M.I. Singer, K. Slovak, T. Frierson, and P. York, 1998, ÒViewing Preferences,Symptoms of Psychological Trauma, and Violent Behaviors Among Children Who WatchTelevision,Ó Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 37(10): 1041-1048.21K. Harrison and J. Cantor, 1999, ÒTales from the Screen: Enduring Fright Reactions toScary Media,Ó Media Psychology 1:117-140.
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.151THE RESEARCH BASE ON THE IMPACT OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIALspecific types of content that lead to fear will depend on the childÕs devel-opmental level.  For example, preschool-age children are most disturbed

by grotesque, visual images, such as monsters, whereas children in el-
ementary school are more likely to be frightened by realistic images in
which the danger they perceive could actually happen.  Teenagers tend to

be more frightened by abstract components of a story. Data from studies
during the Persian Gulf conflict showed that elementary school children
became frightened by images of exploding missiles, whereas teen viewers
were more afraid of the idea that the conflict could spread.  Material

frightening to a teenager may not even be processed by a younger child,
who may not understand the abstract concepts that are less readily
visualized.22Social learning theory suggests that children learn through observa-tion and modeling of behaviors and actions, and it is often used to explain
the phenomenon of children imitating what they see on television or in
films. There are numerous studies documenting a correlation between
media exposure to violence and childrenÕs aggressive behaviors.  For in-
stance, a study in Israeli middle schools after the introduction of the World
Wrestling Federation to Israeli television documented the widespread
imitation of acts demonstrated on this show that resulted in numerous
playground injuries,23 and a juvenile was recently tried and convicted for
homicide against a small girl in what the juvenile claimed was an imita-
tion of professional wrestling moves.24It is unknown if responses to media violence are cumulative (e.g.,attitudinal changes resulting from repeat exposure) or instantaneous (e.g.,
fear responses due to seeing the ÒwrongÓ movie at the ÒwrongÓ develop-mental moment), if they are temporary or lasting (e.g., a few nightmares
or a lasting fear of specific animals or situations), how the impact of
exposure to media violence varies with the kinds of violence being seen,
and how the context of viewing violence (e.g., news reports vs. ÒslasherÓmovies) may have differential effects on children.  Furthermore, addi-

tional research is needed before extrapolating results from this research22J. Cantor, 1998, ÒMommy, IÕm ScaredÓ: How TV and Movies Frighten Children and What WeCan Do to Protect Them, Harcourt Brace, San Diego, Calif.; J. Cantor, M.L. Mares, and M.B.Oliver, 1993, ÒParentsÕ and Children
Õs Emotional Reactions to Televised Coverage of theGulf War,Ó pp. 325-340 in 
Desert Storm and the Mass Media,  B. Greenberg and W. Gantz,
eds., Hampton Press, Cresskill, N.J.23Donnerstein and Linz, 1986, ÒMass Media Sexual Violence and Male Viewers: CurrentTheory and ResearchÓ; Zillman, 1982, ÒTransfer of Excitation in Emotional BehaviorÓ; D.Lemish, 1997, ÒThe School as a Wrestling Arena: The Modeling of a Television Series,ÓCommunication 22(4): 395-418.24ÒBoy Gets Life for ÔWrestleÕ Killing,
Ó St. Petersburg Times, March 10, 2001.  Available
online at <http://www.sptimes.com/News/031001/State/Boy_gets_life_for__wr.shtml>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.152YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETon violent material to sexually explicit material, although research onviolence may be relevant to sexually violent content.6.2.2Sexually Violent Material
Research on the effects of viewing sexually violent images has focusedon college-age viewers.  Effects observed in these studies were similar to

effects seen in studies on violence without sexual content.  Studies of young

adults (aged 18 to 20) watching an hour of the equivalent of an R-rated film
containing sexual violence have demonstrated desensitization effects im-
mediately after viewing.  Levels of physiological arousal decreased with

additional viewing after the first hour.  Furthermore, viewers shown a

documentary on battered women after an hour of watching a sexually
violent film demonstrated less empathy toward the victims, and gave lower
evaluations of how injured the woman was and how painful the experience
may have been.  Attitudinal changes have also been observed, with both

men and women more likely to display callous attitudes toward female
victims, such as stating that a rape was the fault of the victim or that she
brought it on herself.25  Women viewers do have slightly different responses
from men, and although both show desensitization, women also tend to
experience an increase in fear after watching sexually violent content,26 in
large part because they are likely to be the victims of rape.Although changes in attitude and arousal levels were measured inthese studies, it is not clear to what extent these changes may be lasting.
For example, normal arousal responses tend to return after 24 hours, and
the Òlong-termÓ changes in attitudes are based on studies that follow
subjects for only a few weeks after viewing the material.27ZillmannÕs arousal theory suggests that sexually explicit content doesnot lead to any specific or consistent behavioral outcome in viewers. Al-
though sexually explicit content may produce emotional or physiological
arousal, behavioral outcomesÑwhich might include sexual expression,aggressive behavior, or altruismÑdepend on the personality of theviewer, the environment, and context in which the material was viewed.2825E.I. Donnerstein and D.G. Linz.  1986.  
ÒMass Media Sexual Violence and Male Viewers:Current Theory and Research,Ó American Behavioral Scientist 29(1):601-618.
26C. Krafka, D. Linz, E. Donnerstein, and S. Penrod.  1997.  
ÒWomenÕs Reactions to Sexu-ally Aggressive Mass Media Depictions,Ó Violence Against Women 3(2):149.27See, for example, D.G. Linz, E.I. Donnerstein, and S.M. Adams, 1989, ÒPhysiologicalDesensitization and Judgements About Female Victims of Violence,Ó Human CommunicationResearch 15(4):509-522; D.G. Linz, E.I. Donnerstein, and S. Penrod, 1988, ÒEffects of Long-Term Exposure to Violent and Sexually Degrading Depictions of Women,Ó Journal of Person-ality and Social Psychology 55(5): 758-768.28Huston et al., 1998, Measuring the Effects of Sexual Content in the Media: A Report to theKaiser Family Foundation.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.153THE RESEARCH BASE ON THE IMPACT OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIALFrom the perspective of social learning theory, one can argue that behav-iors that are learned are not necessarily performed.6.2.3Exposure to Non-violent Sexual Material
Most studies of the impact of sexually explicit material in the mediaon adolescentsÕ sexual attitudes and practices have been limited to the
sexual content in mainstream media. Youth exposed to content involving
sexual relations outside of marriage rated such behavior as significantly
less objectionable than did their peers who viewed either sexual relations
between married partners or non-sexual relations between adults,29 a find-
ing consistent with social learning theory (i.e., disinhibition) or arousal
theory (i.e., desensitization).  Viewing music videos increased the accept-
ability of premarital sex for teenagers as compared to teenagers who were
not similarly exposed.30  In some studies, youth exposed to explicit sexual
content that did not involve violence did not become desensitized,31 while
in others, large amounts of experimental exposure to such material led
men (and to some extent women) to be more callous toward gender rela-
tionships, more likely to overestimate the prevalence of certain kinds of
non-mainstream sexual behavior such as sadomasochism and bestiality,
less likely to be offended by sexually explicit material, less likely to sup-
port restrictions on the distribution of sexually explicit materials, and
more likely to support lighter sentences for convicted rapists.32Many media messages suggest to adolescents that they should bethinking about sexual activity, and engaging in it early.  Frequent televi-
29J. Bryant and S.C. Rockwell.  1994.  
ÒEffects of Massive Exposure to Sexually OrientedPrimetime Television Programming on Adolescents Moral Judgment,Ó pp. 183-195 in 
Me-dia, Children, and the Family: Social Scientific, Psychodynamic, and Clinical Perspectives, D.Zillmann, J. Bryant, and A.C. Huston, eds., Erlbaum, Hillsdale, N.J.30L.E. Greeson and R.A. Williams, 1987, ÒSocial Implications of Music Videos for Youth:An Analysis of the Content and Effects of MTV,Ó Youth & Society 18(2): 177-189; J.S. Strouse,
N. Buerkel-Rothfuss, and E.C. Long, 1995, ÒGender and Family as Moderators of the Rela-tionship Between Music Video Exposure and Adolescent Sexual Permissiveness,Ó Adoles-cence 30(119): 505-521.31D.G. Linz, E.I. Donnerstein, and S. Penrod, 1988, ÒEffects of Long-Term Exposure toViolent and Sexually Degrading Depictions of Women,Ó Journal of Personality and SocialPsychology 55(5): 758-768; D.G. Linz, E.I. Donnerstein, and S.M. Adams, 1989, 
ÒPhysiologicalDesensitization and Judgments About Female Victims of Violence,Ó Human CommunicationResearch 15(4): 509-522.32Regarding callousness toward gender relationships, they were more likely to agree thatÒpickups should expect to put outÓ and 
Òa woman doesnÕt mean ÔnoÕ unless she slaps you.
ÓRegarding lighter sentences, those with large amounts of experimental exposure recom-
mended incarceration times that were 53 percent as long as those with no exposure at all.See D. Zillmann and J. Bryant, 1982, ÒPornography, Sexual Callousness, and the Triviali-zation of Rape,Ó Journal of Communication 32(4): 10-21.
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.154YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETsion viewers are less likely to believe that marriages are happy or lasting,prompted perhaps by the depiction of married couples who are not happy,
not having sex, or having sex with a person other than their spouse.33Compared to non-viewers, soap opera viewers appear to believe that
single mothers have relatively easy lives, with good jobs, high levels of
education, significant leisure time, and freedom from poverty.  They were

also more likely to believe that the male friends of a single mother will be
important in her childrenÕs lives.34In one study, teenagers frequently viewing television with a high de-gree of sexual content were more likely to engage in sexual intercourse
than those who viewed television with a smaller proportion of sexual
content, though it is unclear whether viewing such content contributes to
a teenÕs decision to engage in intercourse, or instead, whether those whoare already engaging in sexual activity are more likely to seek out such
programs.35  A longitudinal study found no strong or consistent evidence
for links between the amount or sexual content of television viewing by
children and the initiation of sexual activity.36 Other studies have sug-
gested that frequent viewers of mainstream television programs tend to
have more negative attitudes toward remaining a virgin and that becom-
ing a non-virgin is a priority.37Many studies indicate that the media seem to have an effect on atti-tudes, although it is difficult to assess whether these attitudes are long-
lasting, the extent to which attitudes are related to behavior, and the degree
to which the media, compared with other sources of experience in a young
personÕs life, are influential in shaping the choices a young person makes.For example, although studies have shown that viewing fashion magazines
tends to cause lower self-scoring by girls on body image indices, not all
girls become anorexic.  In one study in which early adolescent females were

asked to keep journals about what they observed in the media about love,
sex, and relationships, the participantsÕ experience was extremely impor-
tant in shaping how they interpreted and reacted to sexuality in the
33N. Signorielli. 1991. ÒAdolescents and Ambivalence Toward Marriage: A CultivationAnalysis,Ó Youth and Society 23(1): 11-25.34M. Larson. 1996. ÒSex Roles and Soap Operas: What Adolescents Learn About SingleMotherhood,Ó Sex Roles: A Journal of Research 35(1/2): 97-121.35J.D. Brown and S. Newcomer. 1991. ÒTelevision Viewing and AdolescentsÕ Sexual Be-
havior,Ó Journal of Homosexuality 21(1/2), 77-91.36J.L. Peterson, K.A. Moore, and F.F. Furstenberg. 1991. ÒTelevision Viewing and EarlyInitiation of Sexual Intercourse: Is There a Link?,Ó Journal of Homosexuality 21(1/2): 93-119.37Brown and Newcomer, 1991, ÒTelevision Viewing and AdolescentsÕ Sexual Behavior
Ó;Strouse et al., 1995, ÒGender and Family as Moderators of the Relationship Between MusicVideo Exposure and Adolescent Sexual Permissiveness.ÓYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.155THE RESEARCH BASE ON THE IMPACT OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIALmedia.38  One prepubertal 12-year-old did not want to see sex in the media,
while other girls who were beginning to think about relationships were
very interested in the romantic heterosexual script. Girls who had been
sexually active were more critical of the mediaÕs portrayal of sexual interac-tion and the roles male and females should take (according to these repre-
sentations).  Experience, development, and age made enormous differences

in the types of reactions girls had to media depictions about sex.6.2.4Caveats and Cautions
Although some literature exists on traditional forms of media (e.g.,television, radio, magazines), the empirical research that examines the
impact on children of exposure to non-violent sexual material is extremely
limited.39  Social mores and ethical issues generally prevent U.S. scientists
from studying the impact of media on sexual behavior (Box 6.1).  Because

there are so few studies in this area, the empirical research that does exist
must be viewed with caution, and in particular must not be viewed as
making statements or supporting conclusions that go beyond the research
designs employed.¥Correlational studies do not permit one to make causal inferences.For example, in the studies mentioned in Footnote 37, it is possible that a
third factor, such as different values and beliefs about sexual activity, is
actually responsible for the trend in attitude described and that television
viewing is an extraneous variable.¥Some researchers have attempted to avoid the complications ofstudying minors by observing the impact of sexually explicit material on
college-age viewers. These studies seek to extrapolate the impact this
material may have on younger populations.  It is not clear to what extent

this generalization is appropriate because younger individuals have very
different developmental needs and experiences than do college-age stu-
dents.   Some research has suggested that college-age students viewing

sexually explicit material may develop more callous attitudes toward
women and female sexuality, but it has not been clear to what extent these
attitudes are lasting.4038Sarah Keller, 2000, ÒHow Do Early Adolescent Girls Use Media to Shape Their RomanticIdentities?,Ó unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.
39For instance, a Kaiser Family Foundation report reviewed existing research on the me-dia, finding no more than 15 empirical studies on this topic.  See Huston et al., 1998, 
Measur-ing the Effects of Sexual Content in the Media.40Donnerstein and Linz, 1986, ÒMass Media Sexual Violence and Male Viewers: CurrentTheory and ResearchÓ; Zillmann and Bryant, 1982, ÒPornography, Sexual Callousness, andthe Trivialization of Rape.ÓYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.156YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET¥Experimental studies typically examine impact on time scales rang-ing from minutes to days (in a small number of cases, effects are mea-
sured 3 to 6 weeks after the experimental treatment).  For example, view-
ing a television program may change a personÕs immediate state byinducing arousal, leading to inhibition of impulses, or activating thoughts
or associations, and in doing so might have immediate influence on oneÕsbehavior.  However, such studies do not provide an empirical basis for

determining impact over longer time scales (e.g., months to decades), and
in particular cannot provide a sound empirical basis for claims of long-
term deviant sexual behavior resulting from exposure to sexually explicit
material in oneÕs youth.Societal impact is better assessed using longitudinal data that mea-sures long-term effects.  Experimental studies do not address long-term

impact, and there is significant debate and disagreement over whether
results of such experiments can be extrapolated to the long term.  For

example, some studies of college-age students suggest that males viewing
sexually violent movies displayed more callous attitudes toward female
victims.41  However, these attitudes were tested immediately after view-
ing the film and several weeks later with no further follow-up. Longer-
term effects have simply not been measured. There also is little informa-
tion as to how other experiences might interact with and mitigate some of
these negative attitudes.¥It is difficult to generalize clinical research to broader populationsbecause of the sampling issue.  Those who seek or obtain clinical treat-

ment for criminal sexual behavior, for example, are hardly a representa-
tive sample of the population that may or may not have been affected by
the viewing of sexually explicit material in their youth.¥Empirical studies examining the impact of exposure to other me-dia content (e.g., studies of the impact of viewing violence) cannot be
extrapolated with confidence to the sexual domain.  Studies that measure

the impact of violent material are sometimes used to speculate about the
impact of sexually explicit material on the basis that learning processes
that underlie both types of content are similar. Although one can envision
similarities between the effects of watching violent and sexually violent
material, the impact of content that is sexually explicit but not violent may
be very different.  No research is available to establish the extent to which

it is appropriate to extrapolate from studies of one type of media content
to other types.41Donnerstein and Linz, 1986, ÒMass Media Sexual Violence and Male Viewers: CurrentTheory and ResearchÓ; Zillmann and Bryant, 1982, ÒPornography, Sexual Callousness, andthe Trivialization of Rape.ÓYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.157THE RESEARCH BASE ON THE IMPACT OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIAL¥Cross-cultural studiesÑto which researchers sometimes turn toidentify possible connections between exposure to sexually explicit mate-
rial and behavior, and which are made necessary by ethical and legal
constraints in doing research in this area in the United StatesÑhave lim-ited applicability.  For example, cross-cultural studies of youth being ex-

posed to nudity and explicit material at a relatively young age do not
show higher levels of sexual addiction or teen pregnancy in European
countries compared with the United States. However, European children
also receive early, frequent, and comprehensive sex education in a way
that is not typical in the United States. This could suggest that such edu-
cation offers a useful context for interpreting sexually explicit material. It
may also suggest that sexually explicit material does not have the type of
impact on behavior that some may fear.6.3FACTORS AFFECTING THE IMPACT ON MINORS
OF  EXPOSURE TO SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIAL
The phrase Òimpact on minors of exposure to sexually explicit mate-rialÓ used by itself obscures a number of important differentiating factors,
because Òimpact,Ó Òminors,Ó Òexposure,Ó and 
Òsexually explicit materialÓall have a wide range of meaning.  Without considering these differences,

an overly simplistic analysis is inevitable.  Consider each of these terms in

turn.6.3.1Impact
As noted above, impact can be measured in the short term or longterm.  Its magnitude can be large or small (and people with different

values will differ on whether a given change in a certain dimension is
large or small).   And a particular impact may be desirable or undesirable.

(The desensitization of a teenager who has been viewing sexually explicit
behavior on an adult Web site can be regarded as undesirable, if one
believes that such depictions should be shocking and socially unaccept-
able, or as desirable, if one believes that a desensitized individual will
simply ignore such images in the future.)  Moreover, 
ÒimpactÓ may not be
confined to the direct results of exposure to sexually explicit material (for
example, impact may also include the punishment that a teenager might
receive for viewing such material).6.3.2Minors
Children from birth to 17 or 18 vary widely in maturity and develop-mental perspective. The broad range of cognitive, social, emotional, andYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.158YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETmoral reasoning and developmental abilities encompassed by this agerange means that a 6-year-old will react differently than a 16-year-old to
sexually explicit content.  The youngest children may not find such im-

ages remarkable or memorable because they do not have the cognitive
abilities or understand the social meaning of explicit images.  In contrast,
because they are becoming curious about sex and are experiencing chang-
ing bodies and a changing social landscape, those in the 9 to 12 age range
may be more vulnerable to disturbing portrayals of sex and sexual activ-
ity.  (For perspective, note that the mean age of first intercourse is around

17 1/2 years of age, as discussed in Section 5.2.)
Among the adolescents to whom the committee spoke, those in highschool (the 11th and 12th grades) were much less concerned about expo-
sure to sexually explicit material on the Internet than were middle-school
students.  Indeed, the 11th and 12th graders noted that they were exposed

to similar material in every other part of their lives, and they now found it
more annoying than upsetting.  By contrast, the middle-schoolers were

less nonchalant and tended to be more concerned about such material.6.3.3Gender
Gender is also likely to influence the impact of sexually explicit mate-rial on young people in part because it will influence how and with what
characters young viewers identify. This is not to suggest that girls will
only identify with female characters and boys with male characters, but
the gender of the viewer will certainly affect how one interprets the treat-
ment of characters. In addition, some research suggests that girls and
boys select different types of media (e.g., Glamour has a broad female
readership) and use them in different ways. For example, some studies
suggest that girls use the media to gain insight about interpersonal rela-
tionshipsÑin one study girls who viewed a video about teen pregnancyreflected more about the content than boys.42In the context of viewing sexually explicit material (especially im-ages), the overwhelming majority of such material is oriented toward
male consumers, with females being the object of sexual activity, and
boys tend to be more interested in visual depictions of sexual images than
are girls.43  Put another way, preadolescent and adolescent males are
42M. Thompson, K. Walsh-Childers, and J.D. Brown, 1993, ÒThe Influence of Family Com-munication Patterns and Sexual Experience on Processing of a Movie Video,Ó pp. 248-263 in
Media, Sex and the Adolescent, B.S. Greenberg, J.D. Brown, and N.L. Buerkel-Rothfuss, eds.,Hampton Press, N.J.43For example, men demonstrate greater interest in visual sexual stimuli than do women(J.M. Bailey, S. Gaulin, Y. Agyei, and B.A. Gladue, 1994, ÒEffects of Gender and SexualYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.159THE RESEARCH BASE ON THE IMPACT OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIALmore likely to view online adult-oriented sexually explicit material thanare females of the same ages.446.3.4Special Needs
The experiences of minors encompass a very wide range, and certainsegments of the population may be more susceptible to influence and
impact than others.  For example, one site visit of the committee took it to

a residential school for young girls who had been sexually abused.  Staff

at the school expressed to the committee the concern that for these girls,
sometimes at the start of a very long recovery process fraught with psy-
chological and emotional pitfalls, even one exposure to a sexually violent
or abusive imageÑespecially if they were not prepared for itÑcould behighly damaging to them and to their recovery.6.3.5Exposure
One dimension of exposure is the type of stimulus involvedÑvisual,still or moving, textual, and so on.  A second dimension is the intensity

and duration of exposureÑ3 hours per day, every day, for 5 years isobviously different from once for 3 minutes in the last 2 years.  Most

research in this area, sparse though it is, has focused primarily on the
impact of exposure patterns that are quite frequent and deliberate rather
than incidental or inadvertent and rare, and have involved primarily vi-
sual stimuli.A third dimension of exposure is the context in which it occurs.  In
particular, parental involvement in adolescent television viewing and dia-
log about the meanings conveyed in depictions of sexual activity can
influence the relationship between viewing and sexual behavior. For ex-
ample, one study showed that adolescents who did not talk with their
parents about television were more likely to have sexual intercourse than
those who did.45  The style with which families communicate about the
Orientation on Evolutionarily Relevant Aspects of Human Mating Psychology,Ó Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 66(6): 1081-1093).  In the context of sexual fantasy, visual
imagery is also more important for men than for women (B.J. Ellis and D. Symons, 1990,ÒSex Differences in Sexual Fantasy: An Evolutionary Psychological Approach,Ó Journal ofSex Research 27(4): 527-555).  One caveat: these studies were conducted using adult subjects
rather than minors.44In surveying adults, a Nielsen Media survey found that about two-thirds of the users ofsexually explicit Internet sites are male.  See CommerceNet/Nielsen Media, 1998, Internet

Demographic Study,  June.
45Peterson et al., 1991, ÒTelevision Viewing and Early Initiation of Sexual Intercourse: IsThere a Link?ÓYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.160YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETmedia also seemed to influence the way adolescents interpret sexual con-tent in the media.46A fourth dimension of exposure is whether exposure has been volun-tary or involuntary, as discussed in Sections 5.5.1 and 5.5.2.  Most of the

research known to the committee regarding exposure to sexually explicit
material has involved voluntaryÑand hence anticipatedÑexposure.  Thus,
little is known empirically about the impact of involuntary and unantici-
pated exposure.  Given that inadvertent exposure to sexually explicit mate-

rial on the Internet generally occurs at some point, an important question is
the nature and extent of the impact of a surprise encounter.6.3.6The Type of Sexually Explicit Material
There is a very wide range of material that different people regard assexually explicit, including photos of models in bathing suits, couples
having intercourse, group sex scenes, sadomasochism, gay and lesbian
sex, and erotic texts of the Kama Sutra or 
The Joy of Sex, as well as scholarlyworks such as those of Masters and Johnson.47  As noted above, the im-
pact of images depicting sexual violence is likely to be different from the
impact of images depicting non-violent and consensual sex; presentation
of the material is also likely to affect the nature of the impact (e.g., the
difference in portrayal of sexuality in Playboy compared to that in OurBodies, Ourselves).Along the lines of presentation, realism in the media (or at least thatwhich young people perceive as being believable portrayals of sexuality)
may be more influential than depictions that seem less realistic.  Depic-

tions of sexuality that are realistic but romanticized or idealistic may
encourage young people to have unrealistic expectations of sexuality and
may induce or influence young people to adopt these portrayals as guides
to sexual behavior and romantic relationships.4846Thompson et al., 1993, ÒThe Influence of Family Communication Patterns and SexualExperience on Processing of a Movie Video.Ó47See, for example, William Masters and Virginia Johnson, 1966, Human Sexual Response,Little, Brown and Company, Boston; William Masters and Virginia Johnson, 1970, HumanSexual Inadequacy, Little, Brown and Company, Boston.48Huston et al., 1998, Measuring the Effects of Sexual Content in the Media: A Report to theKaiser Family Foundation.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1617.1CHALLENGES TO PARENTS
One of the strongest challenges that many parents face with respect totheir childrenÕs exposure to sexually explicit material is their own ambiva-
lence toward it.  Such parents assert that they object to their children view-
ing sexually explicit material, but in the conduct of their own lives tolerate
it and may even seek it out.  This is not to say that all parents who assert

such objections behave inconsistently with their stated positions, but the
fact that the adult entertainment business is as profitable as it is suggests
that at least some parents say one thing and do another.  And, even if they

do not seek it out, many parents are active and by and large willing partici-
pants in a culture that glorifies the particular style of sexual engagement
and interaction that is illustrated in the media.  Thus, it is important to

consider what messages parents are delivering to their children.A second point to be considered is that traditional nuclear familiesare increasingly less common.  According to the U.S. Census, the number

of women living with their own child but without a husband grew by 25
percent from 1990 to 2000.  The number of unmarried-partner homes

increased by 60 percent in this period.  Furthermore, even in nuclear

families, stay-at-home parentsÑwho might provide supervisionÑare in
the minority. Of married women with children aged 6 to 17, 39 percent
worked outside the home in 1960, 49.2 percent in 1970, and 77.1 percent in
1999.1  Also, there are same-sex couples living together openly in virtually
7Beyond the Science: Perspectiveson Impact and the Public Debate1For the 1960 figure, see ÒEmployment Status of Women, by Marital Status and Presenceand Age of Children: 1960 to 1998,Ó Statistical Abstract of the United States: 1999, Table No.659, p. 417, available online at <http://www.census.gov/prod/99pubs/99statab/sec13.pdf>.  For the 1970 and 1999 figures, see ÒEmployment Status of Women, by Marital Status

and Presence and Age of Children: 1970 to 1999,Ó Statistical Abstract of the United States:2000, Table No. 653, p. 409, available online at <http://www.census.gov/prod/2001pubs/statab/sec13.pdf>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.162YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETevery county in the United States, suggesting that social attitudes abouthomosexuality may be becoming more tolerant.Overall, while parents enjoy broad discretion to raise their children asthey see fit, it is likely that non-parental influences on children have in-
creased over the past several decades.  For example, the extent to which

children are engaged with various media has increased considerably.
Schools have been asked to take over responsibilities for many activities
for which parents have been traditionally responsible, ranging from serv-
ing breakfast to providing sex education.The Internet itself presents particular challenges for parents that arenot posed by other media.  The generation gap with respect to the Internet

is large and profound.  Perhaps for the first time, children
Ñas a groupÑare more knowledgeable than their parents about an increasingly perva-
sive technology.2  These 
Òdigital childrenÓ3 have never known a world
without personal computers, and many have been exposed to the Internet
for a very large fraction of their lives (Box 7.1).  They also have the time

and the inclination to explore the limits of the technology.  The result is

that, compared to their parents, they are more knowledgeable about how
to do things on the Internet and with other forms of information technol-
ogy, and more knowledgeable about what things can be done and what
experiences can be had on the Internet.  In practice, such expertise makes
the teenager rather than the parents the in-house expert on computers,
and such reliance on the teenagers whom one is trying to guide and
parent presents interesting challenges not generally faced by parents in
the past.Testimony to the committee provided one very clear example of thisphenomenon.  A teenager, knowing that her mother would 
Òfreak outÓ at
the online solicitations and invitations to view commercial sexually ex-
plicit material that she was receiving,4 simply set up an AOL account for
her mother with parental controls set to Òyoung teen,Ó thereby blocking
her mother from receiving such material.  Her mother, not knowing what

was being blocked, expressed surprise that her online experience was
much less intrusive than she had been led to believe.2The ChildrenÕs Partnership.  1999.
  The ParentsÕ Guide to the Information Superhighway:
Rules and Tools for Families Online, Second Ed.  Available online at <http://www.childrens
partnership.org/> (October, 5, 2001).3Don Tapscott.  1998.  
Growing Up Digital: The Rise of the Net Generation.  McGraw-Hill.
4This testimony is consistent with a study undertaken by the Girl Scout Research Institutefinding that Ò30 percent of girls (responding to the study) had been sexually harassed in achat room, but only 7 percent told their mothers or fathers about the harassment, most
fearing their parents would overreact and ban computer usage altogether.Ó  See Whitney
Roban.  2002.  
The Net Effect: Girls and New Media.  Girl Scout Research Institute, New York.
Available online at <http://www.girlscouts.org/about/PDFs/NetEffects.pdf>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.163BEYOND THE SCIENCE: PERSPECTIVES ON IMPACT AND THE PUBLIC DEBATEBox 7.1Experiences on the Internet and with ComputersThe following information was obtained in a survey of 500 teenagers aged 12 to17 that was conducted by Family PC magazine in the fall of 2000.
Usage¥80 percent spend 1 to 5 hours a week on e-mail.

¥75 percent spend 1 to 5 hours a week online doing homework and research.
¥66 percent spend 1 to 5 hours a week Web surfing.

¥31 percent have a computer in their room.
The teenagers surveyed had been online for an average of 3.7 years.Life with a Computer at Home¥63 percent said they had to compete with parents or siblings for computer
time.¥75 percent said families had a computer before they turned 12.
¥9 percent said the computer came home before they were born.
Interacting with People Online¥38 percent preferred telephone contact to stay in touch with friends, while 33
percent preferred online mechanisms.¥83 percent used e-mail to stay in touch with distant friends and relatives.
¥84 percent used instant messaging and e-mail to communicate with other
people for any purpose.¥44 percent used chat rooms, but only 10 percent used chat rooms regularly.
¥32 percent thought it was easier to say personal things online versus face-to-
face.Online Friendships¥33 percent met someone online with whom they still keep in touch.

¥21 percent arranged to meet their e-friend in person.

¥Girls were more likely than boys to arrange a face-to-face meeting (26
percent versus 14 percent).Computer EducationOf the teens surveyed, 55 percent had taken a computer class, including¥62 percent of boys and
¥51 percent of girls.
SOURCE: A Field Guide to Wired Teens. 2000.  Digital Research Inc., Kennebunkport, Maine.
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.164YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETMaking parenting in the age of the Internet even more challenging isthe fact that some real-world lessons do not carry over well to cyberspace.
For example, most parents have told their children to Ònever talk to strang-ers.Ó  As evidenced by many new pen-pal relationships between young
people in remote parts of the world, this kind of Òcommunication withstrangersÓ can be an invaluable learning experience that allows young
people to develop awareness of global issues and even a global sense of
community.  However, a sense of online community can also be extremely

misleadingÑespecially to neophyte Internet usersÑin creating a sense ofsafety and trust that is in fact unwarranted.Rules of behavior in cyberspace are sometimes different than in reallife, and new behaviors and traditions are created.  These online social

mores are often a mystery to parents, though their children may be quite
comfortable with them.  For example, technology enables multitasking to

a much greater degree than has been possible in the past (e.g., conducting
a number of conversations via instant messages and telephone simulta-
neously),5 whereas a rule that governs many, though not all, adult inter-
actions with other people is one of paying full attention.Issues with a long history in the real world play out differently incyberspace.  Parents who once fought with kids about messy rooms and

telephone time must now deal with conflicts over computer usage as well.
ChildrenÑwho always resisted the notion of sharing diaries with theirparentsÑmust contend with the possibility that their e-mail might bemonitored or the history of their Web visits viewed.  Academic plagia-

rism is much easier in an Internet environment and thus is arguably more
tempting.   Sorting out truth from fiction
Ña task that has always beenimportantÑis more important than ever before given the near-infinitediversity of content on the Web.  Bullying
Ñalways a problem in somecontexts in real lifeÑhas its online analogs in harassment, and is some-times protected by the anonymity provided by the Internet.Finally, there is often a large gap in what parents perceive their chil-dren are doing on the Internet and what these children report they are
actually doing (Table 7.1).  This, too, reflects an all-too-common and more

general disconnect between parental perceptions of their childrenÕs be-havior and what they actually do.65Katie Hafner.  2001.  
ÒTeenage Overload, or Digital Dexterity?,Ó New York Times, April 12.6For example, in April 1998, the Partnership for a Drug-Free America released a studyindicating that many baby-boomer parents Òare seriously underestimating the reality ofdrugs in their childrenÕs lives.Ó  In support of that claim, the study noted that
¥38 percent of parents said their teenagers might have been offered drugs; 59 percent ofteenagers reported having been offered an illicit substance.¥21 percent of parents acknowledged the possibility that their teenager might have triedmarijuana; 44 percent of teens said theyÕd done so.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.165BEYOND THE SCIENCE: PERSPECTIVES ON IMPACT AND THE PUBLIC DEBATENone of these challenges obviate a parental role, or even a role forother adults, in ensuring a safe and appropriate Internet experience.
While some children may know the technology better than their parents,
parents and other adults still have important roles to play in shaping the
values of their children and in teaching critical thinking and moral skills
that allow children to make informed and ethical choices according to the
values that are important to them.  In short, the parental role is still central

in teaching children to protect themselves on the Internet.TABLE 7.1  Parents
Õ Lack of Knowledge About the Internet Activities of
Their Teenage ChildrenParents Who Believe ChildChildren Who Report
ActivityIs Doing This ActivityDoing This Activity
Posting personal online17 percent45 percent
profilesaHaving private e-mail68 percent81 percent
accountsaCorresponding with30 percentMore than 50 percent
strangersaWhile using the Internet,67 percent of parents78 percent say they
someone else is regularlyreport that someoneuse the Internet
in the roombelse is in the roomwhen they are
while their childrenalone

are onlineUsing the Internet at home76 percent63 percent
for schoolwork at least
once a weekbaPenn, Schoen, and Berland Associates. 2000.  
Web Savvy and Safety: How Kids and Parent Differ
in What They Know, Whom They Trust
, September. Available online at <http://www.microsoft.com/presspass/press/2000/nov00/safetywebsitespr.asp>.
bNational School Boards Association (no date available). 
Safe and Smart: Overview of Re-search and Guidelines for ChildrenÕs Use of the Internet.
Ó  Available online at  <http://www.nsbf.
org/safe-smart/full-report.htm>.¥33 percent of parents said they believed their teenagers viewed marijuana as harmful;18 percent of teens viewed trying marijuana as risky.¥45 percent of parents believed their child might have friends who smoked marijuana;71 percent of teens said they had friends who used it.Source: Partnership for a Drug-Free America. 1998.  The Boomer-Rang: Baby Boomers Seri-ously Underestimating Presence of Drugs in Their ChildrenÕs Lives.  Available online at  <http:/
/www.drugfreeamerica.org/NewsCenter/pats/pats1.asp?ws=PDFA&vol=1&grp=
NewsCenter&cat=National+Surveys&top=Articles&Pyear=1997&Pname=pats199x.asp&pNum=9>.  More recent data from the Partnership for a Drug-Free America, as yet unpub-
lished, indicate similar trends.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.166YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET7.2SPECULATIONS AND OTHER PERSPECTIVES
ON POSSIBLE IMPACTAs the discussion in Chapter 6 indicates, the research literature on theimpact of sexually explicit material on young people is sparse and incon-
clusive.  Nevertheless, there are a variety of views on the potential nega-

tive impact that exposure to sexually explicit material might have on
children, some of which are illustrated in Box 7.2.  Further, there is no

reason to suppose that all negative impacts are necessarily manifested in
science-based research studies.One issue of concernÑmentioned by many parents in the committeeÕssite visits as being far more troublesome to them than the issue of expo-
sure to inappropriate sexually explicit materialÑis the fear that childrenwill be physically victimized by someone whom they met through the
Internet.  Among many of the students with whom the committee spoke,
meeting someone face-to-face whom they had initially encountered online
was a common and accepted part of life, more common among girls than
boys.  Some of these face-to-face encounters occurred at parties, others

one-on-one at malls, and in one case at a personÕs home.  Most students
knew that they should not give out personal information, such as real
names and addresses, but they were generally overconfident in their abil-
ity to make judgments in potentially dangerous situations.  For example,

the committee spoke to one teenage girl who appeared to understand that
people often lie online, that meeting Internet acquaintances face-to-face
can be dangerous, and that things are not always what they seem.  How-

ever, when asked if she would meet someone from the Internet, she said,
ÒSureÑif I had any doubts about him, I would never do soÑand I only doit with people I know are okay.ÓAnother type of negative impact that has not yet been studied is thedamage that results from online attacks on the character of an individual
youth.  For example, from time to time, the facial image (a head shot) of a

student may be grafted onto a sexually explicit image using a software
package such as Photoshop.  Distribution of such a doctored image can be

quite harmful to the student whose face is on the image, perhaps in part
because in many cases, it is someone in the young personÕs physical com-munity who has spread the rumor or image and the receiving audience
are other students or friends also in the young personÕs physical commu-nity.  On the committee
Õs site visits, a number of students reported prob-lems with online (and anonymous) harassment in the form of spreading
rumors about oneÕs character and sexual behavior or threatening some-one with bodily harm.77Such behavior is similar in some ways to the use of the bathroom wall at school as aplatform for someone writing nasty comments about a classmate, but electronic communi-Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.167BEYOND THE SCIENCE: PERSPECTIVES ON IMPACT AND THE PUBLIC DEBATEcation allows such rumors to be forwarded and disseminated much more rapidlyÑwith allof the attendant negative consequences.Box 7.2Views of the AdvocatesSexually Explicit Materials Are Bad for SocietyAnti-pornography advocates believe that pornography is linked to a variety ofsocially destructive behavior, such as rape, child molestation, and sexual dysfunc-tion.1  Furthermore, pornography is seen as disseminating dangerous misinformation
about sexual relations and as promoting medically risky sexual practices, especiallyamong adolescent boys, who are large consumers of sexually explicit material.  One
individual often quoted by those in the anti-pornography camp is Park Elliot Dietz,
who has written:Pornography is a medical and public health problem because so much of it teachesfalse, misleading, and even dangerous information about human sexuality. . . . A
person who learned about human sexuality in the Òadults onlyÓ outlets of America
would be a person who had never conceived of a man and a women marrying or
even falling in love before having intercourse, who had never conceived of tender
foreplay, and who had never conceived of procreation as a purpose of sexual
union.  Instead such a person would be one who had learned that sex at most

meant sex with oneÕs children, stepchildren, parents, siblings, pets, and withneighbors, plumbers, salesmen, burglars, and peepers.2Anti-pornography advocates argue further that exposure to pornography that
combines erotic images with violent images normalizes sexual assault and desensi-tizes men to rape.  For example, they point to correlations between states in which
large amounts of pornography are sold and high rates of rape, and between greater
inclinations toward sexual coercion and being raised in home in which fathers readpornographic magazines and talked about watching X-rated movies.  They also draw
on clinical studies of sex offenders and self-described pornography addicts.  For

example, they note that a large fraction of sex offenders, child molesters, and thoseconvicted of sexual assault are avid consumers of pornography.  As for children, anti-
pornography advocates argue that child pornography normalizes and promotes the
sexual abuse of children.  Graphic imagery is used to persuade children that sexual
activity is normal and that other children willingly participate in such activities.Many of these advocates believe that viewing pornography, even for a moment,can have dire consequences.  For example, American Family Online believes that
1Views of the Òanti-pornographyÓ advocates can be found online at <http://www.cwfa.org/
library/pornography/1998-06_pp_poison.shtml> and <http://www.chuckiii.com/Reports/Social_
Issues/pornography.shtml>.  The material in this section is derived from content found online at

<http://www.cwfa.org/library/pornography/1998-06_pp_poison.shtml> and <http://www.chuck
iii.com/Reports/Social_Issues/pornography.shtml>.2Closing statements of the Meese CommissionÕs Final Report.  See Attorney GeneralÕs Com-mission on Pornography.  1986.  
Final Report.  U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington,
D.C., July.(continues)Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.168YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETÒpornography is dangerous, and viewing it (even for a moment) can set off a terriblechain of events.Ó3  The American Family Association stated that 
ÒTed Bundy startedon his road to perversion and murder by innocently looking at ÔnudieÕ magazines asa boy.  It only took one time for him to become hooked.
Ó4In addition, some commentators argue that even short-term exposure to certainsexually explicit materials has long-lasting physiological effects.  For example, Jodi

Hoffman, founder of Restore AmericaÕs Moral Pride, wrote, ÒSomeone on this list...has made numerous attempts at convincing us that pornography Ôdoes no harmÕ to
children. . . . Studies have shown that an event which lasts even so much as three-
tenths of a second, within five to ten minutes has produced a structural change in thebrain.  Exposure to porn causes actual brain damage, especially in a child.
Ó5Feminist anti-pornography advocates believe that pornography degrades womenby portraying them as sexually insatiable objects of male pleasure in a world ofsexual inequality, and that pornography contributes to male contempt for womenthat can ultimately lead to sexual violence and rape.Finally, anti-pornography advocates argue that pornography eliminates from sex-ual acts the emotional intimacy needed to promote healthy relationships by reducingwomen and children to sex objects to be used on demand.  Consumption of pornog-

raphy is seen as the first step toward sexual addiction.  Drawing on arousal theory,
they argue that consumers of pornography are compelled to partake of more frequentÒdosesÓ of more varied and more extreme pornography in order to obtain the same
sexual high.  Eventually, they argue, the individual must act out the scenes being
depicted to obtain the sexual highsÑand that the scenes depicted are obviously bad.Such individuals thus become incapable of natural sexual relationships.Sexually Explicit Materials Have Benefits for SocietyA different set of views is expressed by those who believe that the widespreadavailability of sexually explicit materials has benefits for society.One writer argues that the insistence on limiting such availability demonstratesrestrictive attitudes toward sexual expression, and that Òsocieties which hold restric-3See <http://www.afo.net/help/block/Default.htm>.4See <http://www.afajournal.org/archives/24060000438.asp>.5See <http://www.inet-one.com/cypherpunks/dir.1997.10.30-1997.11.05/msg00377.html>.Box 7.2 (continued)Still a different kind of negative impact of childrenÕs exposure tographic, adult-oriented, sexually explicit material is attributable not so
much to the material per se as to the fact that exposure to such material
may occur in a setting when a parent is not available to place the material
into context, to explain why viewing such material is inappropriate, or to
impart parental values with respect to viewing such material.  In this

view, children exposed to such material lose the opportunity to hear from
a responsible adult making a critical point about the social assumptions
underlying such images and portrayals and about values in society.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.169BEYOND THE SCIENCE: PERSPECTIVES ON IMPACT AND THE PUBLIC DEBATEtive attitudes towards sexual issues tend to breed child abuse.Ó6  She asserts that such
legislated limitations add to Òthe cultural squeamishness towards sex, which alreadyappears to play a major role in child sex abuse,Ó and that when 
Òchildren think thatsex is taboo, they will remain silent about being abused. If they think that they aredoing something dirty because they are being abused, they will feel guilty, responsi-ble for the abuse, they wonÕt speak up and theyÕll continue to be abused.Ó  She
further claims that restricting the availability of such materials is potentially hazard-ous for all women and children, citing the Danish experience in which Òpornogra-phy was made freely available in Denmark in the late 60Õs,Ó resulting 
Òin the inci-dence of sex crimes [and] sexual violence towards women and children, [dropping]markedly.Ó  ÒFar from causing harm,Ó she continues, 
Òpornography appears to havea cathartic effect on peopleÕs sexuality. The Denmark experience of the 1960Õs teach-es us that the incidence of sex crimes appears to lower dramatically when pornogra-phy is made freely available.ÓAnother writer concluded that Òafter thorough review of the existing research oneffects of pornography and violent material on the viewer, we can answer this ques-tion simply: there is no known harm caused by the actual viewing of pornographicmaterials, and results of aggression studies in relation to violent material have been
unable to demonstrate any changes in behavior in children after viewing such mate-rials.Ó7  She adds, 
ÒAs of yet, no research has indicated a causal relationship betweenthese materials and anti-social behavior that is said to justify censorship.ÓFinally, according to another view, ÒResearch attempting to demonstrate a causallink between images and violence has not been able to show such a link.  Research
on offenders demonstrates that poverty, actual violence, and abuse in the personal
lives of offendersÑand NOT media imagesÑare the crucial factors in creating atendency toward violence and criminal behavior.Ó8  In addition, 
ÒResearch on seri-ous sex offenders demonstrates that rapists and abusers have been taught repressive
messages about sex, masturbation, and pornography, and that anti-pornography ac-tivism actually exacerbates the problems that lead to sexual assault and abuse.Ó6Patricia Petersen, speech given on May 28, 1999, available online at <http://www.efa.org.au/
Campaigns/may28/bris/pp.html>.7Carol Avedon, 1994, Censorship WonÕt Reduce Crime, Libertarian Alliance Pamphlet No.24, available online at <http://www.capital.demon.co.uk/LA/pamphlets/censcrim.txt>.8Frequently Asked Questions About ÒFeminists Against Censorship,Ó available online at
<http://www.mit.edu/activities/safe/data/feminists-against-cen>.A related point was made by a mother who voiced concern becauseher preadolescent son was worried that something was wrong with him
because he was interested in sexual pictures.  She felt that his interest was

a normal part of growing up but didnÕt know how to talk to him about it.Finally, some parents at the committeeÕs site visits said that they sawno problem at all regarding their childrenÕs exposure to sexually explicitmaterial, even though they recognized in general terms that there are
always some bumps in the path of any child who is growing up.  One

mother (of two daughters and no sons) told the committee that she didnÕtYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.170YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETknow she might have a problem with her daughters until she spoke withthe committee and realized the issues the committee was investigating.
However, it was not clear from what these parents said whether they did
not know what kinds of material were available on the Internet, or if they
did know about the nature and extent of that material and were not
bothered by it.As for other potential negative impacts on children, the lack of asubstantial base of science-based research allows only speculation.  One

possibility is that the sexual behavior depicted on adult Web sites and in
other adult-oriented material may be emotionally disturbing to the minor
himself or herself.  To the extent that the dynamic range of sexual activity

found on the Internet is broader than the range found in mainstream
society, one might suppose that an inexperienced or naŁve minor could bedisturbed by images drawn from the more extreme end of the spectrum.
Someone disturbed by such images might report, for example, that he or
she is unable to get such images out of mind, or that he or she had night-
mares involving such images.Several youth who spoke to the committee reported that they werehighly upset when they inadvertently encountered sexually explicit ma-
terial on the Internet, but not because of its content per se.  Rather, they

were most concerned and worried about the reaction of their parents to
such an eventÑÓMy mom would freak out if she thought I was looking atthis stuff!Ó  In a couple of cases, such material had a negative impact on
the individual because his parent reacted vehemently with punishment
and censure.A related issue was the concern of these youth that their parents orteachers would not believe that they had encountered sexually explicit
material by accident.  A number of parents who testified at committee site

visits echoed this concern, noting that they had not believed their children
when they (the children) had said that they had happened upon such
material accidentallyÑand that the reason for their disbelief was thatthey had never encountered it personally themselves.Active participation in a certain kind of online culture may affect theparticipants because they are participating in it, as opposed to viewing it.
For example, to protect themselves online, many youth obey the rules laid
down by responsible adults about not giving out their real names and
addresses onlineÑthey lie about such information rather than withhold it.To the extent that they participate in cybersex, which for the most part
relates to only the physical aspects of sexual interaction, they are involved
in an interaction (often with strangers) that arguably facilitates detached
sexual activity without an emotional or personal context.  In such a context,

sex talk in chat rooms and in instant messaging (often known as ÒcybersexÓ)is constructed in public (in chat rooms) and in private (in instant messages),Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.171BEYOND THE SCIENCE: PERSPECTIVES ON IMPACT AND THE PUBLIC DEBATEis linked to strangers, has little to do with relationships, is explicit, and isoften associated with the degradation of women.  To the extent that respon-
sible adults believe that it is inappropriate to promote lying and emotion-
ally detached sexual expression, these connections to such online cultures
may be regarded as damaging and destructive.A second common type of conversation in a chat room is Òtrash talkÓthat insults and demeans others.  Public chat rooms provide a means

through which individuals with no prior association (i.e., strangers) can
interact with one another and provide no means for independently ascer-
taining the identity of any given participant.  When chat rooms are un-

monitored (and most are unmonitored8), it is common to see explicitsexual exchanges, joking about physical violence and assaults, degrada-
tion of others, aggression, and exchanges involving racial stereotypes and
prejudice.  Online propositions to engage in cybersex are common, espe-

cially for those with identifiably female screen names.The young people to whom the committee spoke had experiencedsuch online behavior.  Consequently, many had stopped participating in

chat rooms.  Others just ignored obnoxious or offensive IMs, or blocked

the senders to prevent them from further contact.  It is a further problem

that many parents have never been in a chat room and are entirely unin-
formed about the types of communication that occurs in many of them.The research regarding chat room behavior is sparse.  For example,
there are as yet no studies that compare the impact of sexually explicit
Web sites to participation in a chat room, or that examine the impact of
chat rooms oriented toward sexually explicit interaction and dialog. Be-
cause such channels are interactive, participants have greater control over
what happens in the course of dialog, and other research on the media has
suggested that interactive forms of media in which participants have
greater control over the activity have greater influence and impact on the
participants than those that are less participatory in nature.9Finally, it is worth mentioning impacts on society as a whole.  To the
committeeÕs knowledge, such impact has never been the subject of scien-tific research, and indeed may not be amenable to measurement.  It is
8Some chat rooms are monitored.  For example, a number of online services provide
monitoring services for chat rooms specifically intended for young users.  Monitors have
the ability to send warnings, suspend users for certain amounts of time, terminate accounts,and send e-mail to master accounts (presumably seen by parents), and these abilities are in
fact used to sanction misbehavior.  Monitors specifically watch for inappropriate conduct in
the chat room, though effectiveness depends on the attentiveness with which the monitorwatches the conversation.9S.L. Calvert and S. Tan.  1994.  
ÒImpact of Virtual Reality on Young AdultsÕ Physiologi-
cal Arousal and Aggressive Thoughts: Interaction versus Observation,Ó Journal of AppliedDevelopmental Psychology 15(1): 125-139.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.172YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETnonetheless important to acknowledge that interactions and behavior thatresult in reduced respect for human life and human dignity can damage
the common good and be negative for society.  If Internet exposure to

exploitative sex and violence helps to desensitize youth to assaults on
human life and human dignity, then society, whose future is these chil-
dren, will be correspondingly weakened.  Objectionable speech and im-

ages on the Internet, from which children should be protected or able to
protect themselves, do not represent values that strengthen society.  The

point of protecting childrenÑbefore, during, or after the Age of the Inter-netÑis to give them time to internalize principles and convictions consis-tent with those of their parents and the other responsible adults around
them, and to participate in a patient process that leads to the building of a
stronger society.7.3RHETORICAL CONCERNS AND ISSUES OF PUBLIC DEBATE
The research base described in Chapter 6 contrasts with many of therhetorical points made in public debates over the issue of childrenÕs view-ing of sexually explicit material.  For example, some individuals who

believe that exposure to ÒpornographyÓ is harmful to children regularly
cite the most extreme examples of sexual behavior to which most people
would object (e.g., sadomasochism, bestiality), but ignore the fact that
some of what they would want to make inaccessible to children has been
routinely available in National Geographic and 
Playboy magazine for de-
cades.  Their opposite numbers in the political debate point to the desir-

ability of disseminating information about preventing sexually transmit-
ted diseases, but ignore the fact that such information is widely available
in other forums and that much of the sexually explicit material on the
Internet has nothing to do with such issues.It is likely that both sides could reach agreement on the undesirabilityof exposing children to depictions of the most extreme and most graphic
examples of sexual behavior, in the sense that most of those on each side,
acting as individual parents, would prefer to keep their children away
from such material, regardless of their age.   However, they would part

company on whether government should play a role; and, as importantly,
they would be unlikely to agree on whether material that is less extreme
in nature is inappropriate or harmful.A great deal of sexually explicit material falls into the category overwhich consensus among diverse groups is not easily forthcoming.  For

example:¥Sex education is highly contentious, and some public schools avoidteaching anything about this topic because parents have such differentYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.173BEYOND THE SCIENCE: PERSPECTIVES ON IMPACT AND THE PUBLIC DEBATEperspectives on what information is appropriate to provide to young
people.  Some parents feel that providing young people with information

on birth control is unacceptable because it conveys a permissive attitude
about premarital sexual activity, and some believe that it increases the
frequency of sexual activity in minors.  Others feel that providing infor-

mation related to sexual health and even access to birth control in schools
is socially responsible because it may help to reduce the rates of transmis-
sion of sexually transmitted diseases and teen pregnancy by providing a
place for young people to obtain information that they would not get
from their parents, and cite studies suggesting that sex education does not
lead to increased sexual activity.10¥Some materials address sexuality in a manner that is meant toexplore various dimensions of sexual desire, and these materials inevita-
bly lead to differences of opinion about what behavior should be re-
garded as Ònormal,Ó Òhealthy,Ó or appropriate even for fantasy. The de-
piction of non-traditional scripts about how people interact romantically
and sexually can help to broaden the choices that people make.  (The

traditional script depicts romantic heterosexuality in which the male char-
acter is active and powerful both in pursuit of a female partner and in
sexual activity itself. The female character is portrayed as passive and coy
and her power derives from luring a male partner.)  Instead of turning to
such a traditional scene from a movie for perspective on how couples
handle intimacy, a young person could go to the American Social Health
AssociationÕs teen sexual health Web site <www.iwannaknow.org> andjoin a monitored chat room with other teens to talk anonymously about
sexuality. The chat room supervised and facilitated by an expert in sexual
health could be a more productive learning experience than the messages
a young person receives from a highly romanticized scene from a movie,
though others might argue that such chats could give them ideas that they
might not otherwise have.¥Other materials depict what it means to be lesbian or gay in sexualorientation; what for some people is a description of positive feelings10For example, the Surgeon GeneralÕs Call to Action to Promote Sexual Health and ResponsibleSexual Behavior noted that Òprograms that typically emphasize abstinence, but also covercondoms and other methods of contraception, have a larger body of evaluation evidence thatindicates either no effect on initiation of sexual activity or, in some cases, a delay in theinitiation of sexual activity.  This evidence gives strong support to the conclusion that provid-

ing information about contraception does not increase adolescent sexual activity, either byhastening the onset of sexual intercourse, increasing the frequency of sexual intercourse, orincreasing the number of sexual partners.Ó  See David Satcher.  2001.  
The Surgeon GeneralÕsCall to Action to Promote Sexual Health and Responsible Sexual Behavior
.  Office of the Surgeon
General, Rockville, Md.  Available online at <http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/
sexualhealth/default.htm> (July 9, 2001).Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.174YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETabout oneÕs orientation is for others an endorsement of a perverse lifestyle.Having two same-sex people identified as a couple or depicting them as
kissing is very offensive to some people, whereas these activities are ac-
cepted without a second thought when a couple is heterosexual.¥As mainstream media content grows more sexually suggestive(e.g., lingerie advertisements, the Sports Illustrated swimsuit issue), in-dividuals uneasy with such change might well regard such content as
inappropriate.11¥Content drawn from mainstream art and science has been calledpornographic.  For example, a plaque carried on Pioneer 10, the first space

probe to leave the solar system, was called pornographic because it in-
cluded engravings of nude human figures.12   On some of the committee
Õssite visits, various parties objected to Internet images of classical Greek
statues of the human body and Leonardo da VinciÕs Vitruvian Man.¥Sexually explicit discussions may also be useful for minors whowish to remain celibateÑsuch discussions might occur among such like-minded individuals in dealing with questions such as how to manage
oneÕs sexual desires without succumbing to peer and media pressure.Extreme sexually explicit imagery to create sexual desire on the onehand, and responsible information on sexual health on the other, are ar-
guably unrelated and, many would argue, easily distinguished.  But much

content is not so easily categorized.  While some extreme sexually explicit

material meets legal tests for obscenity (and therefore does not enjoy First
Amendment protection), less extreme material may not.  Material regard-

ing sexual health, mainstream erotica, lingerie advertisements, and mod-
els in swimsuits generally do enjoy such protection, at least for adults and11For example, according to FCC Commissioner Michael J. Copps, ÒHundreds of Ameri-cans have registered their displeasure at the VictoriaÕs Secret program, and the promotionaladvertising that preceded it, that aired on network television [on November 15, 2001].Ó  By
CoppsÕs characterization, most of the complainants thought some of the material was inde-cent, and many were angered because the program and ads were run during a time in theevening when children were likely to be watching and when indecent programming may
not be aired in accordance with FCC rules.  See <http://www.fcc.gov/Speeches/Copps/
Statements/2001/stmjc128.txt>.12For example, one newspaper published the images on the plaque, but erased the nipples,saying that Ò[a] family newspaper must uphold community standards.Ó  Another newspa-
per affiliated with a religious denomination said that the plaque should have had prayinghands rather than nudes.  And a major newspaper printed the image in full, but received a

letter from a reader that said, ÒI was shocked by the blatant display of both male and femalesex organs. . . . IsnÕt it enough that we must tolerate the bombardment of pornographythrough the media of film and smut magazines?  Isn
Õt it bad enough that our own spaceagency officials have found it necessary to spread this filth even beyond our own solarsystem?Ó  See William Poundstone.  1999.  
Carl Sagan: A Life in the Cosmos.  Henry Holt and
Company, New York.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.175BEYOND THE SCIENCE: PERSPECTIVES ON IMPACT AND THE PUBLIC DEBATEoften for children.  Is it good or bad to know about and to see non-
mainstream sexual behavior?  Knowledge about such behavior might

create an aversion to it, a desire for it, or simply a person better informed
about it.  Content and information that fall outside the realm of extreme

sexually explicit imagery are thus likely to be the source of greatest con-
tention, and different people fear that such content would or would not
fall under regulatory efforts aimed at reducing the exposure of minors to
material that is or may be sexual in nature.Describing material as ÒinappropriateÓ is value-laden, in that one
personÕs definition of inappropriate will be different from that of another.One parent may feel that exposure of children to violence is much more
harmful than exposure to sexually explicit material, while another may
feel the reverse.  Moreover, some parents believe that exposure to sexu-

ally explicit material poses moral danger (distinct from physical or psy-
chological harm and danger) to their children, while others do not.7.4JUDGMENTS IN THE ABSENCE
OF A RELIABLE RESEARCH BASEReliable informationÑthe outcome of rigorous researchÑcould, inprinciple, indicate how, if at all, exposure to sexually explicit material
upsets minors, whether and how it changes their attitudes and/or their
behaviors, and so on.   But these effects are neither good nor bad absent

a consideration of values.  It is one
Õs values that provide the basis fora determination of whether these effects are good or bad, desirable or
undesirable.Consider, for the sake of argument, as a hypothetical example that isnot demonstrated in the research literature, that there is a reasonably firm
consensus that brief exposure to sexually explicit material does not change
sexual behavior but that individual attitudes become more accepting of a
variety of sexual behaviors. One person might say that this outcome is
bad or wrong if childrenÕs attitudes toward certain sexual behaviors havebecome more accepting, even if their behaviors donÕt change.  Another
might strongly approve of the same attitude change.  A third person

might object to such material as tasteless, crude, vulgar, or worse.  Each of

these judgments would be informed according to his/her value system.13However, the research concerning the impact of exposure to sexuallyexplicit material on children across their entire development span is not13Such differences also occur among larger social groups.  For a discussion of such differ-
ences between nations, see Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, NationalResearch Council, 2001, Global Networks and Local Values, National Academy Press, Wash-ington, D.C.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.176YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETrobust. While the charge to the committee, and much of the public debate,has been predicated on the assumption that exposure to ÒpornographyÓhas negative effects on children, the committee has heard from a variety
of analysts and scholars presenting a range of both experimental and
clinical work in this area, and it has reviewed the literature as described
above.  What has been demonstrated is that there is no scientific consen-

sus on the nature or extent of the impact of exposure to sexually explicit
material on children.  Furthermore, emotions run so high in this area and

strongly held values relating to it are so intertwined with assessments of
impact that even good empirical evidence is unlikely to change many
minds.In the absence of reliable empirical evidence, some people will say,ÒBecause the scientific evidence is lacking, we must not act precipitously.
ÓOthers will say, ÒEven if the scientific evidence is lacking, we must actimmediately.Ó  In each case, one
Õs values and prior predispositions have astrong influence on oneÕs assessment of a phenomenon.  An individual
predisposed to believe that there is a significant negative impact or that
there is no significant negative impact will thus require very strong evi-
dence to change his or her mind.   Individuals and communities will of

course include as a part of their decision-making processes their own
subjective evaluations and judgments of the impact of inappropriate ma-
terial on children.Thus, one sees in the public debate that judgments about the impactof inappropriate sexually explicit material on children are closely tied to
the values of those making the judgments.  Controversy is inevitable

when these values are strongly held (as one would expect for values
concerning sexuality and children) and in conflict with those of others.Even definitions of Òpornography,Ó which itself has no legal defini-
tion, or inappropriate sexually explicit material, may differ based on one
Õsworld view and values (e.g., one community may object to images of
scantily clad individuals, whereas another may only be concerned about
exposure to images that are more explicitly sexual, such as those depict-
ing intercourse).The increasing cultural and social heterogeneity of the United Statesimplies the co-existence of different sets of values.  A range of different

value sets was demonstrated to the committee, and the committee heard
from individuals representing a wide spectrum of views on the impact of
sexually explicit material on children.  These views range from the belief

that such exposure is Òvery negative, wrong, and harmfulÓ to minors to
Ònot particularly negative, wrong, or harmful.Ó  This diversity of values is
reflected within the committee itself, but it depends strongly on what
type of sexually explicit material is being considered.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.177BEYOND THE SCIENCE: PERSPECTIVES ON IMPACT AND THE PUBLIC DEBATEAs the discussion in Section 7.3 suggests, there is some set of explicitmaterial involving depictions of  ÒextremeÓ sexual behavior that the com-
mittee does believe would be highly inappropriate for viewing by chil-
drenÑthis judgment would not be made so much on scientific grounds(as the committee knows of no reliable scientific studies that address this
point) as on a sense that such exposure would offend the committeeÕscollective moral and ethical sensibilities.However, for other, less extreme sexually explicitly material, the gen-eral publicÑand the committee itselfÑwould reflect a range of beliefsabout its propriety for children and the extent and nature of its impact on
children.  Thus, if the committee
Õs task were to come to consensus on thenature and extent of the impact on children of this type of less extreme but
still sexually explicit material, the committee would be deliberating for a
long time indeed.  In short, even with the best of intentions, intelligent

individuals with different values working with highly uncertain knowl-
edge are likely to disagree on both likely outcomes and the desirability or
undesirability of those outcomes.But coming to a consensus on the impact of exposure to such sexuallyexplicit material on children is not the task of the committee.  As noted in

Chapter 1 and in the preface, the committeeÕs task is to provide a clearexplication of factors that enter into choices about appropriate approaches
to protecting children from inappropriate sexually explicit material on
the Internet.  To the extent possible, this explication strives to provide

reliable information about these different approaches, and it is intended
to address that charge with analysis that is as value-neutral as possible.14In the end, however, values must enter into the process of selectingappropriate approaches to the issue of children and inappropriate sexually
explicit material on the Internet.  In particular, the weights that a decision

maker assigns to various characteristics of a given approach are deter-
mined by his or her values.  One who believes that the impact of such

material on children is Òvery negativeÓ will put different weights on the
various factors related to approaches to protection that are articulated in
Chapters 8 through 13 and come to very different conclusions than some-
one who believes the impact is Ònot very negative.Ó  To illustrate with a
14The committee recognizes that value-neutral analysis, especially in controversial areas,is in practice not possible.  For example, values are implicit in the choice of dimensions
along which approaches may be analyzed.  Indeed, they are implicit in the use of the word
ÒprotectÓ in the committee
Õs legislative charge, which assumes that harm and danger neces-sarily flow from childrenÕs exposure to ÒpornographicÓ material.  Nevertheless, along the
continuum ranging from more value-neutral to more value-laden, the committee sees itstask as more aligned with the former than the latter.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.178YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETsmall but important example: one who believes that the impact of sexuallyexplicit material on minors is very negative is likely to weight the partial
protection offered by filters heavily, and to give much less weight to the fact
that filters also screen out some appropriate and useful information.  One

who concludes that the impact of sexually explicit material is not very
negative is likely to place the opposite weights on these factors.It is with this discussion in mind that this report includes the materialpresented in Chapter 6, though it is sparse and inconclusive.  For matters
that concern parents and communities, an inadequate knowledge base
cannot be used as a rationale for doing nothing.  But the knowledge

available, sparse and inconclusive though it is, helps to provide context
that frames the choices of parents, teachers, librarians, administrators,
and makers of public policy.7.5CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS
The distinction between voluntary or involuntary exposure to sexu-ally explicit material is important.  The research base described in Chap-

ter 6 focuses mostly on the impact of voluntary exposure to sexually
explicit materialÑit is in the nature of most psychological research thatthe subjects of research consent to being exposed to various stimuli.  And,

as noted above, there is little reliable evidence on the impact on children
of exposure to sexually explicit material.  However, it is true that some

such material has the potential to shock or surprise some people not
expecting to be exposed to it, even if many children who accidentally
encounter sexually explicit material report that they are not particularly
bothered by the experience (Section 5.4.3).The committee believes that there is a reasonably strong social con-sensusÑone reflected in its own deliberationsÑthat involuntary expo-sure to sexually explicit material is clearly inappropriate and undesirable
and should not be occurring, regardless of oneÕs views on the impact ofvoluntary exposure, and it is particularly inappropriate and undesirable
in the context of minors being exposed to such material or when invol-
untary exposure is the result of intentionally misleading or deceiving a
minor.To the extent that risk does exist (as indicated by reactions of childrento such experiences), it is likely that it is largest for children in an age
group who are old enough (namely preadolescents) to engage in unsu-
pervised Internet activity but young enough that they have not been ex-
posed to very much sexual stimuli.  Very young children are unlikely to

have the technical sophistication needed to explore the Internet in a way
that exposes them to sexually explicit material (e.g., they are less likely to
use search engines than to stick with a set of prescreened age-appropriateYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.179BEYOND THE SCIENCE: PERSPECTIVES ON IMPACT AND THE PUBLIC DEBATEsites) and even if exposed to sexually explicit material are unlikely to havethe worldly knowledge that labels such material as inappropriate.  Ado-

lescentsÑespecially the older onesÑare sexually mature, have been ex-posed to a great deal of culture and media that are suffused with sexual
messages, and are often engaged in sexual activity (including intercourse).
Such individuals are as likely to close a screen containing sexually explicit
images as to explore it further.On balance, there is no scientific research consensus supporting aclaim that exposure to sexually explicit material doesÑor does notÑhavea negative physical, emotional, or psychological impact on children, nor a
consensus regarding the existence of a causal relationship between expo-
sure to sexually explicit material and long-term behavioral outcomes in
general.  (Of course, what happens in the case of any specific individual is

outside the scope of such research in any event.)   Further, the committee
has not established specific definitions of what constitutes inappropriate
sexually explicit material, though it remains confident that there is some
significant set of sexually explicit material on which it could reach con-
sensus regarding inappropriateness.The inconclusive results from the sparse scientific literature regard-ing the impact of exposure to sexually explicit material on children are
reflected in a wide spread of committee member views on this subject as
well.  Although Chapter 6 includes a review of empirical research that

explores this topic and a discussion of developmental theories that point
to how one might incorporate a scientific framework into making deci-
sions about the strategies to use to guide childrenÕs Internet use, there isnot a consensus either in the science or in the committee on which to base
definitive and authoritative conclusions on the impact of sexually explicit
material on children or on the appropriate parental, school, library, or
societal response for all children.  What this report can offer is data on and

careful analyses on a number of factors (e.g., how children use the Inter-
net, means by which children come in contact with Internet content, de-
velopmental theory about a childÕs cognitive and emotional growth) thatindividuals and communities can consider in formulating a careful ap-
proach to this issue.It is important to keep in mind the difference between a scientificassessment that exposure to certain kinds of sexually explicit material is
harmful and a stance that exposure to such material is morally wrong.   A

moral stance and a scientific consensus are entirely different concepts.
Each is important to discourse and action, but they have entirely different
epistemological underpinnings, and even if there were a scientific con-
sensus that exposure to such material had no negative impact, one could
still make a moral and ethical judgment that such exposure should be
avoided simply because it was wrong.  A good illustration is found in the
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.180YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETcommitteeÕs views on this subjectÑdespite a wide range of views on theunderlying science regarding the impact of exposure to sexually explicit
material on children, there is nevertheless some significant set of sexually
explicit material that the committee would unanimously regard as inap-
propriate and objectionable for children.A nation of communities with very different moral beliefs may neverbe able to come to a stable consensus on public policy if moral knowledge
and values are the primary determinants of policy-making outcomes.

Because science incorporates at its core techniques intended to safeguard
the process against the influence of personal beliefs, it offers a more value-
neutral form of knowledge, and as such offers a form of knowledge
around which public consensus can be built.  In the case of inappropriate
sexually explicit material on the Internet, there is no scientific consensus
on the impact of exposure to such material, and so informed decisions
about practices and policies cannot be based on empirical evidence.  What

science can offer in this case is a careful analysis of how, when, and where
young people come into contact with various types of inappropriate ma-
terial. This knowledge can significantly improve local and perhaps even
national dialogs on what approaches could be employed to safeguard
children on the Internet.The committeeÕs task is to explicate the factors that should be takeninto consideration in determining a course of action, as well as to offer
examples of existing approaches that some communities have used to
address the issue.   Thus, its findings and conclusions about the factors

that communities should consider as they formulate policy and practices
do not require either a scientific or committee consensus on the impact of
exposure to inappropriate sexually explicit material on children.  Judg-

ments about impact necessarily affect oneÕs calculus in weighing differentfactors (and hence on deciding upon recommended courses of action), but
they do not necessarily affect what the relevant factors are.  Research

(existing or future) that helps to say when, where, and in what circum-
stances exposure may put children at risk can help people to make deci-
sions about what types of approaches may be the most beneficial and
cost-effective, and the committeeÕs review of current research is outlinedin Chapter 6.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART II
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.182Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.183This chapter provides a general framework for understanding what itmeans to protect youth from inappropriate material.  Part of the complex-

ity of the task is seen in the observation that ÒprotectÓ and Òinappropriate
materialÓ are terms without clear and unambiguous definition.8.1THE IDENTIFICATION OF INAPPROPRIATE MATERIAL
8.1.1In Principle
The determination that particular material is inappropriate for chil-dren begins with a human judgment.  The judging party can be a parent,

a teacher, a librarian, the child himself or herself, the creator of the mate-
rial, the carrier (distributor) of that material, a third-party rating service,
or a government agency.Given a particular universe of material (e.g., a set of images), it islikely that any group of judges will agree on some material as Òappropri-
ateÓ and some as Òinappropriate,Ó and that there will be some material
about which the judges will disagree.  Of course, depending on the par-

ticular judges involved, the term ÒinappropriateÓ could include a very
large variety of material, including some or all sexually explicit material,
bomb-making recipes, extremist material, birth control information, hate
sites, and the platforms of particular political or social groups.  Indeed,

judgments about inappropriateness are closely tied to the values of those
making the judgments.8Approaches to Protection from
Inappropriate Material
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.184YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETThe general pattern would not change even when judgments are con-fined to a specific area such as sexually explicit material.  Some material

would be unanimously classified as inappropriate, some would be unani-
mously classified as not inappropriate, and some would be indetermi-
nate.  Judges drawn from different segments of the U.S. public would

disagree strongly about whether certain materials were inappropriate for
children, and what is obscene or obscene with respect to minors, in Cali-
fornia may well be different from what is obscene or obscene with respect
to minors in Tennessee because the community standards of California
may be different from those of Tennessee.  In other words, as the Supreme

Court has made clear, the determination that material is obscene, or ob-
scene with respect to minors, depends on criteria that are extrinsic to the
material itself.In the absence of universal criteria, the most relevant standard forvalidity or accuracy is the standard of the individual(s) responsible for
making decisions about inappropriateness on behalf of the child.  Thus, it

is often said that the best protection against children being exposed to
inappropriate material on the Internet is the presence and guidance of a
responsible parent or guardian while the child is using the InternetÑthereason is that when such an adult is involved, his or her standards can be
trusted as the basis for good judgments for the childÕs welfare.When the presence and guidance of a responsible parent or guardianduring Internet use are not possible, protection depends on the judgment
of a proxy.  The proxy
Õs judgments must then be evaluated against thestandard of the responsible adult who would otherwise make such deci-
sions for the child.  The proxy may be another adult such as a teacher

acting in loco parentis, the board of a public library system, another
trusted adult, an Internet service provider, a developer of filtering soft-
ware,1 a local jury deciding an obscenity case, the U.S. Congress, or a state
legislature.  But whatever the proxy, the validity of the proxy
Õs assess-ments about inappropriate material is indicated by its consistency with
the judgments of the party responsible for deciding on behalf of the child.Different proxies have different methodologies for determining inap-propriateness.  A proxy that uses one reviewer is likely to have a different

set of consistencies than an agency that has a hundred reviewers.  The

former is likely to have a higher reliability than the latter, while the latter
is more likely than the former to establish a standard for accuracy or
validity that reflects the larger population from which those reviewers are
drawn.1The developer of software builds into a tool assumptions about what content is appro-priate (and for whom) and also establishes the standard of accurate performance that thetool will meet.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.185APPROACHES TO PROTECTION FROM INAPPROPRIATE MATERIALMoreover, even if agreement can be obtained on particular content(e.g., that a given image is inappropriate), it is hard to define clear rules
about how to identify ÒsimilarÓ material in a consistent manner.  Put
differently, it is difficult to articulate a set of rules that clearly defines a
specific class of ÒinappropriateÓ material that is both sufficiently inclusive
(includes most or all material that is inappropriate) and sufficiently exclu-
sive (excludes most or all material that is appropriate).Given a need for proxies, how does a proxy make reasonable judg-ments about what sexually explicit material may be inappropriate for view-
ing by children at any age?  To answer this question, it is important to

distinguish conceptually between reliability (or consistency) and validity.The most common example to illustrate the distinction between reli-ability and validity is that of a shooter aiming at a target and firing mul-
tiple rounds.  Reliability is a measure of the repeatability of the shooter
Õsaim.  A tight cluster of shots indicates high repeatability (reliability).

However, reliability says nothing about how close that cluster of shots is
to the actual target.  For that, validity indicates the accuracy of those

shots: a small distance between the center of the cluster and the center of
the target indicates high accuracy (validity).  Validity means that one is

measuring what one claims to be measuring.  A highly reliable measure

may not be valid, and a highly valid result may not be reliable.2In determining whether certain material is inappropriate, reliabilityrefers to the reproducibility of an assessment that a given piece of mate-
rial is inappropriate.   To test for reliability, one might ask an individual to

evaluate a collection of materials several times under different circum-
stances.  If this individual
Õs judgments were generally consistent, he orshe would be said to be a reliable judge.  Because the same person may

classify a given piece of material differently depending on his or her
mood or from one day to another or what else he or she might have seen
or read during that period of time, an individualÕs reliability as a judgecannot be taken for granted.Reliability is even more difficult when multiple people are involvedin judging content. Different people may classify a given piece of material
differently even if they are ostensibly using the same rules for classifica-
tion.  Thus, to determine the reliability of a group of judges, one might ask

them to evaluate a collection of materials; if their judgments were gener-
ally consistent with each other, this group would be said to make reliable
judgments.  Key to this process is an agreed-upon operational specifica-

tion of how to make a judgment.2For practical purposes, a variable with low reliability (i.e., with a wide spread) is hard touse for empirical work.  However, it can still be highly valid in the formal sense of the term,
even if it is not useful.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.186YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETThis definition of reliability implies that machine assessment (a givenversion of software running on a given computer) is inevitably more
reliable (or consistent) than human assessmentÑgiven the strictly algo-rithmic process, the reliability of machine assessment is 100 percent.3  The
reliability of human assessment is likely to be considerably lower, even
when the same rules of classification apply to all assessments, simply
because people interpret the same rules differently.Validity is a more problematic concept because there is no universallyaccepted standard (no Ògold standardÓ) for what counts as inappropriate.In other words, there are no universally accepted criteria that define
whether something is obscene or inappropriate for viewing by children.These comments do not exclude the possibility of broad agreementover many possible decision-making parties in a particular instance char-
acterized, for example, by child pornography, just as even the worst-
made rifle can make bullÕs eyes for a particular target with a very largebullÕs eye.  Rather, the accuracy of a rifle is best tested against a target
with a very small bullÕs eye, so that variations in accuracy can be readilyobserved.  Similarly, the validity of a process for making judgments about

inappropriateness is best indicated by examining judgments of Òques-tionableÓ material about which people do not hold similar views.
Reliability and validity (as measured from the perspective of a re-sponsible adult) are the primary determinants of a ÒgoodÓ proxy for that
adult.  Because different proxies have different methodologies, an indi-

vidual faced with the responsibility for deciding inappropriateness for a
child can, in principle, choose to adopt the approach used by a trusted
proxy.  Thus, in principle, an individual (e.g., a parent) might choose to

trust the judgments of Disney, the American Civil Liberties Union, the
Christian Coalition, or another organization that has a well-known repu-
tation for espousing a particular set of views or values.8.1.2In Practice
Given the general principles described above, three methods can beused in practice to identify inappropriate material.  The decision-making

party, whether machine or human, can¥Make a real-time assessment of the material in question based on the con-
tent of the incoming information.  This approach would require the decision-
3This statement must be qualified if the assessment software relies on elements thatchange over time.  For example, the assessment software may rely on a database that is
updated from time to timeÑwith new or additional data, the results of the assessment of,say, a given image may well vary.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.187APPROACHES TO PROTECTION FROM INAPPROPRIATE MATERIALmaking party to screen each item of information immediately prior to thechildÕs viewing of it.  Items judged to be appropriate are immediately
passed to the child, while items judged to be inappropriate are not.¥Rely on a tag or label associated with the material in question.  Labels
can contain either a description of the material or a judgment about the
material.  (In principle, a label can be created by the content creator or by
another party.)  If the label contains a description, the description is a

highly condensed description of the material with respect to dimensions
of content likely to involve judgments of inappropriateness.  Thus, the

label might indicate Òimage contains frontal nudityÓ because decision
makers are likely to want to make decisions based on the presence or
absence of frontal nudity.  By contrast, the label would not indicate 
Òim-age contains people,Ó because that fact is not likely to be the basis on
which judgments about inappropriateness are likely to be made.  Alterna-

tively, the label may contain a judgment about the material (e.g., inappro-
priate for those 14 and under).  In this case, the label represents a time-

delayed judgment of content that has been made by a third party.¥Examine the source of the material.  Some sources can be trusted to
provide only appropriate material; others provide a large volume of inap-
propriate material.4  Rather than assessing the material itself (an effort
that may be unduly time-consuming), the evaluation is based on the
source.  Note that relying on an evaluation of the source is, in essence,

reliance on a labelÑthe name of the source is the label, and material from
that source is rejected or accepted depending on the particulars of the
sourceÕs identity.A second dimension of identifying inappropriate material in practiceis a consequence of the size of the Internet.  The volume of information on

the Internet is so largeÑand changes so rapidlyÑthat it is simply imprac-tical for human beings to evaluate every discrete piece of information for
inappropriateness.  Moreover, the content of some existing Web pages

changes very rapidly, and new Web pages appear at a very rapid rate.5This fact leads to one of two approaches.  One is based on an auto-
mated, machine-executable process for identifying inappropriate content4Sources of adult-oriented, sexually explicit material are generally consistent in their of-feringsÑsuch content is available on their Web sites today, and will be available tomorrow(if they are still in business).  Yet the content on one such site is often generically similar to

that on another site, so Òbrand loyaltiesÓ that keep viewers coming back are hard for any
one business entity to establish.  The most successful commercial entities are those that
have been able to establish such loyalties.5No data was available to the committee on the first point, but on the second point, thenumber of publicly accessible Web pages increased by 300 million in the period from July toOctober 2001 (according to the Google statistics on the number of pages indexed).Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.188YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET(generally used for evaluating content Òon the flyÓ); such processes areless expensive than manual processes for screening content, but as a rule,
they result in judgments that are less valid than those of human evalua-
tors.  Automated approaches must be based on machine-executable rules
that are abstracted from human judgmentsÑsuch abstraction inevitablymisses nuances in those human judgments and reduces their validity
compared to that of humans.  Reliance on labels depends on the label
Õsaccuracy, and only a humanÕs action binds a particular label to a givenpiece of material.  And, the identity of a source may not be an adequate

indicator of material coming from it.The second approach is the human-performed explicit identification ofspecifically appropriate material and the exclusion of everything else (or its
reverseÑthe explicit identification of specifically inappropriate materialfor exclusion and the inclusion of everything else).  This approach is expen-

sive.  The first variant runs the risk that large volumes of appropriate mate-

rial will be excluded, but is likely to result in a very low fraction of inappro-
priate material being displayed.  The second variant captures only some

(perhaps a large fraction) of the inappropriate material on the Internet, but
allows a large volume of appropriate material to pass.In practice, a combination of approaches can be used as wellÑa com-bination would rely on an automated search for material that might be
inappropriate, but would rely on a human judgment for the final determi-
nation.  In this case, inappropriate material not identified in the auto-

mated search does not reach a human decision maker and so it mistakenly
identified as appropriate.  To the extent that the threshold of identifica-

tion is set so that a greater volume of possibly inappropriate material is
identified (so as to reduce the likelihood that inappropriate material is not
mistakenly identified), the volume of material that is subject to actual
human judgment is increasedÑin which case the issues regarding humanreview discussed in the previous paragraph obtain.8.2DIMENSIONS OF ÒPROTECTIONÓ
In the context of Òprotecting youth from inappropriate material orexperiences,Ó the term 
ÒprotectÓ has a number of plausible definitions.
ÒProtectionÓ can mean:
¥Preventing children from deliberately finding inappropriate mate-rial or experiences (e.g., searching out an adult-oriented Web site);¥Preventing children from being inadvertently exposed to such ma-terial or experiences (e.g., receiving an unsolicited e-mail containing an
inappropriate image or text); and/or¥Developing in the child skills that enable him or her to cope con-Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.189APPROACHES TO PROTECTION FROM INAPPROPRIATE MATERIALstructively with such exposure should it occur and making available asupport infrastructure that reduces the harm or injury that might result
from being exposed to such material or experiences.The approaches needed to implement these definitions of protectiondiffer but are not mutually exclusive.  Protecting children from deliberate

exposure is a very different enterpriseÑand entails very different costsÑcompared with protecting children only from inadvertent exposure,
though approaches to each may have common elements.  Further, teach-

ing a child to cope constructively is likely to be helpful in the event that
other protection measures fail.The primary difficulty of protecting children and youth against delib-erate exposure is the fact that many adolescents, especially boys, are
highly motivated to seek out sexually explicit materials, including mate-
rial that is ostensibly limited to adults.  Absent a significant change in

their desire for such materials, their motivation often enables them to
overcome many obstacles in their path, whatever the nature of those
obstacles.ÒProtectionÓ has other important dimensions. The extent to which a
child can be protected is an important element of the debate.  It is easy to
say that 100 percent protection is impossibleÑbut such a statement begsthe question of what Ò80 percent protectionÓ might mean. Does it mean
that the child is exposed to inappropriate material 20 percent as much as
another child who does not have such protection?  Should the evaluator

rely primarily on the number of incidents of exposure?  Or are other

aspects of the exposure, such as its nature or duration, important as well?
An important challengeÑas yet unresolvedÑis to articulate appropriatemetrics of protection.A key dimension of protection is the issue of false positives and falsenegatives.  In deciding whether a given piece of material is appropriate or

inappropriate, it is inevitable that some material will be designated as
inappropriate when it should have been designated as appropriateÑer-rors of this type are false positives.  On the other hand, some material will

be designated as appropriate even when it should have been designated
as inappropriateÑerrors of this type are false negatives.Perfect protection (Ò100 percentÓ) is possible only at the cost of manyfalse positivesÑand is in fact simple to provide.  A cable with an air gap
in it (or, equivalently, disconnecting from the Internet) will provide 100
percent protection in the sense that it will screen out all inappropriate
material.  But it will also block all appropriate content as well.  In the real

world, those wishing to provide protection (e.g., parents, school adminis-
trators, and so on) must balance the rate of false positives against the rate
of false negatives.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.190YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETA third dimension of ÒprotectÓ might refer to measures taken to en-
sure that the child suffers no ill effects from being exposed to inappropri-
ate material.  This approach recognizes that absolute protection from in-

appropriate material is impossible to achieve (except at the cost of total
disconnection) and that nurturing a child who is able to place inappropri-
ate material into context, to evaluate and make good judgments about it,
and to deal with it appropriately is an important element of the overall
goal of keeping children from harm.The relevance of these different definitions and dimensions of ÒprotectÓdepends on the developmental maturity of a child.  The range from birth to

18 spans a very broad developmental range in a psychological sense.  What

may be developmentally inappropriate for a very young child may not be
inappropriate for a teenager.  It can be taken as a given that teenagers will be

more interested in sexual matters than will young children, and a site provid-
ing a detailed scientific description of human reproduction, for example, may
be more appropriate for the former than the latter.  Parents and other respon-

sible adults may thus wish to consider developmental factors in weighing the
costs and benefits of different approaches to protection.For example, at very young ages, one might be inclined to shieldchildren from any Internet exposure at all (e.g., confining a very young
childÕs computer experience to CD-ROMs).  As he or she matured, a nextstep might be to allow online experiences only in environments that were
specially created for children.  Then, at a further stage of maturity, one

might seek to educate oneÕs child in safe Internet use and use technologyto screen out objectionable material.  Finally, one might simply allow

unconstrained Internet access but keep an eye on the childÕs Internet ac-tivities.  The assumption underlying such a progression is that as the child

matures, his or her judgment and capability for responsible action grows,
and different kinds of ÒprotectionÓ are necessary.  (All of these options
are discussed in subsequent chapters.)In the context of protecting children from pornography and perhapsother types of material as well, it is also important to distinguish between
protecting children from being exposed to pornography (the subject of
the discussion above) and protecting children from participating in por-
nography (which is the ultimate and primary rationale for laws that
strictly proscribe child pornography).  The discussion below and in Chap-

ters 9 through 13 focuses primarily on protection from exposure, but
addresses protection from participation as appropriate.8.3THE TIME LINE OF PROTECTIVE ACTIONS
Actions can be taken at a variety of times.   Actions can be taken to
protect a child before potential exposure to inappropriate material, at theYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.191APPROACHES TO PROTECTION FROM INAPPROPRIATE MATERIALmoment of that exposure, and after that exposure.  For example, as Chap-
ter 10 discusses, various education and media literacy strategies may help
the child to decide not to be exposed to inappropriate material.  Such

strategies must obviously be implemented before exposureÑthat is, thechild must begin to learn (internalize) norms of appropriate conduct and
behavior.  At the moment of potential exposure, tools such as filters (de-

scribed in Chapter 12) are relevant, because they can help to block expo-
sure to such material.  And, after exposure, a variety of measures (e.g.,

getting help, reporting to a responsible adult) can help to mitigate any
negative effects that may result from such exposure.8.4DIFFERING INSTITUTIONAL MISSIONS
OF SCHOOLS AND LIBRARIESEven the same community, libraries, and schools often have verydifferent policies regarding the need for filtering.  In some communities

visited by the committee, schools had implemented filtering for all school-
based Internet connections, whereas the public libraries in that same com-
munity did not have filters.To understand why such differences might arise, consider the differ-ent purposes served by public schools and libraries.  A public school

serves the primary purpose of providing academic instruction for indi-
viduals who have not attained the age of majority.  Parents send their

children to school in the legally enforceable expectation that school per-
sonnel will take responsible care to protect them from harm and to pro-
vide adequate instruction (i.e., that they will act in loco parentis).By contrast, a public library serves the primary purpose of providinga broad range of information to the entire community in which it is based.
This community includes children, but also includes adults, and the infor-
mation needs of the communityÑtaken as a wholeÑare generally muchmore diverse than those of children and youth in school.6  Thus, given
these differing purposes, it is not at all unexpected that school and librar-
ies have different needs and might take different approaches in seeking6For example, the position of the American Library Association is that Òlibrarians believein supporting a wide variety of information needs,Ó and emphasis should be placed 
Òon thepatronÕs right to choose,Ó an emphasis that is 
Òconsistent with [the library] professionÕscommitment to intellectual freedom.Ó  Further, 
Òlibraries rarely limit what can be read ina library.  Librarians do not search patrons
Õ book-bags for titles the library would not
purchase, or police reading tables to see if patrons are reading materials consistent with
local collection-development policies.  In a similar vein, many libraries offer open access to
the Internet, so that the patron may choose what to read.Ó  See <http://www.pla.org/
publications/technotes/technotes_filtering.html>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.192YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETto protect children and youth from inappropriate Internet material andexperiences.Approaches of schools and of libraries for protecting children andyouth from inappropriate Internet materials and experiences must be as-
sessed against this backdrop.  Some elements of these approaches will be
similar, but it is also to be expected that other elements will be different
because of differences in fundamental purpose.8.5THE POLITICS OF PROTECTION AND
INAPPROPRIATE MATERIALÑWHO AND WHEN?Within this framework of different dimensions of ÒprotectionÓ and
Òinappropriate material,Ó a range of approaches to the definitional pro-cess can be identified.  One approach, rarely stated but often implicit as
the motivating force behind certain policy positions, is the idea that a
particular definition of ÒinappropriateÓ is appropriate for all communi-ties.  Underpinning this approach is the view described in Box 7.2 in

Chapter 7 that inappropriate materialÑand in particular, sexually ex-plicit materialÑcan be so dangerous that even a single exposure of achild can result in very harmful consequences.   Examples to support

this point of view tend to be drawn from the more extreme sexually
explicit material found on the InternetÑand not coincidentally materialthat tends to arouse revulsion in a large segment of the population.
Thus, ÒprotectionÓ of children must be as airtight as possible, and false
positives that improperly classify appropriate material as inappropriate
are preferable to false negatives that improperly classify inappropriate
material as appropriate.7  Note also that if one believes that even one
exposure of a child to such material is likely to have long-lasting and
profoundly negative effects on his or her development, then nothing
less than perfection suffices.  For such individuals, technologies that

seek to isolate and wall off a child from untoward influences are likely
to have considerable appeal.A second approach asserts that individual communities have the right(and obligation) to define for themselves what is inappropriate.  Believers

in this philosophy reject the notion that there are, or that there should be,
universal standards of inappropriateness.  To buttress their view, they

tend to draw on examples of material that many people would not find
inappropriate or offensiveÑinformation that can be characterized as moreÒmainlineÓ than 
Òextreme.Ó  They tend to doubt that exposure to sexually
7Child pornography is an area where a similar philosophy has led to strong legal protec-tions against the harms of child sexual abuse that typically define the material.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.193APPROACHES TO PROTECTION FROM INAPPROPRIATE MATERIALexplicit material will have a damaging impact on most children, and thusare willing to accept false negatives as the cost of avoiding false positives.
For those who believe in the resilience of children when given appropri-
ate guidance, social and educational strategies that teach a child how to
make good decisions about such material and how to cope with it should
exposure occur are likely to have more appeal than approaches that rely
primarily on technology.These two approaches represent polar opposites.  In practice, most
people fall somewhere in between.  That is, they might well say that some

types of material should indeed be universally prohibited, regardless of
community standards (e.g., child pornography), but conclude that for
other types of sexually explicit material, communities should be free to
decide for themselves.A third approach, in general independent of those described above,focuses on empowering children to protect themselves. This approach
calls for adult definition of inappropriate material (and could be defined
either universally or on a community-by-community basis, but in any
event would ideally account for developmental maturity) but focuses on
the child rather than the adult as the primary decision maker.  This does

not mean that adults have no role, or that protective mechanisms are
inappropriate, but rather that reliance on externally driven protective
mechanisms can be reduced as the childÕs judgment increases.  (The ap-
propriate analogy would be that externally driven protective mechanisms
for a child whose judgment is developing and maturing serve the same
role as Òtraining wheelsÓ serve for someone learning to ride a bicycle.)
Under this approach, the goal is not to protect the child from exposure as
an end in itself, but rather to educate the child to cope well with offensive
or inappropriate materials.  This approach is based on the idea that in a

free and pluralistic society, one will inevitably be exposed to material that
he or she may find disturbing, offensive, or distasteful, and that the best
way to deal with such situations is to develop coping mechanisms through
experience.It is also important to consider the time scale over which politics isconducted.  In one site visit to a state generally regarded as politically and

socially conservative, discussion with those familiar with the local com-
munity revealed a difference in the politics associated with schools (which
did have filtering for all its schools) and libraries (which did not).  The

membership of the school board had changed relatively suddenly, on the
time scale of a year (one election), whereas the membership of the library
board changed very slowly.  Thus, filtering could be driven by new mem-

bers of the school board, whereas library board membership was more
stableÑand thus changes to policy took longer to implement in the ab-sence of sustained and demonstrable public concern.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.194YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET8.6TECHNIQUES OF PROTECTION
Chapters 9 through 13 address the challenges of protecting childrenagainst exposure from inappropriate sexually explicit material.  This sec-

tion introduces some general concepts for protection that underpin more
specific approaches:¥Blocking inappropriate material refers to techniques that 
prevent achild from being exposed to material that has been judged to be inappro-
priate.  Blocking protects against both deliberate and inadvertent expo-

sure.  However, all material that is not explicitly identified as inappropri-

ate (Òblack-listedÓ material) is treated as appropriate.  Blocking can be
circumvented by defeating the blocking mechanism, by gaining access to
material that is generically equivalent to the blocked material, or by ac-
cessing that material in a venue that is not blocked.8¥Restricting a child to appropriate material refers to techniques that
give a child access only to material that is explicitly judged to be appro-
priate for him or her.  Children cannot reach inappropriate material be-

cause the only material they can reach has been judged as appropriate. All
material that is not explicitly identified as appropriate (Òwhite-listedÓmaterial) is treated as inappropriate.  Restrictions can be circumvented by

defeating the restriction mechanism or by accessing non-white-listed ma-
terial in a venue that does not restrict the user.  The key difference be-

tween blocking and restricting is that blocking allows access to every-
thing that has not been blocked, whereas restricting gives access only to
what has been approved.¥Warning a child of impending exposure to inappropriate material leaves
him or her with an explicit choice to accept or decline a viewing. Warning
protects against inadvertent exposure to inappropriate material, but not
against deliberate exposure.  As with blocking, all material that is not ex-

plicitly identified as inappropriate is treated as appropriate.  However,

circumvention is unnecessary, because the ultimate decision about whether
to access the material is made by the child.¥Suggesting appropriate material to a child provides direction but does
not foreclose the exercise of choice.  The child may disregard such sugges-

tions, but such suggestions can influence him or her to proceed in Òappro-8Note the existence of Ògray.Ó  ÒGrayÓ may be material that, while not exactly inappropri-
ate for children, is regarded as not particularly helpful to themÑÓwaste-of-timeÓ material.
For example, one could imagine some schools putting Web sites that relate to games, sports,entertainment, and celebrities on a Òblack listÓ because spending time on such sites and
with such material would not be regarded as having educational value.  On the other hand,
creative teachers may well be able to extract educational value from such sitesÑand block-ing such material might reduce the educational opportunities available.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.195APPROACHES TO PROTECTION FROM INAPPROPRIATE MATERIALpriateÓ directions.  Suggestions are, of necessity, more limited than the
entire universe of material that might be regarded as appropriate, and
thus tend to focus on material that is regarded as being of particularly
high value.¥Deterring the access of children to inappropriate material depends on
two factors: detection of access and subsequent penalty.  Detection can be

overt or covert, and penalties can vary across a very broad range, from
social sanction to incarceration.  Deterrence relies on a choice of the indi-

vidual involved to refrain from accessing inappropriate material, a choice
motivated by concern over being detected and of the subsequent penalty.
Thus, deterrence is directly relevant to preventing or reducing deliberate
access to such material.  (However, if the threat of punishment makes the

individual more careful, inadvertent access may be reduced as well.)  The

threat of a penalty being imposed for an inappropriate use detected
through monitoring a childÕs Internet access is an example of an approachthat relies on deterrence.¥Educating a child about accessing inappropriate material has two com-
ponents.  One is much like deterrence, except that the motivation is differ-

ent.  Whereas deterrence depends on the possibility of detection and pun-

ishment, education is an integral part of helping a child choose to refrain
from accessing inappropriate material by inculcating an internal sense of
personal responsibility.  The second component is education about the

Internet and the development of critical thinking that can help the child to
conduct searches that are less likely to turn up inappropriate material and
to recognize inappropriate material more effectively.¥Helping a child to cope with exposure to inappropriate material recog-
nizes that some exposure to such material is likely for most Internet users.
Coping strategies are especially useful for children inadvertently exposed
to inappropriate material and may involve ways of putting such material
into context, understanding the difference between fantasy and reality,
and so on.¥Keeping a child Òon task.Ó  In an environment in which time limits on
Internet access can be enforced, children can be given specific tasks to
accomplish.  If they are held responsible for these tasks (as they might be
in, for example, a school setting), they will simply have less time to seek
out activities that are inappropriate.¥Reducing the accessibility of inappropriate material to children can re-
sult from a variety of actions, including making inappropriate material
harder to find and reducing the amount of inappropriate material on the
Internet.  Supply-side actions have a different structure and are discussed

further in Chapter 9.¥Reducing the appeal of deliberate contact with inappropriate material.This approach leaves the essential content of such material untouched butYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.196YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETmakes the userÕs engagement with the material (and only such material)more difficult, cumbersome, and inconvenient.It is important to note that the techniques discussed above are notmutually exclusive. For example, a message indicating that access to ma-
terial has been blocked can also be accompanied by suggestions for alter-
native but appropriate material instead.  Indeed, combining some tech-

niques may enhance effectiveness; such instances must be determined on
a case-by-case basis.8.7APPROACHES TO PROTECTION
Society has responded to concerns about the possibility that childrenand youth might be exposed to inappropriate material in a number of
ways.  For example, consider the following:
¥By legislative mandate, a ÒV-chipÓ is contained in every new tele-
vision sold in the United States.  The purpose of the V-chip is to give

parents greater control over the television content to which their children
are exposed.¥In many communities, parents have the explicit right to Òopt outÓof school-provided sex education for their own children.9¥Members of a community often complain to schools or public li-braries about materials (usually books) that the complainants feel should
not be available to the public, and especially to children.  The content of

such materials covers a wide rangeÑhomosexuality, drugs, religiouscults, bomb making, human sexuality, and race relations, to name a few.
In some cases, schools and libraries do remove material found to be offen-
sive by members of the local community.However, these examples do not illustrate a social consensus on theirappropriateness or desirability.  For example, most parents do not use V-
chips in controlling their childrenÕs television usage (Box 8.1) and do not9For example, Section 51550 of the California Education Code states,No governing board of a public elementary or secondary school may require pupils toattend any class in which human reproductive organs and their functions and processes
are described, illustrated or discussed, whether such class be part of a course designated
Òsex educationÓ or 
Òfamily life educationÓ or by some similar term, or part of any other
course which pupils are required to attend. . . . Opportunity shall be provided to each
parent or guardian to request in writing that his child not attend the class, [and] no child
may attend a class if a request that he not attend the class has been received by the
school.Available online at <http://www.leginfo.ca.gov/cgi-bin/waisgate?WAISdocID=07839714985+0+0+0&WAISaction=retrieve>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.197APPROACHES TO PROTECTION FROM INAPPROPRIATE MATERIALBox 8.1The V-chipAccording to a study of the Kaiser Family Foundation, parents are deeply con-cerned about sex and violence on TV.  More than 80 percent of parents are con-
cerned that their children are being exposed to too much sex and violence on TV.
Sixty-three percent are Òa great dealÓ concerned and 18 percent are ÒsomewhatÓconcerned about too much sexual content; 59 percent are Òa great dealÓ and 23percent ÒsomewhatÓ concerned about violent content. Nearly half of parents believe
that exposure to sexual content on TV contributes Òa lotÓ to kids becoming involved
in sexual situations before theyÕre ready, and the same proportion believe exposure
to violence on TV contributes Òa lotÓ to violent behavior in children.However, while 40 percent of all parents own a TV equipped with a V-chip, feware using it.  Only 7 percent of all parents have used a V-chip to control their chil-
drenÕs television viewing.   Of those parents with a V-chip, half (53 percent) donÕt

know it, about a third (30 percent) choose not to use it, and one in six (17 percent)
have used it to block shows they donÕt want their children to watch.  Of all parents

who know they have a V-chip, about a third (36 percent) have chosen to use it.Of the parents who know they have a V-chip but do not use it, half say the reasonthey havenÕt programmed their V-chip is that an adult is usually nearby when theirchildren watch TV; a quarter (25 percent) say itÕs because they trust their children to
make their own decisions.  Just 2 percent say itÕs because they think their children

would find a way around it, and just 1 percent say it is because they see the V-chip
as a form of censorship.Far more parents have used the TV ratings system than the V-chip. About half (56percent) of all parents say they have used the TV ratings to make decisions aboutwhat shows their children will watch. This is similar to the percent of parents who
have used the advisories on music (50 percent) or video and computer games (59
percent). A much larger proportion of parents (84 percent) have used the movie
ratings. About a quarter of all parents (28 percent) say that they use the TV ratings
Òoften.Ó  Furthermore, most parents (92 percent) who have used the ratings find them
useful.  About half of the parents who have used the ratings (48 percent) say they are
ÒveryÓ useful.  This is similar to how parents assess the usefulness of the movie

ratings (53 percent say ÒveryÓ useful) and the advisories for CDs (52 percent ÒveryÓ
useful) and video games (52 percent).However, parents have mixed views as to whether TV ratings accurately reflectthe content of shows.  Of the parents who have used the TV ratings, half say that
from what theyÕve seen, most shows are being rated in a way that accurately reflectstheir content; however, 40 percent say most shows are not being rated accurately.
Furthermore, many parents donÕt understand what the TV ratings mean.  For exam-

ple, most parents of children aged 2 to 6 cannot say what the ratings for young
children mean. Just 43 percent can define the rating TV-Y7, 31 percent can define
TV-Y, and only 14 percent can recognize that FV stands for fantasy violence.  More
parents do understand age-based ratings, with 62 percent knowing what TV-14means, 63 percent what TV-G means, 74 percent what TV-PG means, and 47 per-
cent what TV-MA means. Nevertheless, more parents say the content-based ratingsprovide the most useful information.SOURCE: Adapted from Kaiser Family Foundation, 2001, Parents and the V-chip 2001, TheHenry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, Menlo Park, Calif., available online at <http://www.kff.org/
content/2001/3158/Summary.pdf>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.198YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETremove their children from sex education classes in school.10  In the case
of removing materials from libraries, a formal hearing process often guar-
antees that removal will have a high political profile in the community
involved, and constitutional issues arise as well.Nevertheless, there is one example of action taken in this area that thecommittee believes provides a helpful analogy.  In particular, many com-

munities deal with the issue of preventing minors from reading and view-
ing adult-oriented magazines available at a newsstand through a number
of steps.  Children are taught by parents not to seek out such magazines,

and parents refrain from leaving such magazines lying around the house
(social and educational measures).  In the stores, adult magazines are

placed on the highest shelves, so that they are harder for shorter people to
reach (a social measure).  They are sealed in plastic, so that browsing them

in the store is more difficult (a technology measure).  An opaque 
ÒbellybandÓ obscures the picture on the front (another technology measure).
The picture itself, while sexually suggestive, does not depict either overt
sexual activity or the genitalia of the models (a public policy measure).  A

purchaser of such magazines must usually make the transaction face-to-
face with the operator of the newsstand, who can generally distinguish
between a 12-year-old boy and an adult and whose very presence helps to
deter some minors from even seeking to make such a purchase (another
social measure).  And the operator of the newsstand may be subject to

prosecution if he knowingly sells an adult magazine to a minor under
state and local laws that prohibit such sales to minors (another public
policy measure).All of these measures combine into an approach to the sale of adultmagazines that has not absolutely prevented minors from viewing their
contents, but there is not much controversy about the approach, imperfect
though it is.  In other words, there is a rough social consensus that this

approach is for the most part not unreasonable, either in its implementa-
tion or its philosophy.  It provides some protection, though the protection

is not absolute, and the burden it places on magazine vendors and adult
consumers is not particularly significant.  Further, the protection that it

does provide is adequate for publishers and vendors of adult magazines
to be able to plausibly assert that they are taking reasonable steps to keep
such material out of the hands of children.10When given a choice, only 1 to 5 percent of parents remove their children from compre-hensive sexual education classes.  See Kaiser Family Foundation.  2000.  
Sex Education inAmerica: A View from Inside AmericaÕs Classrooms.  The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation,
Menlo Park, Calif.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.199APPROACHES TO PROTECTION FROM INAPPROPRIATE MATERIALHow should one view approaches to protecting children from inap-propriate sexually explicit material on the Internet?   While the discussion

of the corner newsstand above is helpful in understanding how to think
about this issue, cyberspace is unlike a corner newsstand in many ways,
and much of the controversy about inappropriate sexually explicit mate-
rial on the Internet arises because of the differences between the corner
newsstand and cyberspace.   Nevertheless, a reasoned approach to pro-

tection in cyberspace also relies on the three generic elements mentioned
in the corner newsstand issueÑsocial and educational measures, technol-ogy, and public policy.There is a broad consensus that the ideal approach for keeping kidssafe on the InternetÑin any dimension one wishes to considerÑis thepresence of a trusted, responsible adult providing guidance, pedagogy,
and supervision along with encouragement and understanding.  But as a
practical matter, many children are likely to have some degree of unsu-
pervised access to the Internet or other online services (e.g., because of the
infeasibility of continuous parental monitoring of childrenÕs Internet use).While parents with the education, resources, and time to understand and
deal with the problem may approach the ideal described above, others
who do not have these benefits also seek solutions to what they see as a
real problem.It is thus not unreasonable to consider a combination of protectiveelements whose use can reinforce one another, though the closer one can
get to the ideal described in the preceding discussion, the better.  For

example, parents can place computers at home in public places so that
they can better supervise the Internet use of their children.  Schools and

libraries can teach children to avoid behavior that can lead to inadvertent
exposure to inappropriate sexually explicit materials. Technology can be
used to create Internet environments for very young children in which all
content is specifically designed to be age-appropriate and educational.
Public policy measures may be able to reduce the amount of adult-
oriented, sexually explicit material that is accessible without some kind of
age verification.  (All of these elements, and others, are discussed in the

following chapters.)The possibility of such synergistic effects should not be taken to meanthat one particular combination of protective elements is right in all cases.
Furthermore, no combination of protective elements will be free of trade-
offs, both within the space of protecting children and youth from inap-
propriate sexually explicit material on the Internet and with respect to
how this space interacts with other societal issues.  Thus, the appropriate
combination of protective elements will vary substantially across differ-
ent communities and styles of parenting, and it is important that parentsYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.200YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETand communities retain the ability and authority to determine what isbest for their childrenÑand how to make those trade-offsÑin accordancewith their own values.Chapters 9 through 13 address a variety of options for public policies,strategies, and tools, and some of the benefits of coordinating their use.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.201This chapter presents a variety of legal and policy options that thecommittee considered  and discussed during its deliberations regarding

how best to protect children from inappropriate sexually explicit material
on the Internet.  However, it should be kept in mind that the legal and

policy environment today (as this report is being written) is highly fluid
and rapidly changing.  Court cases are being heard, and legislation is

pending on areas such as privacy, elimination of spam, and protecting
kids on the Internet.  Furthermore, even if some of these legal and policy

options are helpful for regulating sources of sexually explicit material
within the United States, a substantial number of sources outside the
direct enforceable jurisdiction of U.S. law will remain.  This fact might

well limit the success of U.S. legal and policy options for regulating
sources of sexually explicit material.Table 9.1 provides an overview of the public policy options describedin this report.9.1VIGOROUS PROSECUTIONS OF OBSCENE MATERIAL
With all of the difficulties described in Chapter 4 in defining obscenity,it is still the case that material deemed obscene is not protected by the First
Amendment.  Federal and state obscenity laws impose criminal and civil

penalties on the production, distribution, and sale of obscene matrial.  In

recent years, however, obscenity prosecutions have been relatively rare.
Such prosecutions can be very difficult, especially in the context of the9Legal and Regulatory Tools
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.202YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETTABLE 9.1  Examples of Advantages and Disadvantages of Various
Public Policy Options for Protecting Children from InappropriateSexually Explicit Material on the InternetOne Illustrative AdvantageOne Illustrative Disadvantage
Vigorous prosecution ofexisting obscenity lawsImposition of civilliability for dissemination
of obscene materialsRequired use of ageverification systems bycommercial suppliers of
adult-oriented sexuallyexplicit materialRequired use of Òtext-onlyÓfront page to en-sure that
first page of Web site is the
ÒwarningÓ page aboutmaterial in-side being for
adults onlyRequired labeling ofmaterial that is obscene
for minorsProhibitions on spamcontaining material that isobscene for minorsProhibitions on mouse-trapping to Web sites
containing material that isobscene for minorsStricter enforcementof record-keepingrequirementsWould clarify existinguncertainties about thefeasibility of obscenity
prosecutionsWould enable privateparties to take actionthrough the court system
when prosecutorialresources are limitedWould reduceinadvertent access tosexually explicit materialfrom adult-oriented
commercial Web sitesWould place a minimalburden on contentprovidersWould reduce unsolic-ited e-mailed advertise-
ments for adult-orientedmaterialWould improve naviga-tional experience forInternet usersWould increase costs ofcompliance with suchrequirements; might
reduce number of
commercial entitiesunwilling to behaveresponsiblyWould require personneland resources that might beused for other law enforce-
ment activity that may be ofhigher priorityWould generally requiresome showing of individua-lized harm, which may be
difficult to demonstrateWould not reduce access forchildren willing to lie abouttheir agesWould require positivemarket response for success(e.g., browsers must be cap-
able of recognizing labels,parents must configurebrowsers accordingly)Content-based restrictionwould make regulation
more problematic on FirstAmendment groundsRegulatory target may beuncertainWould require personneland resources that might beused for other law enforce-ment activity that may be of
higher priorityCurrently under judicial review;see discussion in Section 4.2.4Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.203LEGAL AND REGULATORY TOOLSInternet, where community standards, jurisdictional, and international is-sues abound.Nevertheless, vigorous enforcement may help to persuade operatorsin the adult online industry to change their behavior to act more respon-
sibly in denying access to children.  It may also reduce to some extent the

number of operators of Web sites carrying obscene material by putting
some of them out of business and changing the cost-benefit calculus for
other ÒmarginalÓ operators who would choose to exit the business in a
different regulatory climate.Note that a reduction in the number of Web site operators providingsuch materials is not likely to reduce greatly the ease with which one can
find such material.  The reason is that search engines operate in such a

way that a given search is more or less independent of the number of such
sites.  Thus, if there are 100,000 such sites today, a reduction to 10,000 sites

would not significantly increase the difficulty of finding such material (or
even reduce the likelihood of coming across it inadvertently).1   Thus, it is
likely that the second effectÑpersuading operators to behave more re-sponsiblyÑwould be larger in magnitude.It is also important to note that the problem of defining which com-Streamlined process forhandling reports of
violationsSelf-regulation (e.g.,vigorous enforcement ofISP terms of service)Would facilitate citizenreporting of childpornography; would
reduce interagencyimpediments tocooperation in such
prosecutionsWould likely lead tofaster Òtake downÓ of
material posted inviolation of terms of
service (which generallyincludes material that isobscene or child
pornography)Might increase false alarmsand screening effortrequiredWould require vigorousmonitoring effort on part ofISPTABLE 9.1  (continued)
One Illustrative AdvantageOne Illustrative Disadvantage
1Strictly speaking, the results of a search do depend on the number of Web pages beingsearched: the more pages in the index, the less often the search engine re-indexes/re-
searches the Net for updates and changes.  Thus, Web pages that have recently been added
to the Internet are less likely to be found when the number of pages in the index is large.However, this is a relatively small effect.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.204YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETmunityÕs standards should govern obscenity prosecutions for material onthe Internet is at issue in current litigation regarding the Child Online
Protection Act of 1998 (COPA).  As noted in Chapter 4, the Supreme

Court held on May 13, 2002, that COPAÕs reliance on Òcommunity stan-dardsÓ to identify what material is 
Òharmful to minorsÓ did not by itself
render the statute substantially overbroad for First Amendment purposes,
but was silent on the extent and nature of the community in question.The Court of Appeals reasoned that in dealing with the Internet, un-like other forms of communication, the material is immediately available
in all jurisdictions without regard to conventional geographical bound-
aries.  If local community standards govern the definition of material that

is obscene for minors, then providers will be liable to criminal prosecu-
tion if the material they make available violates the standards of any
jurisdiction in the nation.  In such a situation, providers will censor them-

selves by providing only that sexually oriented material that is not ob-
scene for minors in the most conservative community in the nation.  The

Court of Appeals concluded that such a situation would violate the First
Amendment rights of both providers and of citizens of all of the other
communities in the nation.  This same issue would arise with respect to

traditional obscenity prosecutions for material presented on the Internet.It should also be noted that even if the Supreme Court upholds theThird Circuit Court of Appeals in this instance, this does not necessarily
mean that all legislation intended to serve the same goals as COPA will be
unconstitutional.  For example, one possible solution to this problem

would be to require the government in a prosecution of obscenity on the
Internet to prove that the material is obscene (or obscene for minors)
under both national and local community standards.  The use of the na-
tional standard would avoid the problem that concerned the Third Cir-
cuit Court of Appeals, and the use of the local standard would be neces-
sary to ensure that the material was in fact unprotected in the particular
jurisdiction in which the prosecution takes place.  In any event, this issue
is currently pending.More vigorous prosecution of federal and state obscenity lawsÑre-gardless of the outcomeÑwould help to clarify whether the current state ofaffairs with respect to obscenity prosecutions is due to a liberalization in
Òcommunity standards,Ó a lack of willingness to undertake prosecutions,
or some other factor or factors.  Thus, such prosecution could help to estab-

lish more up-to-date benchmarks for the field, a development that would
provide much-needed guidance for law enforcement professionals dealing
with such issues.  Finally, vigorous enforcement of laws against false and

deceptive advertising and business practices (an example of which is de-
scribed in Section 3.4.2) could help to reduce exposure to inappropriateYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.205LEGAL AND REGULATORY TOOLSsexually explicit material that results from mousetrapping, takeovers ofspam that advertises adult-oriented, sexually explicit sites, and so on.Finally, note also that despite the Supreme Court ruling overturningthe provisions of the Child Pornography Prevention Act relating to
computer-generated imagery (discussed in Chapter 4), there is no bar to
the prosecution of material that is obscene, whether or not it involves
computer-generated images.  Thus, if material depicts a child engaged in
sexual activity, the full weight of the obscenity laws continues to apply
should that material be foundÑthrough the Miller testsÑto be obscene.9.2CIVIL LIABILITY FOR PRESENTING OBSCENE
MATERIAL ON THE INTERNETBecause prosecutors have not been inclined in recent years (i.e., through-out most of the 1990s) to commit substantial resources to obscenity prosecu-
tions, an alternative is to allow private individuals to bring civil actions for
damages against individuals or businesses that purvey obscenity on the In-
ternet.  Under such a regime, any person who finds obscenity on the Internet

could sue the Web site operator for civil damages.  This use of the concept

of Òprivate attorneys generalÓ is not unknown in the law.  But it is exception-
ally rare.Ordinarily, one cannot bring a civil action for damages without show-ing some legally cognizable harm to the would-be plaintiff that has not
been suffered by other persons generally.  For example, if X drives his car

in excess of the speed limit, he cannot be sued for damages by people who
were not individually damaged by his speeding.  Similarly, people cannot

sue for damages a murderer, a thief, or a drug dealer, without a showing
of particularized, specific harm to them as individuals.  Although the idea

of essentially creating a ÒbountyÓ by authorizing such suits has some
appeal, it is generally not consistent with the standards of the U.S. legal
system or the basic goals of U.S. system for civil actions.  And although

civil actions for damages are familiar in the realm of expression (for ex-
ample, civil actions for defamation), they have always required a showing
of individualized harm.A further difficulty is the potential for abuseÑusing the court systemmerely to harass providers of material that one group or another finds
objectionable.9.3OPTIONS FOR DEALING WITH MATERIAL
 THAT IS OBSCENE FOR MINORS
In recognition of the special problems posed by the exposure of chil-dren to sexually explicit material, the Supreme Court held in Ginsberg v.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.206YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETNew York that the government can constitutionally prohibit 
Òthe sale tominors . . . of material defined to be obscene on the basis of its appeal to
them whether or not it would be obscene to adults.Ó  In other words, the
government can prohibit children from having access to certain types of
sexually explicit material that it cannot constitutionally ban for adults.  As

noted in Chapter 4, this doctrine works best in those situations in which it
is possible to separate children from adults, for as the Supreme Court has
also observed, the government Òmay not reduce the adult population . . .to reading only what is fit for children.Ó Thus, in decisions like 
Reno v.ACLU, the Court has made clear that the government may not prohibitmaterial that is Òobscene as to minorsÓ on the Internet unless it can do so
in a way that does not unduly interfere with the rights of adults to have
access to such material.Further, there is a very wide developmental range from birth to the ageof legal majority.  The very concept of speech that is obscene for minors has

never been well defined, but presumably its content varies with the age of
the minor.  This creates a problem for any unitary definition for the term.

Furthermore, what is obscene, either for adults or for children, turns in part
on community standards.  But as noted in Chapter 4, it is difficult to define

or identify community standards when one deals with the Internet.  This

may, or may not, present a constitutional problem depending on the re-
strictions that are imposed on such material (see below).Although an outright prohibition of material that is obscene for mi-nors would therefore be unconstitutional, more finely tuned proposals,
such as those described below, may pass constitutional muster.9.3.1Age Verification
In the Child Online Protection Act of 1998 (COPA), Congress soughtto remedy the deficiencies in the Communications Decency Act of 1997
(CDA) that led the Supreme Court unanimously to invalidate the CDA in
Reno v. ACLU.  (See Chapter 4.)  COPA declares it unlawful to communi-
cate on a commercial Web site material that is obscene for minors by
means of the World Wide Web if the material is available to minors.
COPA states that it will be an affirmative defense if the defendant, in
good faith, takes reasonable measures to restrict access to the material by
minors by requiring a credit card, an adult access code, an adult personal
identification number, or other appropriate proof of age.  As of April

2002, the constitutionality of COPA is currently pending before the Su-
preme Court of the United States in Ashcroft v. ACLU.As noted above, one issue in this case is whether the use of localcommunity standards in the context of the Internet is consistent with the
First Amendment.  Another issue is whether the requirement of age veri-Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.207LEGAL AND REGULATORY TOOLSfication passes constitutional muster.  For example, in a book store one
can require proof of age to purchase a book that is obscene for minors,
thus providing access to adults while denying access to children.  COPA

attempts to establish a similar basis for differentiation between adults and
minors on the Internet.  Because the implementation of age verification on

the Internet requires the use of technology, the objection to COPA is that
it imposes significant costs on the Web site operator and/or the adult
viewers and that by potentially creating a permanent record it violates
legitimate privacy interests and chills the freedom of adult viewers.If the Supreme Court upholds the constitutionality of COPA in Ash-croft v. ACLU, this will appreciably advance the interests of those whoseek to prevent minors from gaining access to material that is deemed to
be obscene for minors.  It will not necessarily meet all of their concerns,

however.  First, COPA applies only to material that is obscene for minors.

The precise definition of this concept remains largely undeveloped, and it
is not clear how far it will reach.  Second, COPA applies only to material

on the World Wide Web.  It does not apply to chat rooms or e-mail.  Third,

COPA applies only to commercial Web sites.  It does not apply to non-

commercial sites.  These three limitations on COPA were necessary to

meet the concerns of the Supreme Court in Reno v. ACLU in invalidating
the CDA.  Fourth, COPA will be effective only to the extent government

actually prosecutes violations with sufficient vigor to have a significant
deterrent effect.  The lack of Internet obscenity prosecutions in recent

years raises questions about whether such prosecutions will occur.  Fifth,
COPA applies only to Web sites in the United States.  For jurisdictional

reasons, federal legislation cannot readily govern Web sites outside the
United States, even though they are accessible within the United States.
Because a substantial percentage of sexually explicit Web sites exist out-
side the United States, even the strict enforcement of COPA will likely
have only a marginal effect on the availability of such material on the
Internet in the United States.  Thus, even if the Supreme Court upholds

COPA, COPA is not a panacea, illustrating the real limitations of policy
and legal approaches to this issue.  The committee also notes that, even if
COPA is constitutional, this does not necessarily mean it is good public
policy.  The concerns raised against COPA could at least arguably lead to

the conclusion that it is insufficiently effective to justify its costs, whether
or not it is consistent with the First Amendment.If the Supreme Court invalidates COPA because age verification pro-cedures in the context of the Internet are too burdensome on the First
Amendment rights of adults, this will make it very difficult to regulate
material that is obscene for minors in this environment.  In the next few

sections, the committee presents several legal and regulatory approaches
that might be available even if the Supreme Court invalidates COPA.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.208YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET9.3.2Plain Brown Wrappers and Age Verification
Many commercially oriented adult Web sites subject the viewer to anassortment of ÒteaserÓ images that are intended to entice a viewer to pay
in order to see more such images.  In many cases, the teaser images in-

clude material that may be obscene.  To prevent minors from viewing

such materials, it might be possible to grant such Web sites a statutory
Òsafe harborÓ immunity from prosecution under obscenity laws if the
provider places the Web site behind a Òplain brown wrapper.Ó2 Such a
ÒnoticeÓ page would contain an appropriate warning indicating that go-
ing past this notice page should be done only if the viewer is older than
18, and that going past this notice page constitutes certification that the
user is indeed older than 18.3  The notice page would contain no images,
or perhaps images that are obscured in the same way that the covers of
adult-oriented magazines are obscured in the newsstands.The purpose of the notice page is to ensure that anyone who reachesthe sexually explicit Web pages of a site has actually read the notice and
agreed to its terms.  However, many sites today have notice pages and it

is still often possible to reach sexually explicit pages on those sites through
search engines that index the pages behind the notice page.  Thus, by

clicking on a link that may be returned by a search engine, the user cir-
cumvents the notice page entirely.To prevent such circumvention, it is necessary to prevent search en-gines from indexing the pages behind the notice page, and a standard
protocol for accomplishing this task is described in Chapter 2 (Box 2.2).
For a site that uses this protocol (the Òrobots.txtÓ protocol), a Web indexer
for a search engine cannot reach the pages behind the notice page, and so
search engines cannot return links to those pages and thus users cannot
access them directly.  Thus, the only way that a user could reach the

contents of the adult Web site would be to go through the notice page.This approach would reduce inadvertent access to teaser images onadult-oriented sites, and thus provide a greater level of denial of such
access than is currently in place.  Of course, this approach would not
2The reason for this approach (of granting immunity from prosecution under obscenitylaws rather than obscene-for-minors laws in exchange for using age verification technolo-
gies and Òplain brown wrappersÓ) is that if it were constitutional to prosecute a Web siteoperator under obscene-for-minors laws, the government would simply do it.  However, if
such prosecutions are found to be unconstitutional, then the Web site is immune from such
prosecutions regardless of what it does with respect to age verification technologies andÒplain brown wrappers,Ó and thus an incentive of a different sort is needed to persuade
them to adopt such measures.  In this case, the incentive is to grant another, different

benefitÑnamely, immunity from obscenity prosecution.3The age of 18 is an age that denotes legal emancipation for a minor, but there is noparticular reason that the age could not be some other number.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.209LEGAL AND REGULATORY TOOLSprevent access by individuals under 18 who are willing to lie about theirage.  To deal with such individuals, it may be possible to add to the plain
brown wrapper an age verification requirement.  That is, in order to get

past the notice page, proof of age would be required.4  (A discussion of
age verification technologies is contained in Chapter 13.)  Such
 a provi-sion might be constitutional, even if COPA is declared invalid, because
the use of age verification is encouraged by the offer of immunity from
prosecution for obscenity, but is not legally required.9.3.3Labeling of Material That Is Obscene for Minors
Another possibility would be to require any commercial provider ofmaterial that is obscene for minors to label that speech in a machine-
readable manner that enables parents and others to technologically block
the access of minors to such material (Section 12.1 has further discussion
of this approach).  Because this approach focuses only on a category

of speech that can constitutionally be restricted for minors, and does
not prohibit adults (or even minors) from accessing it, it may not be

unduly burdensome.  And if the market responds appropriately, the pro-

posal provides parents with a reasonable degree of control over what
their children see.If the labeling requirement is found to present constitutional difficul-ties, a less speech-restrictive approach would be to grant safe-harbor im-
munity from prosecution under Òobscene for minorsÓ and obscenity laws
for those who voluntarily label their materials in an appropriate manner.9.3.4Prohibiting Spam That Is Obscene for Minors
A third approach would be to prohibit any person from sending onthe Internet commercial spam that includes material that is obscene for
minors.  This is less intrusive on First Amendment interests than COPA

because it deals only with commercial advertising and it involves sending
information to individuals who have not requested it or sought it out.4The use of age verification technologies poses a significant privacy issue.  Indeed, in the
cases of the CDA and COPA, the courts reviewing these acts found that these requirementswere unreasonable given the current state of technology and that age verification measuresimpose significant burdens on Web sites because the verification measures require site
visitors to provide personal information.  Because users are reluctant to provide this infor-
mation and are discouraged from accessing sites that require such disclosures, the imposi-tion of age verification requirements may chill or inhibit adults from accessing non-obscene
Web sites, both because they might not wish to give personal information and because theymay not be able to prove their age.  These measures, the courts found, would diminish
access to protected speech and thereby impose significant expense on commercial sites.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.210YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETHowever, this approach is potentially more problematic than COPA be-cause it restricts the sending of such material to adults as well as to chil-
dren.  Unlike COPA, it does not attempt to differentiate between them.
In general, the Supreme Court has held that the government cannotprohibit the sending of constitutionally protected material (including com-
mercial advertising) to individuals who have not expressly asked not to
receive it.  In 
Bolger v. Youngs Drugs Products Corp.,5 for example, the
Court invalidated a federal statute prohibiting the mailing of unsolicited
advertisements for contraceptives because the interest in shielding Òre-cipients of mail from materials that they are likely to find offensiveÓ is not
sufficiently substantial to justify the restriction of Òprotected speech.ÓThe most plausible distinction between the law invalidated in Bolger and
a ban on sending through the Internet commercial spam that includes
material that is obscene for minors is that material that is obscene for
minors is constitutionally protected for adults, but not for children.  This

may not be a sufficient distinction to make a constitutional difference.
More modest versions of this proposal, more likely to withstand constitu-
tional scrutiny, would prohibit any person from sending commercial spam
that includes material that is obscene for minors (a) without appropriate
labeling (e.g., having a warning on the e-mail subject containing a mes-
sage like ÒNot appropriate for children under 16 years of ageÓ), or (b)without prior age verification, or (c) after the recipient has objected to
receiving such material in the past.It is important to note that for speech to be regulated under the com-mercial speech doctrine, it must consist of advertising.  Thus, to the extent

that the constitutionality of the alternatives noted above turns on the
commercial speech doctrine, non-commercial spam or spam that does not
consist of advertising could not be restricted.It is also worth noting that most spam concerning sexually explicitmaterial does not consist of the sexually explicit material itself, but of
links to Web sites that have such material embedded within them.  Thus,
the recipient of the e-mail must affirmatively take some action actually to
reach the Web site (e.g., clicking on the link).  From a constitutional per-

spective, there is a significant difference between ÒinflictingÓ sexually
explicit material on individuals who do not want to be exposed to it and
providing those individuals information about how to find such material.
Even if the former can be regulated, the latter may warrant greater consti-
tutional protection.This observation may be especially important in applying the com-mercial speech doctrine.  From a constitutional perspective, there is a
5463 U.S. 60 (1983).Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.211LEGAL AND REGULATORY TOOLSdifference between giving individuals information about how to obtainan unlawful thing and actually providing them with the thing.  Making

illegal the mere providing of the link might pass constitutional muster if
(a) the material at the link could be determined to be illegal (as it could
sometimes be under obscenity laws) and (b) the party providing the link
is essentially an accomplice under the criminal law.  Requirement (b)

would not be met merely because someone provided information about
how to find obscene material.  However, it would be met if the spammer

is also the operator of the Web site containing obscene materials (or if the
spammer is hired by the Web site operator), because the spam could be
regarded as an advertisement for an illegal product and the provider or
sender punished on that basis.Note that a variety of legislative proposals have appeared with theintent of reducing the problem of spam e-mails.  For example, one federal

proposal calls for prohibiting senders of unsolicited commercial electronic
mail from disguising the source of their messages, and giving consumers
the choice to cease receiving a senderÕs unsolicited commercial electronicmail messages.6  This proposed legislation prohibited senders from in-
cluding materially false or misleading header information and deceptive
subject headings in commercial e-mail, required the inclusion of a valid
return address in commercial electronic mail so that the recipient could
indicate a desire not to receive further messages from the sender, and
penalized further transmissions of e-mail once such a desire had been
indicated.  States have also sought to regulate spam, as illustrated in

Box 9.1.Still another possibility for regulating spam is a mechanism similar tothat for regulating the telephone calls of telemarketers.7  Thus, it might be
feasible for a central clearinghouse to register and maintain specific
e-mail addresses or perhaps even entire domain names as a 
Òdo not spamÓdatabase.  The clearinghouse would also be configured to provide data-

base results automatically.  Any party sending spam would be required to

check the Òdo not spamÓ database and eliminate from its mass mailing all
addresses contained in the database.  Not doing so (and the proof would

be the receipt of a spam by someone contained in the database) would
subject the sender to some civil liability and/or class-action suit.  (Note
6HR 718, the Unsolicited Commercial Electronic Mail Act of 2001, passed the House onApril 4, 2001.7At present, a customer request to refrain from calling must be honored only by thespecific company to which the customer has given notice.  As this report goes to press, the
Federal Trade Commission is proposing to create a centralized national ÒDo Not CallÓregistry that would enable consumers to eliminate most telemarketing calls simply by reg-istering with a central Òdo-not-callÓ list maintained by the FTC.  See <http://www.ftc.gov/
opa/2002/01/donotcall.htm>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.212YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETthat a mechanism of this sort that was specifically aimed at senders ofsexually explicit spam would be much more suspect under the First
Amendment because it would not be content-neutral.)9.3.5Prohibiting the Practice of Mousetrapping to Web Sites
Containing Material That Is Obscene for MinorsAnother approach may be to prohibit the practice of mousetrappingat sites that contain material that is obscene for minors without prior age
verification.  Even if the Court finds COPA unconstitutional, it may be

that the act of directing children to material that is obscene for minors
without their consent or any affirmative act on their part would be up-
held.  The act of mousetrapping involves not only exposing individuals to

material they would prefer to avoid, but rather actually taking over their
freedom of choice and effectively compelling them to view such material.
Whether or not all mousetrapping can or should be restricted, a reason-
able case can be made for prohibiting operators of Web sites from sendingBox 9.1The Washington State Experience with Anti-spam Laws
In 1998, the Washington state legislature passed the Unsolicited CommercialElectronic Mail Act, RCW 19.190.020, which prohibits unsolicited electronic mailthat advertises consumer products with a false or misleading subject line or return
address. Such e-mail is more commonly known as Òspam.ÓIn June 2001, the Washington Supreme Court unanimously upheld the constitu-tionality of the stateÕs anti-spam e-mail law.  The decision involved a lawsuit filed by

the Attorney GeneralÕs Office on October 22, 1998, against an Oregon man, JasonHeckel, and his company, Natural Instincts, of violating the stateÕs new anti-spam lawby sending unsolicited commercial e-mail.  While the subject of the e-mails was to

promote a for-sale booklet titled ÒHow to Profit from the Internet,Ó the subject headerwas allegedly ÒDid I get the right e-mail address?ÓÑa ploy to entice recipients todownload and read his entire message.  In addition, the e-mail allegedly contained an

invalid return e-mail address to which recipients were unable to respond.In March 2000, King County Superior Court Judge Palmer Robinson dismissedthe case against Heckel and his company on grounds that the state law violated the
Commerce Clause of the U.S. Constitution.  But in its ruling overturning Judge Rob-insonÕs dismissal, the Washington Supreme Court found that Ò. . . the only burdenthe Act places on spammers is the requirement of truthfulness, a requirement that
does not burden commerce at all but actually Ôfacilitates it by eliminating fraud anddeception.Õ ÒThe case will be remanded to the Superior Court for trial.SOURCE: Adapted from <http://www.wa.gov/ago/releases/rel_spam_060701.html>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.213LEGAL AND REGULATORY TOOLSchildren without warning or choice to sites that will expose them to mate-rial that is obscene for minors.  A more modest variation would be to

require at least a warning before mousetrapping a viewer to a site con-
taining material that is obscene for minors.9.4ENFORCEMENT OF RECORD-KEEPING REQUIREMENTS
One element of the federal obscenity laws (18 U.S.C. 2257, as dis-cussed in Section 4.2.2) involves a record-keeping requirement intended
to ensure that performers and models depicted in sexually explicit scenes
are older than 18.  More active enforcement of this provision may better

protect minors from participation in the creation of child pornography.8Assuming that strict enforcement of this provision can withstand con-stitutional scrutiny, such enforcement might also have the effect of in-
creasing the rate at which the adult online Web industry consolidates.
Compliance with the regulation would increase the expenses of such pro-
viders, and would be likely to drive out of business the small-scale ÒquickbuckÓ enterprises, while the established adult content providers would
simply absorb those expenses as a cost of doing business.  (At the same

time, as a matter of constitutional doctrine, the intent behind enforcement
is highly relevant.  If these laws are enforced with the intent of driving out

of business otherwise legal business operations, such enforcement might
well raise constitutional questions.)As described in Chapter 3, representatives from the online adult in-dustry testified to the committee that attracting children was not in their
business interest.   Taking this testimony at face value, and assuming that

the Òquick buckÓ providers are the ones that are not discriminating in
their attraction of traffic to their sites (i.e., not distinguishing between
adults and minors), then enforcement of 18 U.S.C. 2257 might result in a
withering of the irresponsible enterprises, leaving behind businesses that
take more seriously their responsibilities to deny access of their wares to
minors.  Note also that the issue of recognizing 
Òsexually explicit con-ductÓ is far simpler than recognizing obscenity, a fact that would simplify
considerably the task of prosecution.98This point is likely to be most relevant in the context of Web sites that depict ÒbarelylegalÓ models engaged in sexually explicit behavior.  Thus, the child pornography at issue
is most likely to be images of an older minor engaged in sexual activity.918 U.S.C. 2257 defines ÔÕsexually explicit conductÕÕ as actual sexual intercourse, including
genital-genital, oral-genital, anal-genital, or oral-anal, whether between persons of the same
or opposite sex; bestiality; masturbation; sadistic or masochistic abuse; or lascivious exhibi-tion of the genitals or pubic area of any person.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.214YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET9.5STREAMLINING THE PROCESS
OF HANDLING VIOLATIONSProsecutors seeking to enforce child pornography laws rely to a sig-nificant extent on lay person reporting of child pornography.  That is, law

enforcement officials may come across such material in the course of their
everyday work, but citizens filing complaints about such material are a
major source of leads and tips.In an Internet environment, the most natural way to file such com-plaints is likely to be electronic.  For example, a concerned citizen lodging

a complaint with law enforcement officials should provide the route to
which the material came to the citizenÕs attention and a description of theimage.  Because images are hard to describe in words, a copy of the image

would be desirable to include in the complaint.  Indeed, in the case of

child pornography, such a copy so forwarded might be the only tangible
evidence that law enforcement officials could obtain, as child pornogra-
phy sites are generally highly transient (and by the time law enforcement
officials are able to act on such complaints, the site may be gone).  How-

ever, if the citizen files an electronic complaint with a copy of the suspect
image, he or she may be in technical violation of statutes that prohibit the
electronic transmission or distribution of child pornography, even though
it is being transmitted to law enforcement authorities or the National
Center for Missing and Exploited Children (NCMEC) and even though
such evidence might be crucial for the investigation and prosecution of
the offender by law enforcement.  Instead, complainants must often go

through a cumbersome and inconvenient procedure to file such a re-
port.10A similar problem affects the NCMEC.  Despite the NCMECÕs role inproviding technical assistance to law enforcement in the investigation of
child pornography, it does not enjoy the same immunity enjoyed by law
enforcement authorities to receive, possess, and store complaints of child
pornography, and it does not have the authorization to transfer evidence
of child pornography from the NCMEC to other designated law enforce-
ment agencies outside the CyberTipline (CTL) system and sometimes
even within the CTL system.1110For example, to report a suspected violation through the NCMEC, they must providethe relevant URL where the image can be found and a textual description of the image.  In
an online environment, it would be much simpler and easier for the citizen to simply for-
ward the image.11The CyberTipline, operated by the NCMEC, is a national reporting mechanism for useby citizens to report to law enforcement authorities apparent instances of sexual exploita-
tion of children; possession, manufacture, and distribution of child pornography; onlineenticement of children for sexual acts; child prostitution; child-sex tourism; and child sexualmolestation.  See <http://www.cybertipline.com> for more information.
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.215LEGAL AND REGULATORY TOOLSRelief for the first problemÑi.e., allowing citizens to report suspectedchild pornography to the NCMEC without fear of prosecutionÑcouldenable and encourage more citizen action in this area, while relief for the
second problem would enable the NCMEC to proactively forward such
evidence to law enforcement outside the CTL system.9.6SELF-REGULATORY APPROACHES
Successful self-regulatory approaches are based on the fact that thefirms in an industry are generally willing to abide by a common code of
behavior, though as noted in Chapter 4, such a willingness may reflect a
desire to stave off legislation or other regulation that these firms would
find more onerous.  One example of self-regulation with respect to certain

media content is the willingness of private producers of TV content to
provide ratings of their content that can be processed by the V-chip.Today, a large number of reported instances of child pornographyremain on Internet service provider (ISP) servers because law enforce-
ment lacks the resources to investigate every report. An approach used in
Europe with some success is employed by the European INHOPE Hot-
lines.  Under the INHOPE approach, European ISPs support a non-gov-

ernmental organization, staffed by trained specialists to identify child
pornography and funded by the ISPs, whose role is to advise Internet
service providers of possible postings of child pornography.12  (Through
Internet ÒHotlines,Ó this organization takes tips from the public, but
screens them for credibility.)  Such advisories do not have any binding

effect on ISPs, but in fact many ISPs cooperate with such advisories by
taking down the offending material because these advisories provide
more authoritative advice than that provided by members of the public.13In a U.S. context, such a function could be provided by the NCMEC,
which currently lacks the authority to provide such advisories.A second facet of possible self-regulatory efforts might include promi-nent placement of the CTL reporting icon on adult-oriented Web sites.
Today, many such Web sites provide links to information on filtering
products, and some even have a banner that says Òfight child pornogra-phy.Ó   It would be simple for these sites to add the CTL icon, which has
proven quite useful in reporting online child pornography.12Note also that the fact of private support by the ISPs is the key component of the Òself-regulatoryÓ dimension of this approach as viewed by the Council of Europe.
13Note that the private terms of service to which users must conform as a condition of anISPÕs service agreement with the user grant ISPs considerably more latitude in the exerciseof such Òtake-downÓ authority than would be possible if they were agents of government
and hence constrained by legal and constitutional barriers.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.216YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETAnother dimension of self-regulation is the willingness of ISPs toenforce the terms of service to which users must agree.  To the extent that

these terms of service prohibit posting or sending of inappropriate mate-
rial, harassment, or other inappropriate behavior (and most terms of ser-
vice do contain some restrictions along these lines), ISPs have the author-
ity to take quick action against offending users without waiting for legal
action.A third example of self-regulation could be set by the commercialsources of adult-oriented, sexually explicit imagery that provide much of
the content for smaller Òaffiliates.Ó  In particular, they could build into
their contracts with affiliates conditions that require those affiliates to
engage in responsible behavior.  Thus, as one possibility, affiliates could

be required contractually to put their content behind the Internet equiva-
lent of Òplain brown wrappersÓ with age verification.  The firms that
supply them with content would be in a position to check on them and
penalize them if they did not (by cutting off a content source).9.7GENERAL OBSERVATIONS
In its consideration of various public policy options to help shieldchildren and youth from inappropriate sexually explicit material on the
Internet, the committee realizes that the viability of many proposals de-
pends on how makers of public policy make certain trade-offs.  Proposals

that depend on regulating a certain type of content (namely, sexually
explicit speech) are inherently more suspect on First Amendment grounds
than proposals that regulate speech independent of content.For example, the committee believes that spam containing materialthat is obscene for minors should not be sent to children.  But laws ban-

ning such e-mail to minors are potentially problematic in an online envi-
ronment in which it is very difficult to differentiate between adults and
minors.  At the same time, a ban of all spam regardless of content may be

seen as too broad because it affects many other interests.The committee also believes that it would be desirable for adult Website operators who exhibit material that is obscene for minors to use age
verification systems so that children would not be able to access such
material.  However, in an online environment in which it is very difficult
to differentiate between adults and minors, it is not clear whether this can
be achieved in a way that does not unduly constrain the viewing rights of
adults.  Thus, as one illustrative example, the government might offer a

grant of immunity from prosecution under obscenity laws to Web site
operators who use age verification systems to prevent minors from ac-
cessing such material.   In this instance, the trade-off is helping to protectYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.217LEGAL AND REGULATORY TOOLSchildren from exposure to certain kinds of inappropriate sexually explicitmaterial in return for limitations on possible obscenity prosecutions.Enforcement of obscenity laws also presents trade-offs.  Increased
prosecution of obscenity would likely require increased resources, and
those resources must be taken from some other activity.  If, as is likely, the

other activity represents prosecutions of other crimes, policy makers must

make the judgment that it would be wise to pursue more obscenity pros-
ecutions rather than other criminal prosecutions, or that more prosecu-
tions for obscenity would necessarily be the best use of additional re-
sourcesÑif such resources are available.  Such judgments are complex
and require a careful weighing of many competing factors well beyond
the scope of this report.Several other general observations follow below:¥While the foundation of protecting children from inappropriateInternet materials and experiences continues to be social and educational
strategies to instill ethics of responsible choice and coping strategies for
inadvertent exposure, public policy has a role in shaping the environment
in which children exercise their choices.¥Actions to remove illegal material from the Internet can occur muchmore quickly if the authority to do so is based on the terms of private
contracts (such as terms of service) rather than the requirements of pub-
lic law.¥Obscenity prosecutions are often difficult to undertake, becausecommunity standards are often not knowable in advance of an actual
trial.  By contrast, child pornography is based on standards that are often
easier to identify (e.g., is this material sexually explicit? versus does this
material violate community standards?) and as such is easier to pros-
ecute, all else being equal.  Nevertheless, more aggressive prosecution of

allegedly obscene materials, even if not always successful, would help to
clarify the status of this instrumentality.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.218A preadolescent boy using an Internet-enabled computer in class issurfing the Internet.  On his search engine, he comes across a link to a

Web site.  He raises his hand and tells his teacher, ÒI think I am about to

go somewhere that I shouldnÕt go.Ó  The teacher stops the class and asks

the student to explain to the class why he thought his surfing might have
been about to take him to a place that he should not have gone.10.1FOUNDATIONS OF RESPONSIBLE CHOICE
Linda Roberts, then at the Department of Education, told the commit-tee the story described above.  The boy involved is arguably less vulner-

able to being exposed to inappropriate material on the Internet than if he
used any technological blocking mechanism for protection.  The reason is

that his Òfiltering mechanismÓ has been internalizedÑand he has internal
criteria for deciding what might constitute inappropriate material.In other words, a child who faces a free choiceÑand chooses respon-sible and ethical options over othersÑis protecting himself.  Thus, the

issue at hand is one that relates to the sense of ethics and responsibility
and the character underlying a free (and often unaided) choice.  Indeed, it

has been frequently mentioned to the committee that those who really
want to obtain inappropriate sexually explicit material on the Internet
will generally find ways of doing so, circumventing all technological mea-
sures to curtail access to such material.  For determined individuals with
10Social and Educational Strategiesto Develop Personal andCommunity ResponsibilityYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.219SOCIAL AND EDUCATIONAL STRATEGIESthe technical skills to do so, only a conscious choice to refrain from suchseeking will reduce his or her access to these materials.Almost by definition, a child is not yet fully mature, even if, as in thecase of adolescents, their physiology may be fully capable of sexual en-
gagement.  No maturing child is immune to temptation. No curious child

is safe from the cyberspace equivalents of touching the hot stove, tum-
bling into the unprotected swimming pool, and getting into any ÒnicemanÕsÓ car.
Children need supervision. They also need love. Parents and teachersprovide both. Children need significant adult reference pointsÑsignifi-cant adults who, in fact, function as reference works. They are there to
answer questions and point inquiring minds in the direction of ÒrightÓ (in
the sense of sensible, ethical, correct, and age-appropriate) answers. Ex-
perimentation is part of the discovery process; reckless endangerment
is not.As children develop morally and ethically, they internalize principlesand values that work from within to prompt external actions.  Once inter-

nalized, they support ÒhabitsÓ and facilitate habitual behavior.  Thus the
role of ethical and moral education is to articulate guiding principles for
the child that can be freely chosen and, once internalized, serve to prompt
appropriate behavior. A person of character is a principled person.  Sig-

nificant adultsÑparents, teachers, coaches, counselors, clergyÑarticulateand explain principles to the young, and the learning role of the latter is to
assimilate them.The problem of developing character is compounded by the impor-tant role of community.  In real life, the presence of a supportive commu-

nity is generally regarded as a major positive factor in the development of
an individualÕs sense of social responsibility and responsible behavior.But in an online environment (especially an anonymous one), a shared
sense of communityÑwith all of the attendant rights and responsibili-tiesÑis hard to develop among individuals who see the Internet in purelyinstrumental terms.1  Anonymity in particular (as would be true in an
environment that does not require individual logins, and as is true for
much Web surfing) enables individuals to escape responsibility and to
avoid negative consequences for inappropriate behavior.2In any event, encouraging youngsters to become principled personsis no easy task.  One path to a principled life focuses on the internalization
1See, for example, Robert Putnam, 2000, Bowling Alone, Simon & Schuster, New York.2True anonymous Web surfing is possible only if one takes special measures to be anony-mous.  Nevertheless, the perception that one is anonymous on the Internet even without
taking special measures is strong, and in any case, a perception of anonymity (or at leastprivacy) can result simply from having a screen that no one else can see.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.220YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETof family values, family traditions, and shared meanings within the fam-ily that can help to shape the developing character of a child, and help
ÒexplainÓ why a given youngster chooses to do this or avoid that.  For
those who are religious, this can include faith-based values in this inter-
nalization process.  These principles and values can serve to help a child

judge what is or is not reasonable in a context broader than the imme-
diacy of pleasure and pain, of Ògetting caughtÓ or 
Ògetting away with it.ÓIndeed, an approach based primarily on punishment presupposesthat children engaging in inappropriate behavior will be caught misbe-
having.  As a practical matter, detection of such behavior will often not

occur, especially if those children seek to remain undetected.  While the

fear of punishment will deter some children, others often do things for
which they might be caught and punished in spite of that possibilityÑfear of punishment is not enough to deter these children from things they
really want to do.  Moreover, the research literature indicates that the

threat of punishment per se is not an effective approach to helping indi-
viduals internalize codes of behavior.3  While such a threat is sometimes
effective in deterring undesirable behavior, individuals who find them-
selves free of the threat often revert to the undesired behavior.These comments do not detract from the positive role that punish-ment or discipline may play as one element of an approach to education.  It
is entirely appropriate to impose sanctions for the deliberate violation of
rules if such rules have been explained clearly and discussion with chil-
dren about their rationale and purpose has been entertained.  But expla-

nation and discussion are essential for putting these rules into context as
appropriate reflections of parental values.Every parent has the difficult task of determining where trust endsand neglect begins. They want to trust their children, and their childrenÑparticularly in the teen yearsÑwant to be trusted.  But parents don
Õt wantto be negligent, and their offspring often find it difficult to appreciate the
tug-of-war within a parentÕs heart between the desire to trust and the fearof neglect.  Though parents might wish otherwise, there is no clear and

simple line of demarcation.For example, as noted in Section 10.4, parents can insist that childrennot have access to a computer in the privacy of their bedrooms. Better to
have it outside in the hall, or downstairs in the family roomÑto have it, inother words, in a place where casual passersby can appear at any time. It
is not that the children arenÕt trusted; it is simply an acknowledgment that3See, for example, M.L. Hoffman, 1988, ÒMoral Development,Ó in 
Developmental Psychol-ogy: An Advanced Textbook, 2nd Ed., M.H. Bornstein and M.E. Lamb, eds., Erlbaum, Hillsdale,
N.J.; and G.H. Brody and D.R. Shaffer, 1982, ÒContributions of Parents and Peers to Chil-drenÕs Moral Socialization,Ó Developmental Review 2: 31-75.
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.221SOCIAL AND EDUCATIONAL STRATEGIESchildren are children and are more likely to do the right thing when theyknow they might be observed.By extension, the character issue touches what is commonly referredto as Òsocially responsible business.Ó This is an area of practical, applied
business ethics.  As in any other industry, those in the adult entertain-

ment industry have a social responsibility not only to provide return to
shareholders but also to behave in ways that promote the good of society.
Because societyÕs best hope for a better future lies with its children, allbusinesses have responsibilities for helping and not hindering the young
along a safe path to mature character development.One dimension of that responsibility is to engage in business linesand practices that uphold human dignity and refrain from exploitation.
But a perhaps more important dimension is to help create an environment
in which children can play, learn, and explore without fear of coming
across material that is inappropriate for them.  Thus, for example, entirely

apart from legal requirements to do so, those in the adult online industry
have important ethical and moral responsibilities to keep their material
away from children, even if that has some negative financial implications.10.2DEFINITION OF A SOCIAL OR EDUCATIONAL STRATEGY
For purposes of this report, social or educational strategies are coordi-nated plans of action that seek to develop in young people the ability to
make responsible and safe choices about Internet use, to make good deci-
sions about content to be viewed, to reduce their exposure to inappropriate
material, and to mitigate the consequences, if any, of viewing inappropriate
material.  These strategies include activities that educate parents and young

people on Internet use and address a variety of issues arising from online
use, such as how to reduce exposure to inappropriate material and how to
give young people skills to mitigate any possible effects they might experi-
ence from encountering sexually explicit or inappropriate material online.Through its deliberations and on the basis of testimony and otherinformation received, the committee has found that social and educa-
tional strategies are foundational for childrenÕs safe, effective, and appro-priate use of the Internet.  This is not to say that technology plays no

roleÑindeed, many technological tools can support the development andteaching of skills, attitudes, and ethical codes of behavior that will enable
young people to use the Internet appropriately.  Rather, exclusive
Ñoreven primaryÑreliance on technological measures for protection wouldbe an abdication of parental and community responsibility and is likely to
be ineffective as well.Table 10.1 provides an overview of the social and educational strate-gies described in this report.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.222YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET10.3CONTEXTUAL ISSUES FOR SOCIAL
AND EDUCATIONAL STRATEGIESNew technology often does not live up to its promises.  One reason is
that because technology changes rapidly for everyone, technology tools
developed to solve problems exposed by other technological develop-
ments may be quickly rendered obsolete.  But a more important reason is

that the underlying issues are social.  It is true that the Internet may haveTABLE 10.1  Social and Educational Strategies for Protecting Children on
the InternetDescriptionOne Illust
rActive, in-person supervision of childÕsInternet useHelp provided by sibling or peer mentoracting as guide to childÕs use of theInternetStatement explicating in detail whatconstitutes acceptable and unacceptableuse of the Internet and whatconsequences flow from the latterExplicit instruction on what constitutessafe Internet behavior and how to
recognize dangerous, inappropriatesituationsFacility in using critical reasoning skillsto obtain information sought and toevaluate the content of information that
is receivedContent specifically designed to appealto children that is non-commercial andeducational and/or positive inorientationInitiatives featuring media spots andpublic service announcements about the
nature of the Internet, the potentialdangers of Internet activity for children,and parental options for exerting
influenceParental supervisionPeer assistanceAcceptable use policies (AUPs)Internet safety education (ISE)Information and media (I/M) literacyCompelling content
Media campaignsYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.223SOCIAL AND EDUCATIONAL STRATEGIESexacerbated public concerns about the access of young people to inappro-priate sexually explicit material, but the Internet is more a symptom than
the basic issue.  Furthermore, those who really want to disseminate inap-
propriate materials or find inappropriate materials on the Internet have
proven adept at circumventing technology-based solutions.  As the tech-

nology improves, so also do its circumventers, in a never-ending game of
action and reaction. This pattern is repeated in almost every instance
where technology is used to thwart undesirable behavior.ildren onOne Illustrative AdvantageOne Illustrative Disadvantage
Probably not feasible to provide constantactive supervision of childÕs Internetaccess, especially as child gets olderOlder sibling may lead younger one intotrouble; non-family peer mentors may
spend little time with childInfractions of AUP may not bediscovered; without concerted attention,may become just one more form to befilled outNo obvious forum in most existingcurricula to include ISENo obvious forum in most existingcurricula to include I/M literacyChild market not preferred by mostbusinesses because adult market is morelucrativeAbsent follow-through in other non-media channels, significant constructive
behavioral changes in parents areunlikelyProvides closest connection to the valuesthat the parent wishes to impart to childProvides guidance and influence to whichchildren may be more responsive (com-
pared to parental advice or assistance)Provides clear behavioral guidelines forchild about what should and should notbe doneProvides clear guidance for child abouthow to conduct himself or herself on the
InternetEmphasizes critical reasoning skills thatare valuable in many contexts other thanInternet useAvailability of such material would helpto divert childrenÕs attention frominappropriate materials and experiencesCan contribute a basic awareness of theissues in a broad segment of the
populationYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.224YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETThe committee believes that the fundamental issue is how to teach ayoung person to make wise choices, to stay in control of his or her online
experiences, to be critical and skeptical about the underlying messages in
advertising and romanticized and sexualized images, and to report other
users soliciting personal information or harassing them.  A young person

who has been taught effectively about such matters will bring that training
to any device that he or she uses and in any venue that offers online access.An analogy might be drawn to children and swimming pools.  Swim-
ming pools pose some threat to the safety and well-being of children.  But

swimming pools provide benefits to their ownersÑand childrenÑin manydifferent ways.  Technology
Ñin the form of fences around pools, poolalarms, and locksÑcan help protect children from drowning in swimmingpools.  However, teaching a child to swim
Ñand when to avoid poolsÑis afar safer approach than relying on locks, fences, and alarms to prevent him
or her from drowning.  Does this mean that parents should not buy fences,
alarms, and locks?  Of course not
Ñbecause they do provide some benefit.But parents cannot rely exclusively on these devices to keep their children
safe from drowning, and most parents recognize that a child who knows
how to swim is less likely to be harmed than one who does not.  Further-

more, teaching a child to swim and to exercise good judgment about bodies
of water to avoid has applicability and relevance far beyond swimming
poolsÑas any parent who takes a child to the beach can testify.Note also that social and educational strategies are the only way to dealwith young people determined to seek out inappropriate material.  Those

who are determined are bound to find ways to circumvent any technologi-
cal measures; to the extent that social and educational strategies can reduce
the desire and motivation for seeking out inappropriate material or engag-
ing in inappropriate activities, such behavior can be reduced.  When tech-

nological protection does not work, or when it is not present, the individual
involved must rely on his or her own internal resources to cope with the
issue, whether it is in choosing to refrain from Ògetting into troubleÓ or
knowing how to cope with whatever trouble arises.In designing social and educational strategies, developmental issuesare critical. For example, very young children are generally not capable of
handling a full range of unconstrained choices.  However, as they gradu-
ally mature, it is usually appropriate to give them a wider range of choices
and increasing amounts of responsibility.  Of course, the nature and scope

of increased freedoms to choose are not generally based solely on age, but
for most young people, age is a relevant factor in teaching them increas-
ingly mature and responsible behavior.44In some ways, the developmental issue is similar to that of learning to drive.  Licenses
for driving an automobile in all states are graduated to some extent (learnerÕs permit andYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.225SOCIAL AND EDUCATIONAL STRATEGIESFor example, one time-honored practice of good parenting is to teachchildren to make responsible decisions by sharply constraining their choices
at first and then broadening the universe of choices as they grow more
mature and more capable of making informed and wise decisions.  Of

course, under these circumstances, children may make some mistakes and
injudicious choices.  But when the universe of choices is limited to those

that are at least minimally acceptable, children have a chance to learn how
to make good choices by exercising choice.  Further, the decision-making

skills they acquire in doing so can be carried over to their later livesÑinwhich the universe of choices is not composed exclusively of safe options.A major point to be considered about social and educational strate-gies is that they are not simple to implement.  They require forethought,

planning, and extensive follow-through.  They can be costly, both in terms

of dollars and in terms of time.  Often, they conflict with other pressing

needs.  For example, most K-12 curricula are already overloaded, and

information and media literacy curricula must compete for time in the
schedule with physical education, sex education, consumer literacy, and a
variety of other pressures on the curriculum.  Pediatricians, who can speak

with youth about safety and puberty, and must complete health forms to
be submitted to schools, have limited time with each of their young pa-
tients.  Parental efforts must compete with making sure that children

clean their rooms, do their homework, get to the soccer or basketball
game on time, avoid unhealthy use of drugs and alcohol, and so on.On the other hand, if the problem of exposure to inappropriate mate-rials and experiences is as severe and consequential as many parents
believe it to be, there is no particular evidence indicating that the cost of
such programs is exorbitant.  Moreover, the benefits that accrue from

effective social and educational strategies go far beyond protecting chil-
dren and youth from inappropriate sexually explicit material.  They have

relevance to many situations that individuals are likely to encounter, both
online and offline, and will help them to navigate their Internet experi-
ences with confidence and wisdom.10.4PARENTAL INVOLVEMENT AND SUPERVISION
There is a broad consensus that the best approach to protecting youngpeople on the Internet from inappropriate material and online predatorsfull driving privileges), and in some cases more finely (e.g., teens with solo driving privi-leges only during the day).  While the notion of government licensing for using the Internet
is not particularly appealing or sensible, the idea of age-based expectations for appropriate
Internet use makes developmental sense.  Parents may wish to consider what skills and
knowledge related to the Internet they want their children to have before they give themdifferent degrees of unsupervised Internet access.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.226YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETis the attentive presence of a responsible parent, teacher, librarian, ormentor who is available to provide help and guidance, and to intervene
when necessary.  While this image does characterize some family situa-

tions, parents in most families are pressed for time. Parents in many fami-
lies today face long workdays, long commutes, and considerable work-
related overnight travel.  Single-parent households are common, as are

families in which both parents work full time.  These facts suggest that

continual in-person supervision of a childÕs Internet usage by a parent isnot likely to be achieved by many families.Notwithstanding limits on the time that parents have available, par-ents can still take actions in the home setting that can help their children
to develop a sense of safe Internet use.   No one action is definitive, and

nothing effective can be done just once, but no sensible parent has ever
imagined that the task of parenting and of teaching oneÕs children theskills in navigating through any aspect of life would be easy.¥Parents can develop a basic understanding of what is on the Internet and
what their children can do with it.  The Internet world that most adults inhabit
is far more work-centered than the one inhabited by most children, which
focuses on social interaction, entertainment, and spontaneous play to a far
greater degree.  (This suggestion is not much different from the advice

given in a non-Internet context that parents should be aware of the movies
and TV shows and music that engage a childÕs attention.)Such understanding is useful from two perspectives.  Parents who do
not know what their children can do and see on the Internet may be
overly complacent about the dangers to their children.  Also, parents who

do not know the routes through which their children can be exposed to
such inappropriate material and dangerous experiences may be exces-
sively fearful because they lack perspective on the ease or frequency with
which such exposures might occur.  It is noteworthy that a Pew Internet

and American Life survey found that parents who do not use the Internet
themselves generally tend to be more concerned for their childrenÕs Inter-net safety than parents with more online experience.5Parents also learn from more experienced parents, child-care work-ers, and pediatricians, about age-appropriate Òharm preventionÓ steps to
take in homes: remove lead paint; install child-resistant clips on drawers
where chemicals, knives, or guns are kept; install child-resistant covers
for electric outlets; teach children never to use the stove without an adult5Pew Internet Project.  2001.  
Teenage Life Online: The Rise of the Instant-message Generationand the InternetÕs Impact on Friendships and Family Relationships.  Pew Internet and American
Life Project, Washington, D.C.  Available online at <http://www.pewinternet.org/reports/
reports.asp?Report=36&Section=ReportLevel2&Field=Level2ID&ID=217>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.227SOCIAL AND EDUCATIONAL STRATEGIESpresent; obtain and use bicycle helmets; and so on.  Inquiries to these
more experienced and knowledgeable individuals could result in analo-
gous recommendations to new parents regarding Internet safety.¥Computers can be located in such a way that private, solitary viewing bychildren is not possible.  For example, computers located in private bed-
rooms cannot be supervised as easily as computers in public spaces (e.g.,
in family rooms or dens).  When the potential exists for a responsible

adult to happen across a screen displaying possibly inappropriate mate-
rial while the child is there, the child is likely to be motivated to refrain
from deliberate misbehavior.  Moreover, if the child encounters some-

thing upsetting or inappropriate by mistake, it is more likely that he or
she can obtain help more quickly and spontaneously.  Also, if a computer

is located in a public space, the adult supervisor can more easily wander
over to inquire about what the child is doing.¥Parents and their children can discuss household rules and expectationsfor a childÕs use of the Internet.  Issues to discuss may include:
6ÑWhen and under what circumstances Internet use is permissible,ÑThe amount of time that a child may spend using the Internet,ÑThe types of activities and Web sites that are acceptable andunacceptable,ÑWhat information may be given out or disclosed when using theInternet, andÑWhat should be done if the child becomes uncomfortable in us-ing the Internet.It may also be helpful for parents and children to discuss expectationsfor the use of the Internet at school. Depending on a given familyÕs values,a schoolÕs acceptable use policy may allow certain Web sites or activitiesto which a parent might object.¥Parents can explicitly provide instruction and guidance to their childrenabout inappropriate activities and explain why their viewing of sexually explicit
materials may be inappropriate.  Parents at one committee site visit went so
far as to argue that the best way to educate children about inappropriate
sites was to show them some inappropriate sites and engage in a conver-
sation with them about why they were inappropriate.  For these parents

(and for a number of those who testified to the committee as well), the
problem posed by sexually explicit material was not inherent in the sexual
explicitness of the material itself, but rather the lack of a responsibly
presented explanatory context.  In other words, the concern was not so
6This list is derived from Nancy Willard, 2001, ÒSupporting the Safe and Responsible Useof the Internet by Students: A ChildrenÕs Internet Protection Act Planning Guide,Ó Center
for Advanced Technology in Education, College of Education, University of Oregon, avail-able online at <http://netizen.uoregon.edu/documents/cipa.html>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.228YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETmuch that exposure to the material itself would be harmful, as the factthat without good explanations for why the material was inappropriate,
children would get the wrong messages from it.¥Parents can set limits for how much time a child may spend online.When time is constrained, people are more likely to concentrate on the
activities that they value most highly.  To the extent that children seek out

inappropriate material out of idle curiosity, these are the activities that
are most likely to be curtailed in the presence of time limits.¥Parents can become more aware of tools and programs for Internet safetyalready available to them.   For example, parents may not know about the
resources of GetNetWise (Box 10.1) or about the suggestions on the
ChildrenÕs Partnership Web site on strategies they can use at home toguide their childrenÕs Internet use (Box 10.2).  Parents may also not
know about the educational programs offered by their local libraries or
by non-profit groups in their area and as such are missing other oppor-
tunities to receive training and assistance in this effort (Box 10.3 pro-
vides an example).¥Parents can learn to deal with the fact that their children may be moreadept technologically than they are.  It is accepted wisdom that many chil-
drenÑespecially adolescentsÑknow more about technology than do theirBox 10.1GetNetWiseGetNetWise is an industry-sponsored organization whose purpose is to create asafe, rewarding, and enjoyable experience for children online. GetNetWise is a user-friendly, family empowering, online resource that contains aggregated and syndi-cated content, organized into four themes:¥Internet Safety GuideÑResources based on age-level, risk area, and technology;
¥Tools for FamiliesÑA comprehensive guide to consumer products that allow
families themselves to monitor Internet use, filter unwanted content, or control com-puter use;¥How to Report Online TroubleÑInformation on recognizing and resolving
Internet crime with links to law enforcement offices and childrenÕs advocacy groups;¥Guide to Kids ContentÑPointers and information about online content that is
educational and helpful for kids.GetNetWise is intended to be a resource for those seeking to be wise onlineparents, and seeks to provide help to anyone involved in raising childrenÑparents,
grandparents, educators, caregiversÑeveryone concerned with the routine responsi-bilities of raising children in the digital age.SOURCE: For more information, see <http://www.getnetwise.org>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.229SOCIAL AND EDUCATIONAL STRATEGIESBox 10.2Age-Based Tips for Guiding ChildrenÕs HomeInternet Use from the ChildrenÕs Partnership
Ages 2 to 3: Computers need not play much of a role in the youngest childÕs life.However, it doesnÕt hurt for very young children to see family members usingcomputers and enjoying themselves online. Tips:¥Put your child in your lap as you ÒplayÓ on the computer.
¥Look for books and childrenÕs video programs like Sesame Street that includeimages of children and family members using a computer.Ages 4 to 7: While serious computer use isnÕt a priority for these youngsters,children at this age can begin to make greater use of computer games and
educational products. Tips:¥Spend as much time as you can with your child while he or she uses thecomputer.¥Show lots of tangible results and achievements. For example, print work yourchild has done on the computer.¥Share an e-mail address with your child, so you can oversee his or her mailand discuss correspondence.Ages 8 to 11: At this age, children can begin to directly experience and appreci-ate more fully the potential of online experiences. For instance, children can
begin to use online encyclopedias, download pictures for school reports, or havee-mail pen pals. Tips:¥Set very clear rules for online use and clear consequences if they are broken.¥Teach children to let you know if they encounter anything scary or unusualonline.¥Discuss some of the unique aspects of behavior in cyberspaceÑlike anonym-ity and what it means for your child and for others.Ages 12 to 14:
At this age, young people can use the more sophisticated researchresources of the information superhighway, accessing everything from the Library
of CongressÕs collection to magazines and newspapers to archives from aroundthe world. Tips:¥Since children of this age are more likely to explore on their own, set up clearparental rules, limits, and periodic check-ins.¥Set clear rules about which chat rooms are acceptable for your teenager, andhow much time can be spent there.¥Be sure your children understand the actions that can be taken if peopleharass them online or do anything inappropriate.¥Pay particular attention to games that your teenager might download or copyas some of these games are extremely violent.(continues)Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.230YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETAges 15 to 18:
The Internet provides a rich resource for older teens, includinginformation about job opportunities, internships, and colleges; applications to
create multimedia reports; and specialized help with foreign languages and otherschool subjects. Tips:¥Ask your teenager for help researching topics of interest to the family (follow-up on a family discussion, planning a family vacation, and so on).¥Talk to your teenager about new things online and encourage discussion ofnew experiences.¥Make sure your teenager knows the legal implications of online behavior.¥Watch time limits to make sure your teenager is still pursuing a well-roundedset of activities.¥If your teenager is especially interested in computers, encourage him or her tohelp younger children with their online explorations (e.g., at the local Boys or GirlsClub).SOURCE: Wendy Lazarus and Laurie Lipper. 1998. The ParentÕs Guide to the Information Super-highway, The ChildrenÕs Partnership. May.  A complete copy of the guide is available at <www.
childrenspartnership.org>.Box 10.3An Illustrative Internet Safety Program for Parents
The Internet and Your Child is a comprehensive Internet safety and educationprogram for adults in many states, including Alaska, California, Colorado, Connect-
icut, Georgia, Idaho, Indiana, Kansas, New Jersey, North Dakota, Oregon, Texas,and Washington.  Taught by volunteer law enforcement officers and computer pro-
fessionals, the program offers 7 hours of instruction covering:¥Computer hardware and software basics,¥Windows basics,¥Getting connected to the Internet,¥Internet addressing,¥Newsgroups,¥E-mail,¥Hacking,¥Protecting your privacy,¥Internet fraud,¥Sex crimes,¥Internet chats,¥Filtering and blocking unwanted sites with software, and¥Searching the Internet for information on you or your child.SOURCE: See <http://www.theinternetandyourchild.org/>.Box 10.2  (continued)
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.231SOCIAL AND EDUCATIONAL STRATEGIESparents, and this often makes parents feel inadequate or incapable of pro-viding guidance or setting boundaries about their childrenÕs Internet activi-ties.  Yet, while many children have superior technical skills, parents are

still role models capable of exerting strong influence over the social, moral,
and ethical development of their children.  Furthermore, a noteworthy

body of research indicates that parental involvement in their childrenÕsmedia activities is beneficial for young peopleÕs development.7  To cope
with a lack of technical knowledge, parents can learn about the technology,
as described above.  They can also learn about the technology from their

children, and learn to listen non-judgmentally so that the child will feel
freer to explore situations in which parental input may be helpful.¥Parents can be aware that their children are often more confident in theirabilities to handle themselves online than their actual abilities warrant.  For
example, a study by the Girl Scout Research Institute found that girls
sometimes Òrely too much on their own judgment in making decisionsabout how to behave online.  When asked how they know what is safe or

unsafe behavior on the Internet, 84 percent of online respondents cited
their own common sense. By contrast, 51 percent of these girls cited learn-
ing from parents, 46 percent said television and the media, 29 percent said
teachers, 29 percent said friends, and 4 percent said, ÔNothing is that badonline because it is not really real.ÕÓ8  In one committee site visit, a girl ofabout 15 said that she would never meet anyone face-to-face if she felt
uncomfortable about him (or her).  She also said she knew that people lied

all the time online.  But 30 seconds later she said that she could tell when
people were lying and that she trusted her instincts.¥Parents can set good examples for responsible Internet use.  For ex-
ample, a parent who views sexually explicit imagery online may well
leave traces of such viewing available for his or her child to find later.
This may be quite all right if the parent would not object to his or her child
seeing such material.  But a parent who would object would not be wise to

undertake activities that would raise questions in his or her childÕs mind.Also, a parent who demonstrates a disregard for the privacy of his or her
children may find that they are less than careful with respect to marketers
and survey takers about sensitive family information such as income or
buying practices.  Put another way, if a parent tracks a child
Õs onlinebehavior and the child has no privacy, then the child may not respect7National Research Council and Institute of Medicine.  2001.  
Nontechnical Strategies toReduce ChildrenÕs Exposure to Inappropriate Material on the Internet: Summary of a Workshop.Board on Children, Youth, and Families and Computer Science and Telecommunications
Board, Joah G. Iannotta, ed., National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.8Whitney Roban.  2002.  
The Net Effect: Girls and New Media.  Girl Scout Research Institute,
New York.  Available online at <http://www.girlscouts.org/about/PDFs/NetEffects.pdf>.
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.232YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETfamily privacy if and when opportunities arise to profit from other familymembersÕ private information.
A second example arises with the idea of parental review of the sitesvisited by youngsters on the Internet.  If children know this is happening, will

they welcome it as a necessary ÒgovernorÓ of their choices, or resent it as a
violation of their privacy and an indication that they are not trusted?  At

younger ages, they are likely to not object, but as children get older, they
often develop a sense of personal space about which they are very protective.The difficulties of engaging in effective parental communications withchildren are significantÑand parents who think they are talking effec-tively with their children about Internet use may not in fact be doing so.
For example, a survey taken by the Kaiser Family Foundation and Na-
tional Public Radio in 2001 noted that parents were more likely than their
children to think that they have rules in place about what their children
can do on the computerÑthat is, about three-fourths of all parents inter-viewed said that they have such rules, but only half of all children inter-
viewed agreed.9  Further, only 38 percent of older children (aged 14 to 17)
said that their parents know Òa lotÓ about the things they do on the
Internet and the Web sites they visit.The discussion above regarding things that parents can do to pro-mote and facilitate the safety of their children on the Internet is presented
only in outline form, and the committee does not believe that, by them-
selves, these guidelines and tips provide an actionable agenda. To be a
real guide for concrete action, much more in the way of specifics is needed.However, to the committeeÕs knowledge, there is no comprehensivecurriculum for parental education about the Internet.  Many of today
Õsworkshops emphasize what parents must be afraid of, but they omit affir-
mative steps that parents can take.  As one example, the list above suggests

that parents talk to their children about what counts as inappropriate mate-
rial.  But such conversations can be very awkward for parents.  What are

some sample dialogs or approaches that a parent might use to raise the
subject?  Providing such dialogs is beyond the scope of this report, but

resources must be made available to help parents address such issues.Box 10.4 provides some speculations on ideas for promoting parentaleducation (and Internet safety education, which is discussed in Section
10.8.1).9See <http://www.npr.org/programs/specials/poll/technology/>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.233SOCIAL AND EDUCATIONAL STRATEGIES10.5PEER ASSISTANCE
For certain topic areas, many and perhaps most youth learn as muchfrom peers or near-peers (e.g., siblings) as they do from parents, teachers,
and other adult figures.  Indeed, a Department of Justice report finds that
[F]or many children, having an older youth to talk to and spend timewithÑsomeone who provides encouragement and friendshipÑcanmean the difference between dropping out of school and graduating, orbetween getting involved with drugs and developing the strength andself-confidence to resist such pressures. Youth involved in mentoring
programs, in fact, have been shown to be less likely to experiment withdrugs, less likely to be physically aggressive, and less likely to skipschool than those not involved in such programs.   Peer mentors provide

the important extra support that many younger people need to make itthrough a difficult period in their livesÑwhen peer pressure and thedesire to fit in are strong influences. . . .  Peer mentoring programs match

older youth with young students in one-on-one relationships to provideguidance for the children. Through this special relationship, peer men-Box 10.4Speculations on Ideas for Promoting ParentalEducation and Internet Safety Education¥Television and other mass-market entertainment programming that providesrole models for parents interacting with their children in ways that enhance Internet
safety¥Interviews on TV and radio talk shows during which concrete tips on Internetsafety can be provided to parents¥Short courses on Internet safety offered by schools, libraries, and communitycenters¥Links to training in computer ethics and codes of responsible behavior¥Discounts for Internet service provider subscriptions for parents who com-plete a program of online training in Internet safety¥Awards to youth of various ages for achieving age-appropriate levels of Inter-net proficiency, to include appropriate safety knowledge and education. Such a pro-gram might be modeled on the physical fitness awards given to youth on behalf ofthe PresidentÕs Council on Physical Fitness and Sports1¥Graduated privileges for Internet use at school as a function of the safetyinstruction a student has completed¥Government or foundation support for developing Internet safety curricula forparents and youth1The program is known as the PresidentÕs Challenge. More information can be found onlineat <http://www.fitness.gov/challenge/challenge.html>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.234YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETtors provide advice and support and serve as role models for youngerpeople who need help.10Of course, mentoring is also beneficial for the older youth in that theyare put in a position of responsibility and often rise wonderfully to the
task. Older youth may be more likely to stay out of trouble and make even
better decisions because they know that they have someone watching and
potentially imitating their behavior.Given research supporting the notion that peer or near-peer mentoringof youth may be quite helpful to some young people in avoiding crime and
drugs and staying in school, it is not unreasonable to suppose that such
relationships may be helpful in promoting appropriate use of the Internet.
For example, a program of the Chicago Public Libraries trains college stu-
dent volunteers to help users with computer technology in the library.
They receive a week of training, and then they wander the floors of the
library to help young users on the Internet.  For example, they provide

surfing suggestions that steer users to educational sites.  These young users

learn about the Internet but also have the opportunity to interact with
somewhat older college students who serve as role models.  Not inciden-

tally, these volunteers also provide monitoring of usage that helps to keep
children away from inappropriate or non-enriching Internet material.Older siblings can be a particularly rich source of peer assistance.  For
example, in a number of site visits, older adolescents often expressed
concern about the Internet experiences of their younger siblings, and tried
to help them stay out of trouble on the Internet by providing advice and
guiding them to appropriate sites.Note also that summer programs (e.g., camps) could also provideInternet safety instruction in an environment where youth are relaxed.
Camp counselors are often older youth and may be able to provide semi-
structured mentoring and guidance.Peer assistance works best when there is a broad consensus amongthe peers that certain behavior is inappropriate or unsafe.  Thus, peer

assistance is likely to be most effective in steering children away from,
say, would-be child molesters or racist or hate sites.  However, if the peer

assisters themselves do not believe that exposure to adult-oriented, sexu-
ally explicit material is a big deal (as may be the case for some individu-
als), they are less likely to be as vigilant or zealous in their efforts to
provide assistance.10See Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, 1999, MentoringÑA ProvenDelinquency Prevention Strategy, U.S. Department of Justice, Washington, D.C., availableonline at <http://www.ncjrs.org/html/youthbulletin/9907-4/mentor-*.html> (where Ò*Óranges from 1 through 8).Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.235SOCIAL AND EDUCATIONAL STRATEGIES10.6ACCEPTABLE USE POLICIES
An acceptable use policy (AUP) is a set of guidelines and expectationsabout how individuals will conduct themselves online.11  AUPs are in-
creasingly common in schools, and they are applicable to home and li-
brary use as well (especially when Internet access is conditioned on ac-
cepting terms that accompany a library card).  AUPs vary, but they almost

always contain provisions against viewing sexually explicit Web sites,
and perhaps other kinds of material (e.g., instructions for bomb making,
hate sites).  AUPs can also address outgoing material, such as child-posted

e-mail and Web sitesÑsuch provisions are generally directed toward thepossibility that one child might create and disseminate sexually explicit
pictures as well as harass, defame, and stalk other children.  Furthermore,

AUPs must be acknowledged explicitly by those affected.  An example of

one schoolÕs AUP is provided in Box 10.5.The theory of the AUP is that by making young people responsiblefor the content they create and the behavior that they demonstrate, they
will learn to be responsible for making good choices about the ÒpathsÓthey choose in cyberspace, thereby learning skills that are relevant and
helpful in any venue of Internet usage.  Of course, for an AUP to be

effective, deliberate violations cannot go without response or sanction
(e.g., loss of Internet privileges, call to parents, detention if violations
occur in a school context, grounding if in a home context).  Accidental

violations should be seen as an opportunity to educate the user about
how to avoid such content in the future, how to remove it from the screen,
and if necessary how to report it to an Internet service provider.Furthermore, AUPs must be read, and young people must take themseriously.  In a number of site visits, students appeared relatively igno-

rant of what their schoolÕs AUP stated.  A number of teachers noted that
they believed AUPs were not generally read, because they were simply
one of a large number of forms that students had to bring back signed.
(This is consistent with recent research suggesting that students often do
not recall the content of the AUPs they signed earlier in a school year, and
with the finding that some who signed them do not even remember hav-
ing done so).12  Thus, some explicit attention in the school, library, or
family to the AUP is warranted to underscore its importance.11The term ÒAUPÓ is sometimes applied by Internet service providers to their rules of
use; more generally, such rules are known as terms of service.  Terms of service for ISPs arenot intended to govern childrenÕs use of the Internet, but rather are put into place to protectthe ISP from legal liability and conduct (such as sending spam) that reduces network
efficiency.12Janet W. Schofield and Ann L. Davidson.  2002.  
Bringing the Internet to School: Lessonsfrom an Urban District.  Jossey-Bass, New York, pp. 319-320.
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.236YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETAs a rule, AUPs are most effective when they are developed in con-junction with parents, community members, teachers, school library me-
dia experts, school administrators, and students.  AUPs developed jointly

with the school and community are more likely to incorporate the par-
ticular sensibilities of parents and can be designed to address specific
concerns, resulting in higher degrees of buy-in, acceptance, and legiti-Box 10.5Acceptable Use Policy of Eau Claire,Wisconsin, Area School DistrictThe Eau Claire Area School District offers a good example of policies that establisha set of expectations about the manner in which students and staff will use schoolnetworks and technologies. This acceptable use policy sets rules about a number of
topics and includes guidelines to facilitate safety online, as well as respect for copy-
righted materialÑrelevant to preventing students from using the InternetÕs resources toplagiarize material. It forbids use of the Internet for activities that are not in support of

the educational objectives of the school district.  What follows is the Eau Claire Area
School DistrictÕs acceptable use policy, the full text of which can be found online at
<www.ecasd.k12.wi.us/departments/technology/network/inetpol.html>.Use of the Internet and Other Computer NetworksThe Internet is an electronic network connecting thousands of computer net-works and millions of individual subscribers all over the world. Access to the
Internet will allow students to explore the rich resources of thousands of univer-sity libraries, governmental databases and other online sources while exchangingelectronic mail with Internet users throughout the world. Instructional and library
materials are routinely evaluated by school district personnel prior to purchase inorder to ascertain that such materials are consistent with district goals and guide-lines and that they support and enrich the curriculum. However, use of the Inter-
net, because it may lead to any publicly available fileserver in the world, mayopen classrooms to electronic information resources which have not beenscreened by educators for use by students. Some items accessible via the Internet
may contain material which is inaccurate, defamatory or offensive.  Access to the
Internet and other computer networks requires that school officials developguidelines for use. Such guidelines should address the teacherÕs responsibility fortraining and guidance, the studentÕs responsibility for appropriate use, and theprincipalÕs responsibility for supervising the use.Internet and Other Computer NetworksÑUse GuidelinesThe following guidelines define Òappropriate useÓ of the Internet.
1.All use of school resources to access the Internet must be in support of and
consistent with the educational objectives of the Eau Claire Area School District.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.237SOCIAL AND EDUCATIONAL STRATEGIES2.Transmitting any material in violation of any U.S. or state regulation or
school board policy is prohibited. This includes, but is not limited to, copyrightedmaterial and material that is threatening or obscene.3.Hate mail, harassment, discriminatory remarks and other antisocial behav-
iors are unacceptable in Internet and other network communication.4.All information accessible via the Internet should be assumed to be private
property and subject to copyright protection. Internet sources should be creditedappropriately, as with the use of any copyrighted material.  Example: The Colum-
bia Guide to Online Style http://www.columbia.edu/cu/cup/cgos/idx_basic.html5.Users have a responsibility to respect the privacy and property of other us-
ers. Users should not intentionally seek information about, obtain copies of, ormodify, files, data or passwords of other users.6.For their own safety, users should not reveal any personal information, such
as addresses, phone numbers, or photographs.7.Employing the Internet for commercial purposes is prohibited.

8.Users should not expect that files stored on district servers will always be
private. School and network administrators may review files and communica-tions to maintain system integrity and to ensure that the network is being used
responsibly.Teachers will inform students of what is considered appropriate use of the Inter-net, describing student privileges, rights and responsibilities. As much as possible,teachers will guide students toward materials which have been reviewed and eval-uated prior to use. The use of home pages, bookmarks, lists of Web sites, and
cataloging Web sites in the library system will help match Internet resources to thecurriculum.Because computer use is essentially an individual experience, however, prima-ry responsibility for appropriate use of the Internet resides with the student. A useragreement form will be signed by the student and parent prior to their use. Failureto follow appropriate practices may result in disciplinary action including loss of
the individualÕs access to the Internet.Principals will supervise the use of the Internet and other computer networksin their schools. Procedures will be put in place to ensure that students receive
appropriate instruction and supervision in the use of the Internet and othercomputer networks.NOTE: The committee makes no representation that this acceptable use policy does or does notcomply with the requirements of the ChildrenÕs Internet Protection Act that schools and librariesreceiving E-rate funding must adopt and implement an Internet safety policy.macy.  For example, one community may be more concerned about the
exposure of young people to sexually explicit material while another
might worry more about the consequences of young people spending
time in chat rooms.  The development of an AUP through extensive com-

munity involvementÑincluding those affectedÑcan sometimes be pain-ful, but the process offers the community a chance to consider the balanceYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.238YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETit wants to try to strike between entirely unregulated Internet access andmore-restricted use.  Such discourse can prevent future tensions among

community members (e.g., students, teachers, parents, library patrons) by
allowing difficult and potentially contentious issues to be resolved.  Note

also that the contents of an AUP are likely to need updating as the con-
cerns of the community evolve.  Thus, some mechanism for periodic re-

view is an essential aspect of AUP formulation.In addition, how an AUP is presented to the community can affect itssuccess.  If it is presented in the absence of explanation or context, neither

students nor parents are likely to understand its rationale for being.  Thus,

context-setting activitiesÑsuch as parents being given some instructionon using the Internet (e.g., Section 10.4)Ñmight well accompany the in-troduction of an AUP to the community.While increasingly common, AUPs do raise a number of issues.¥To what extent, if at all, should an AUP for a young person set theexpectations for adult behavior and use?  An argument for similarity is

that an AUP gains in legitimacy (with all of the desirable consequences
for behavioral adherence) when it is seen to be uniformly applied. An
argument for difference is that the legitimate needs of adult supervisors
(parents, librarians, teachers, and so on) are different in some ways from
those of childrenÑwhile harassment may never be appropriate for any-one to engage in, adults may need access to a different set of information
on Web sites than do children.¥AUPs that do not differentiate between the needs of younger andolder children are likely to be overconstraining or underconstraining to
one group or another.  For example, older adolescents may need access to

a different set of information on Web sites than primary school children
do.  An AUP that imposes on these older children restrictions that are

designed for younger children does not provide a realistic code of behav-
ior for these older children.¥An AUP states behavioral goals.  But after policy statements have
been distributed and signatures on AUP forms gathered, a key question
remainsÑto what extent are students and library patrons in fact comply-ing with a given AUP?  Some estimate of compliance can be derived from

data about violations, a point that suggests that such data must be kept
and tabulated if a broad understanding of an AUPÕs effectiveness is to beachieved.  But walk-by monitoring may be of limited effectiveness simply

because the personnel are not available in sufficient numbers to check
usage regularly, and children themselves may not be entirely forthcom-
ing if they violate the policy deliberately.  (In this regard, the problem

raised by AUPs is similar to those raised by any honor code.)  However,

technical tools for monitoring Web usage in the aggregate (without indi-Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.239SOCIAL AND EDUCATIONAL STRATEGIESvidual tracking of users) can provide important information on conform-ance to an AUP.  This point is discussed further in Chapter 12.
¥Many users of AUPs are drawn to them because they provide abroad Òcatch-allÓ for behavior that may be objectionable but not explicitly
listed as inappropriate.  For example, the prohibitions on viewing sexu-

ally explicit adult Web sites complement the restrictions imposed by fil-
ters that block many but not all such sites.  Thus, a student who takes

advantage of underblocking in a filter to reach a sexually explicit adult
Web site is still subject to sanctions for violating the AUP.  Of course, the

logical complement to this argument is that a student who gets into
trouble for violating an AUP may well argue, ÒIf it was against policy,why wasnÕt it filtered?Ó  A student who does not understand the limita-
tions of technology may therefore feel that he or she has been treated
unjustly for violating an AUP.¥More generally, AUPs must clearly specify what material or be-havior counts as inappropriate if they are to be useful as guides to behav-
ior.  Actions taken to penalize inappropriate behavior or access to inap-

propriate materials may well be subject to legal challenge in the absence
of clear specifications.¥To what extent, if any, does the existence of an AUP shield a schoolor library from liability? To the committeeÕs knowledge, there is not abody of case law that establishes the existence and use of AUPs as part of
a defense against liability for improper use of school or library computer
facilities.  However, in the case law of discrimination and harassment, the

courts have established13 that the existence of internal policies or practices
is an important element of an affirmative defense against such allega-
tions,14 and the logic of this case law might carry over to the use of AUPs.
¥AUPs define responsibilities that users have.  A complementary
issue is the nature and scope of rights that users have.  In particular, a

question arises regarding the extent to which an individual has rights to
obtain information that go beyond what a parent might be willing to
grant.  What kinds of information, if any, would be in this category?

Many librarians and others acting in a supervisory but non-parental role
would argue that it is important for a children (especially older adoles-
cents) to have access to some such information.  Some examples offered

by these individuals include information about other races and cultures,13Faragher v. City of Boca Raton, 524 U.S. 775 (1998).14Lauren B. Edelman, Christopher Uggen, and Howard S. Erlanger.  1999.  
ÒThe Endogen-eity of Legal Regulation: Grievance Procedures as Rational Myth,Ó American Journal of Soci-ology 105(2): 406-454.
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.240YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETother religions, evolution, contraception, homosexuality, guns, and pre-vention of sexually transmitted diseases.15The ChildrenÕs Internet Protection Act (discussed in Chapter 4) re-quires that many schools and libraries develop an ÒInternet Safety PlanÓthat addresses Òaccess by minors to inappropriate matter on the Internetand World Wide Web; safety and security of minors when using elec-
tronic mail, chat rooms, and other forms of direct electronic communica-
tions; unauthorized online access by minors, including ÔhackingÕ and other
unlawful activities; unauthorized disclosure, use, and dissemination of
personal information regarding minors; and measures designed to re-
strict minorsÕ access to materials harmful to minors.
Ó16  Note the strong
similarity between the mandated Internet Safety Plan and what is covered
in most AUPs.10.7AFTER-THE-FACT STRATEGIES
It is highly likely that children will, from time to time, encounterinappropriate sexually explicit material.  Thus, it is reasonable to consider

what a child might do after such exposure in order to minimize whatever
deleterious effects, if any, might occur.Perhaps the most important point for adults to keep in mind is thatmany children may be better able to handle exposure to inappropriate
material than adults give them credit for.  As noted in Chapter 5, most of
the older teenagers with whom the committee spoke reported that today
much of the sexually explicit material they encountered online was not a
big deal to them.   Even younger teenagers
Ñin particular the teen Cyber-angels17 who testified to the committee
Ñseem to have been exposed tosuch material without apparent harm.Nevertheless, parents and other adults do have a responsibility tohelp children cope with inadvertent exposure to inappropriate Internet
material or experiences.  One obvious strategy is for a child so exposed, if
15In practice, it would be quite difficult for a parent to make an individual decision aboutevery accessible Web page of information or every book in a library to which a child has
access.  But the notion does underlie an important thought question: assuming that this
array of decisions could be encoded on a smart library card, so that the child could neverhave access to information to which a parent objected, how would parents, librarians, and
teachers wish to proceed?16P.L. 106-554, ¤ 1(a)(4), 114 Stat. 2763 (2001).  A good summary of the provisions of the
CIPA can be found online at <http://www.cybertelecom.org/cda/cipatext.htm#1712>.17These teenagers were members of Teenangels, a group of specially trained 13- to 17-year-old volunteers for the Cyberangels online safety organization (see <http://www.cyberangels.com>).Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.241SOCIAL AND EDUCATIONAL STRATEGIEShe or she is upset, to seek assistance from an adultÑparent, teacher, andso on.  However, for the child to be willing to seek assistance, the adult

must not penalize him or her for doing so.  Recall that many teens re-

ported to the committee that they had been upset in their first accidental
encounters with sexually explicit material on the Internet not because of
the scenes depicted, but because of their concerns about parental (over-)
reactions.  Schools, too, have been known to overreact, and it should be

noted that children talk to parents and other adults more freely if conver-
sation can occur in an open and accepting rather than in a punitive or
judgmental environment.  Thus, such encounters should be regarded as

teachable moments in which the child can learn from the adults around
him or her.A second strategy is to seek help independently, though knowinghow to obtain help is sometimes difficult.  For example, some ISPs pro-

vide methods for reporting of spam e-mail, whether they involve inap-
propriate sexually explicit material or other kinds of material, harassing
instant messages (IMs), e-mail, or offensive chat room dialog.  However,

one would be well advised to understand the mechanics of how to get
help before one encounters a problem.A third empowering strategy is to provide the child with instructionon how to report the offensive material to an appropriate party.  For

example, if offensive material is passed by a filter, it might reduce the
childÕs feeling of being victimized if he or she could report it to the partiesdetermining the filtering policy.  In the context of schools, a student who

is inadvertently exposed must have a clear and safe path for reporting
such an incident.  By doing so, he or she can avoid allegations of inten-

tional access as well as help the school better understand how such acci-
dental access occurred and how it might be better prevented in the future.Another dimension of after-the-fact strategies involves the possibilitythat a young person is being ÒgroomedÓ by a predator. Parents should be
aware that such engagements can happen in spite of their admonitions to
their children to avoid strangers.  Thus, it is particularly important to

maintain open channels of communication in which a child can share
experiences and feelings about being online.  Note also that a young

person may feel guilty about turning on an online friend.18  Also, in some
cases, a teenager may well tell a peer about intentions to meet with some-
one that he or she has met online.  Thus, peers and older teens can often

play a role in helping their friends and siblingsÑby trying to talk themout of going to a meeting or alerting an adult.18In this context, the term Òturning on JoeÓ means reporting to responsible authority that
Joe wants to meet, even if Joe has told the child not to tell anyone.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.242YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETNote that after-the-fact strategies are consistent with the discussion inSection 12.4 about instant help.10.8EDUCATION
10.8.1Internet Safety Education
In the physical world, safety education for children involves thingssuch as teaching children how to cross the street safely, how to deal with
strangers approaching them, and how to react when there is a fire in the
house.   Such strategies are taught to children so that they will be better

able to avoid situations in which they might be harmed, and to deal with
these situations better if they should find themselves in one.Safety education for children on the Internet has similar goals. Whilemany students to whom the committee spoke said that they learned to be
safe on the Internet through experience, explicit Internet safety education
(ISE) provides children with dos and donÕts that decrease the likelihoodthat they will have an unsafe experience online.  It also provides strategies

for children who do happen to encounter unsafe situations.19  ISE is an
application and extension of the critical thinking and judgment skills that
parents and teachers and communities hope to instill in children to cope
with other dangers in life.  Further, it requires awareness of the dangers

so that they will not be surprised when they encounter them.  Three

examples of ISE include the following:¥For young people who might encounter a stranger online, it ishelpful for them to know about how sexual predators and hate group
recruiters typically operate.  In particular, they obtain as much personal

information as possible and then, armed with such information, provide
compliments, positive statements, and other flattery in order to build an
emotional bond with their target.  An example might be that if the young
person says that he does not have many friends, the stranger might say
Òthat is hard to believe,Ó or 
Òyour peers are really missing out, but you areprobably too mature for them,Ó and so on.  Young people, often taught to
be polite to others, should understand explicitly how such a ÒseductionÓprocess works, what to expect, how to recognize it, and how to deal with
the situation, and may need to be taught how to be assertive online in
ending contact with another user or declining and/or blocking instant
messages from users who harass them.19For purposes of this discussion, ÒunsafeÓ is construed broadly.  That is, an unsafe
Internet experience is defined here as one that makes the child feel uncomfortable, or onethat an adult would feel was inappropriate and potentially harmful for the child.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.243SOCIAL AND EDUCATIONAL STRATEGIES¥Recognizing an impending access to inappropriate materialÑes-pecially material of an adult natureÑis a helpful skill as well.  For ex-
ample, while most experienced Web surfers know how to use the few
lines of text accompanying a link that is returned by a search engine,
novice surfers do not. For these individuals, identifying some of the key-
words that flag sexually explicit adult-oriented material and how they are
displayed in a search engineÕs Òreturned linksÓ may be helpful.  Similar
strategies are likely to be useful when processing unsolicited e-mail that
seeks to draw attention to adult-oriented Web sites.¥Knowledge of when it is appropriate to provide personal informa-tion online is increasingly important.  Imparting such knowledge involves

teaching children about what information is private as well as their right
and responsibility to protect that kind of private information from others.
For example, if one is doing registration online for classes at oneÕs school,it is perfectly appropriate to provide personal information such as name,
address, and the like.  But for a teenager to provide such information to a

stranger in a chat room is far less wise, and children of all ages would be
well advised to refrain from giving out such information without explicit
parental permission.¥Knowledge of how one might recognize unsolicited commerciale-mail (spam) without opening it would enable children and youth to
delete much of it and thereby reduce their potential exposure to inappro-
priate material.20  Knowledge of how to behave on the Internet so as to
reduce vulnerability to spam would reduce the volume entering their
mailboxes.Note that the introduction of any particular lesson in ISE should betied to a sense of the childÕs developmental level.  For example, being able
to identify impending access to inappropriate material is a helpful skill
when a child starts to use the Internet without active and continuous
adult parental supervision.  But whether this skill is helpful or should be

introduced prior to this point is less clear.20For example, one can often identify spam on the basis of the subject line and the pur-ported sender of the mail.  (An e-mail from hotsexybabe@example.com with the subject line

Òbest porn on the NetÓ is highly likely to be spam containing links to adult-oriented, sexu-
ally explicit material.)  Such e-mail can be easily deleted without being read, and an in-
formed user who chooses to read the e-mail is reading sexually explicit material more or
less voluntarily.  On the other hand, some spam senders anticipate such behavior on the
part of the user by forging sender addresses (the mail appears to be from support@example.com and use misleading subject lines (e.g., Òabout your e-mail programÓ).  Spam from suchparties cannot be identified as sexually explicit in nature, and a user who reads such mailwill be exposed to its content involuntarily.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.244YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETIn some ways, non-school programs are well suited for ISE (Box 10.6provides one example).   For example, a number of Girl Scout merit badges

related to computers and the Internet could easily and naturally accom-
modate a requirement for Internet safety.  After-school or summer pro-

grams, in which computer usage is likely to be less structured (and thus
have more potential for students getting into Internet trouble), are a good
venue in which to learn and exercise ISE skills in a supervised environ-
ment.  Religious education programs, which already deal with ethics, can

include some Internet safety instruction as well.As discussed in Section 7.1, parents are often far less knowledgeableabout technology than are their children.  Similarly, teachers
Ñespeciallythose at the high school levelÑoften know less about the Internet thantheir students.21  Because many elements of good ISE depend on some
technical knowledge (though framed in an appropriate context), effective
ISE depends on these adults obtaining the necessary skills themselves.
Workshops for parents, pre-service professional education in teachersÕcolleges and library schools, and in-service programs for professionally
active teachers and students all have a role in imparting such skills to
adults.Finally, a number of interactive games and programs seek to teachBox 10.6An Example of a Library Offering for Internet Safety EducationThe Chicago Public LibraryÕs home page for kids and teens is designed to be asafe portal to the Web.  In addition to child-appropriate resources such as the Teen
Edition, Homework Help, Good Reads and Great Books, and resources for parents,
teachers, and youth librarians, it also contains an interactive quiz that poses onequestion at a time that can be answered with a yes or no button that calls up thecorrect response as well as feedback about the question. For example, the second
question in the quiz is, If I see stuff on the Internet that makes me uncomfortableshould I keep it a secret?  Depending on your answer you get either a bouncing stargraphic if you answer correctly or a ÒDangerÓ sign if you answer incorrectly.  Both
answers are accompanied by the following text: ÒIf you are at home, tell your parentsright away if you come across any information that makes you feel uncomfortable.  If
you are at the public library, tell a librarian and then leave that page right away.ÓSOURCE: See <www.chipublib.org/008subject/003cya/sign/sign.html>.21Schofield and Davidson, 2002, Bringing the Internet to School: Lessons from an Urban Dis-trict.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.245SOCIAL AND EDUCATIONAL STRATEGIESchildren Internet safety and responsible Web use.  These include Net-
Smartz,22 SurfSwell Island,
23 and MISSING.
24See Box 10.4 for some ideas on promoting Internet safety education.
10.8.2Information and Media Literacy
Information literacy refers to a set of abilities that enables people toÒrecognize when information is needed and have the ability to locate,evaluate, and use effectively the needed information.Ó25 An information-
literate individual is able to determine the information needed, find the
needed information effectively and efficiently, evaluate the information
received, and assess its sources critically; incorporate selected informa-
tion into his or her knowledge base; use information effectively to accom-
plish a specific purpose; understand the economic, legal, and social issues
surrounding the use of information; and access and use information ethi-
cally and legally.26Media literacy, a newer term, expands on information literacy in twoprimary ways.27  First, media literacy extends to information presented in
all forms of media, not just print.  Information literacy was never specifi-

cally restricted to print, but in practice it is often understood in that pri-
mary context.  Second, and more importantly, media literacy includes the

ability to produce and communicate information for the benefit of others.
Also, some analysts believe that media education is focused on informa-
tion conveyed by and through the mass media, such as newspapers, tele-22See <http://www.netsmartz.org>.  NetSmartz was developed by the NCMEC.
23 See <http://disney.go.com/family/surfswell2001/index.html>.  SurfSwell Island was
developed by the Disney Corporation.24See <http://www.livewwwires.com/index2.htm>.  MISSING was developed by Live-
WWWires, a Canadian organization that seeks to promote Internet safety among youth.25American Library Association.  1989.  Presidential Committee on Information Literacy.  Final
Report.  American Library Association, Chicago.  Available online at <http://www.ala.org/acrl/nili/ilit1st.html>.26This set of abilities is taken with a few modifications from <http://www.ala.org/acrl/ilintro.html#ildef>.27More information on media literacy can be found from the following sources, fromwhich parts of the discussion in this paragraph are derived:¥<http://www.ci.appstate.edu/programs/edmedia/medialit/article.html#What is
Media Literacy>.¥<http://interact.uoregon.edu/MediaLit/FA/MLArticleFolder/defharvard.html>.¥<http://interact.uoregon.edu/MediaLit/FA/MLArticleFolder/defresponse.html>.¥David Considine.  1994.  
Telemedium: The Journal for Media Literacy 41(2) (Strategies
for Media Literacy Inc. and the National Telemedia Council, Madison, Wisc.).Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.246YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETvision programs, and the like.28  Others add to the definition an under-
standing of the role that audiences play in creating meaning from the
information found in media content.29The need for information and media literacy was raised by most ofthe teachers and librarians with whom the committee spoke.  In general,

they saw young peopleÑtheir studentsÑas being far too uncritical intheir acceptance of information found on the Internet, and they felt that it
is important for students to develop the skills usually associated with
information and media literacyÑespecially with respect to skills relatedto critical evaluation.30In some cases, they regarded the harm that could come to studentsfrom uncritical acceptance of information on the Internet as much more
detrimental than anything they might see in the way of sexually explicit
imagesÑhate and racist sites (e.g., featuring Holocaust denial) and sitespromoting cults were often mentioned.  (Of course, all of these teachers

were working in a filtered Internet environment, and this assessment
might have been different if filters had not been present.)  Information

and media literacy offers a set of cognitive skills that can protect against
misleading information or a disturbing image by teaching young people
how to recognize underlying messages, criticize them, and develop pro-
ductive counternarratives.Skills related to the critical evaluation of information are not explic-itly related to reducing the exposure of youth to inappropriate sexually
explicit material on the Internet.  After all, if the concern is that young

people are viewing graphic sexual images, one does not need particularly
sharp skills to determine if a picture is truly sexually explicit.   By con-

trast, it is often necessary to pay close attention to the content of other
kinds of Web sites in order to determine the meaning of the information
contained therein.  (Thus, it is often easier to make a determination that

something may be sexually explicit, compared to a determination that it is
inappropriate in some other wayÑsexual images can be identified at aglance, whereas racist or hate text must be read.)28Barry Duncan et al.  1989.  
Media Literacy Resource Guide.  Ontario Ministry of Education,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.29Rick Shepherd.  1993.  ÒWhy Teach Media Literacy,Ó Teach Magazine, Oct./Nov. (Quad-rant Educational Media Services).30Whether these teachers and librarians actually spent the time in class to teach informa-tion and media literacy in anything but the most cursory fashion is a different matter.
Indeed, many teachers ignore such matters because they are not seen as part of the disci-pline they are teaching.  Nevertheless, the comments of these teachers and librarians indi-
cated at least an awareness of the need for information and media literacy.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.247SOCIAL AND EDUCATIONAL STRATEGIESThough the skills of critical evaluation tend to be more useful inhelping youth to deal with other types of material that may be inappro-
priate, once an exposure to sexually explicit images has occurred, critical
evaluation is still relevant.  For example, the sexually explicit images

found on adult-oriented Web sites generally do not provide Òsafer sexÓmessages.  A good understanding of the role that sexual imagery plays in

modern media could provide occasion for useful reflection.  Critical evalu-

ation thus provides skills that youth can use to help deal constructively
with exposure to inappropriate material.Skills related to finding information are perhaps more relevant to thetask of reducing exposure to sexually explicit material.  For example,

performing an effective Web searchÑthat is, one that retrieves relevantinformation and minimizes the amount of undesired informationÑre-quires the selection of the right set of keywords, familiarity with Boolean
logic, choosing the right search engine for the topic, and knowing how to
navigate through a browser so that it is easy to enter and exit Web sites,
databases, and other online resource tools.   Such skills can help to reduce

the likelihood that a searcher might come across inappropriate material
inadvertently.  For example, if a search engine returned a link to a Web

site that the searcher had learned to recognize would likely contain adult-
oriented sexually explicit material rather than information on reproduc-
tion or sexually transmitted diseases, he or she could simply refrain from
accessing that site.Programs in media literacy generally focus on understanding mediamessages in context.  That is, the 
ÒfaceÓ content of a media message is
only one aspect of it. A media-literate individual understands how to
evaluate the truthfulness and reliability of a media message, and also
knows to ask about the motivations and intent of the party or parties
responsible for distributing that message.  (Some such literacy is pro-

vided in consumer education programs and materials, such as those pro-
vided by Consumer Reports.)The significance of such literacy in the context of evaluating contentfound on the World Wide Web is obvious, where a good deal of Web
content is not reliable or accurate by any standard.  But media literacy

also has relevance to an adolescent who may be exposed to inappropriate
sexually explicit materials, either deliberately or inadvertently. Media lit-
eracy can help a young person ask questions such as:¥Why are these pictures being shown to me?¥Is what I am seeing a true and realistic image of what sex is like?¥Why are other people drawn to these images?¥What important things are not being shown in these images?Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.248YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET¥What are the circumstances that led the individuals being depictedinto their being photographed?¥Could an adult help me better understand what IÕm seeing?In short, media literacy can help to promote a more detached, moreevaluative, and more reflective view of media, messages, and oneÕs ownself.  By doing so, it may well strengthen impulse control and empathy,

and help lead one to question oneÕs own behaviorÑand is likely to reducethe exposure resulting from impulsive behavior.Information and media literacy also addresses the responsible place-ment of information on the Internet, for example on Web sites and in e-
mail.  Thus, the creation of information must be undertaken in a respon-

sible manner that communicates what the creator intends.  Responsibility

might, for example, include the notion that the posting of composite pho-
tographs (e.g., face of a classmate pasted onto a naked body without
permission) constitutes unethical and inappropriate behavior.  Repeated

e-mails to a party (e.g., one person asking another for a date) can be
regarded as harassment if the subject of the e-mails has requested a cessa-
tion of such e-mails.The research base for understanding the effectiveness of informationand media literacy training and education is thin, but two experimental
studies provide evidence that suggests beneficial effects in the short run.
One study provided some information and media literacy instruction to
elementary school children viewing violent cartoons.31  This instruction
asked them to think about the feelings of the victim of violence through-
out the episodeÑand those who received such instruction did not experi-ence a desensitizing change in attitude toward violence nor did they find
the cartoon to be as funny as those not receiving such instruction.  An-

other study focused on girls in their early teens, instructing them in how
to think critically about media messages regarding how women should
think about romance, love, and sexuality.32  They responded by criticizing
the media because they felt the media encouraged them to focus too much
on romance and trying to attract men.  If such studies can be generalized,

helping youth to understand how and why sexually explicit adult-ori-31A.I. Nathanson and J. Cantor.  2000.  
ÒReducing the Aggression-promoting Effect ofViolent Cartoons by Increasing ChildrenÕs Fictional Involvement with the Victim,Ó Journalof Broadcasting and Electronic Media 44: 125-142.32Sarah Keller, ÒHow Do Early Adolescent Girls Use Media to Shape Their RomanticIdentities?Ó unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill,
2000.  Some of the results from this dissertation can be found in National Research Council

and Institute of Medicine, 2001, Nontechnical Strategies to Reduce ChildrenÕs Exposure to Inap-propriate Material on the Internet: Summary of a Workshop.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.249SOCIAL AND EDUCATIONAL STRATEGIESented materials are produced and consumed may be of some assistance inhelping to ÒinoculateÓ these youth to some of the effects of such materials.
As with much education, information and media literacy is likelypursued best in a one-on-one context.  By talking to a student searching

for information on a particular topic, adults can teach him or her effective
search strategies for such information.  Once a number of sources are

found, talking to the student about how to evaluate those sources can
help to develop critical thinking skills.  Of course, one-on-one interaction
is also labor-intensive, and a one-on-one format is less feasible in situa-
tions in which many students must be served.  In such situations, group

and in-class instruction can also be helpful.For application in a mass education environment, a variety of schoolshave adopted educational standards that address certain information and
media literacy skills.  For example, the state of Wisconsin has adopted

learning standards that call for fourth graders to be able to use Web sites
that have been preselected and bookmarked by the teacher, eighth grad-
ers to know effective search strategies, and twelfth graders to be able to
evaluate Internet content for validity and reliability as well as to assess
the search engines for effectiveness and the way in which they return
information.3310.8.3Collateral Issues
Internet safety education and information and media literacy can beregarded as elements of a comprehensive approach to education in which
the use of technology is fully integrated with pedagogical goals.  Al-

though a full discussion of education that is well integrated with technol-
ogy is beyond the scope of this report, the following points are worth
consideration:¥Internet safety is only one dimension of productive and appropri-ate use of the Internet.  It is also a dimension of appropriate use that

young people learn not to use the Internet for socially detrimental and/or
illegal purposes.  For example, harassment conducted online is no less

serious than harassment conducted offline.  The use of a computer to

penetrate another computer, even if that second computer has weak se-
curity, is analogous to walking into someone elseÕs house without per-mission, even if the door is unlocked.  In short, responsibility is also an

important dimension of oneÕs Internet use.33See <http://www.dpi.state.wi.us/dpi/standards/pdf/infotech.pdf>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.250YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET¥Professional development for educators using the Internet is im-portant and must go beyond the mere mechanics of how to use a search
engine and how to send e-mail.  That is, educators must learn how the

Internet can support pedagogical objectives as well as how to teach In-
ternet safety.34  Both pre-service and in-service teacher training is thus
called for.¥Ethical and legal behavior on the Internet and in using technologyis a part of the technology education standards developed by the Interna-
tional Society for Technology in Education for students, teachers, and
administrators.35  To the extent that technology education becomes an
important part of K-12 education, issues related to ethical and legal be-
havior will have to be addressed.¥To integrate technology into schools, an adequate technology in-frastructure is necessary.  For a variety of reasons, today
Õs informationtechnology is not well adapted to the needs of K-12 education.  Develop-

ing a generation of information technology adapted for the special needs
of schools is the focus of a National Research Council project in progress
as this book goes to press.3610.9COMPELLING AND SAFE CONTENT
In various site visits, teachers reported to the committee that their mosteffective strategy for dissuading students from engaging in inappropriate
activities on the Internet was to keep students Òon taskÓÑfocused on activi-ties relevant to the educational task at hand.  Often, teachers prepared for a

class by compiling a list of helpful Web sites appropriate for that class.
Such a list, combined with restrictions on the amount of time students were
allowed to use school Internet facilities, resulted in Òstudents not havingtime to get into trouble,Ó according to these teachers.
A generalization of this strategy would call for the creation of Internetcontent that is compelling and educational for young people, so compel-
ling that they are less inclined to spend their time searching for inappro-
priate material or engaging in inappropriate or unsafe activities.  Material

that is productive, stimulating, and developmentally beneficial could in-
clude more Web sites devoted to sexual health and education so that34For example, the CyberSmart! program is a professionally developed curriculum for K-8 students and supports teachers in educational efforts to introduce responsible and effec-tive Internet use.  For more information see <http://www.cybersmartcurriculum.org>.
35See <http://www.iste.org>.36See <http://www7.nationalacademies.org/ILIT/> for information on the NRC projecton improving learning with information technology.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.251SOCIAL AND EDUCATIONAL STRATEGIES37Sandra Calvert et al.  2001.  
ÒChildrenÕs Online Reports About Educational and Infor-mational Television Programs,Ó Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology 22(1): 103-117.
curious adolescents could obtain reliable information on sexuality ratherthan, or at least before, finding sexually explicit material that lacks infor-
mation or that depicts unprotected sex or other unsafe sexual practices.An analogy can be drawn to the development of high-quality televi-sion programming for children.  An example of commercially supported

programming in this domain is NickJr, a component of the Nickelodeon
networkÕs programming.  NickJr is supported by advertising revenues
and is popular among its target audience,37 suggesting that high-quality
television programs can be of interest and of educational value to some
children, that associated Web sites that support these messages may be
equally valuable for their development, and that this kind of program-
ming can be viable in the commercial marketplace.  Note also that the

NickJr Web site also has quality software, derived from its TV program-
ming, that is oriented toward preschool-aged children.On the other hand, commercial sources of content depend on a finan-cial base that relies almost exclusively on ratings, which implies that their
content must be oriented toward mass markets (for example, their content
is more commonly Òaction-orientedÓ with more violent material that more
easily draws an audience, and cannot economically be tailored to niche
markets).  Further, because the production and airing of commercial ma-

terial are often subsidized by getting children to buy products, it is gener-
ally less expensive to develop child-oriented commercial material; chil-
dren also like a flow back and forth between television and online content,

giving commercial content a further appeal.  Major commercial sources

have the resources to experiment with different approaches to their online

offerings, an important characteristic in a new environment in which suc-
cessful formulas for engaging children with healthy Web content are
largely unknown.  From their physical-world presence, they also have

brand recognition (e.g., Disney, Nickelodeon, and Sesame Street) that
enables many parents to trust the content they provide.Because non-commercial sources do not rely on mass markets forfinancial viability, they can execute more readily on their mandate to
educate.  For example, the content of non-commercial programming can

be tailored more finely to smaller age-appropriate ranges, or to topics and
approaches that are more highly specialized.  While non-commercial pro-

gramming does not in general have the mass market appeal of much
commercial programming, the availability of non-commercial program-
ming would tap into the needs of a number of smaller markets, poten-
tially meeting demand that is not manifested in a commercial environ-Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.252YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETment.  The committee also believes that the presence of non-commercial
sources such as PBS changes the environment for commercial providers
by creating greater incentives for commercial providers to do more inter-
esting and creative programming and raising the standard of quality.
(This change in the environment is at least as important as the quality
programming for which it is directly responsible.)  Box 10.7 describes

some possible non-commercial content developers.In the Internet arena, Yahooligans is a Yahoo-sponsored Òkids areaÓwith sections on sports, news, jokes, games, chat, bulletin board postings,
and online special-interest clubs.  It also provides resources for education

(oriented toward school work), sports, computers, and entertainment, as
well as information for parents, teachers, and children for Internet safety.
The theory is that young people would choose to go to these sites and
portals voluntarily, which in turn would keep them away from adult
material.The approach of creating content that specifically appeals to childrenhas a number of benefits.  One major appeal is that the evaluation of

educational Web sites is more feasible than trying to evaluate online con-
tent as a whole. Because the volume of material to be evaluated is so much
smaller, considerable effort (hours rather than seconds) can be expendedBox 10.7Potential Non-Commercial Developers of Content for Children and Youth¥ChildrenÕs museums and science centers: information and content-orientedWeb sites are often part of their outreach services.¥Non-profit educationally related groups such as the Jason Foundation andGlobal School Network.¥Government agencies: a number of agencies have sites or Web pages that areoriented toward children.  Examples include the Federal Resources for Educational
Excellence (<http://www.ed.gov/free>) and NASA (<http://www.nasa.gov/kids. html>).¥Universities have a mission to disseminate information to the general public.Finally, corporate support can be non-commercial in nature as well.  For exam-
ple, MCI/Worldcom supports an effort known as the MarcoPolo project (<http://marcopolo.worldcom.com/>).  The materials found on the site are not tied to child-
oriented products and hence do not seek to entice children to acquire dolls or play-ing cards or other toys. Blue WebÕn (<http://www.kn.pacbell.com/wired/bluewebn/index.html>) is supported as a public service by Pac Bell and consists of a searchable
database of about 1,000 outstanding Internet learning sites categorized by subjectarea, audience, and type (lessons, activities, projects, resources, references, andtools).  Other firms, such as Scholastic Inc. and Classroom Connect, offer some free

educational content as a lead-in to other products and services available for a fee.Education World, an educational publication, offers a portal with access to educa-tional content; this site is supported by advertising, but the advertising is directed
toward adults rather than children.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.253SOCIAL AND EDUCATIONAL STRATEGIESto produce an evaluation that is thorough, rigorous, feasible, and cangrapple with the extent to which a site is developmentally appropriate,
relevant to young peopleÕs needs and interests, and user-friendly.38  In
addition, the availability of good Web sites that attract the attention and
interest of young people relieves to some extent the burden on parents to
provide direction.  These educational Web sites could also include infor-

mation on online safety as well as other educational content.Good content can also draw on a scientific understanding of the de-velopmental needs and milestones of children in cognitive, social, emo-
tional, and moral dimensions.  For example, based on such research,

schools in Wisconsin have developed Internet-related educational objec-
tives that students must meet by the end of certain years and that teach
skills such as effective searching and how to evaluate online content for
truthfulness and validity.It appears to be quite difficult, however, to find business models thatcan independently support the development of such content for the Inter-
net.  One of the ironies of the Internet is that adult entertainment is one of

the very few businesses that have been able to make a profit on the Inter-
net, while markets for high-quality Internet content for children languish.
Experience in the wake of the dot-com meltdown illustrates that building
any Internet-based business is difficult, but it appears to be especially
difficult to create good offerings for children. Some of the key challenges
include:¥Limited bandwidth.  Even at broadband speeds, most children find
content coming over the Internet frustrating.  (Adults do as well.)  Video

or animation, especially over a dial-up connection, can be quite jerky,
making it virtually unwatchable by many children.  Furthermore, other

media such as TV, video games, and PC-based software offer content that
tends to be much more watchable, and the instant response that these
other media offer places Internet content at a significant disadvantage.
Content can be designed to work well over the Internet.  Nevertheless, it

is likely that content creators will be making creative sacrifices in order to38In the committeeÕs December 2000 workshop, Sarah Keller described the evaluationprocess of the ASHA Web site, <www.iwannaknow.org>, a project in which she is cur-rently involved.  This process began with a content analysis that compares the information

available on the site to the recommendations established by the Sexual Information andEducation Council, SIECUS, a recognized authority on sex education.  The analysis was
used to create an online survey to measure the siteÕs impact on teen knowledge, attitudes,and intended behaviors.  The site was evaluated using the American Library Association
Õsrecommendations on navigability, accuracy, authority, currency, and objectivity (see<www.ala.org/internettoolkit>).Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.254YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETobtain viewabilityÑplacing such content at a disadvantage with respectto content carried in other media.¥Privacy concerns.  Online businesses that are directed at children
must comply with a variety of regulations emanating from the ChildrenÕsOnline Privacy Protection Act (COPPA).  While such regulations have

benefits, COPPA has also imposed costs on such businesses that they did
not previously incur,39 and it is likely that the added costs of complying
with COPPA have increased the operating burden felt by some develop-
ers of material for younger children and resulted in a smaller volume of
such material.¥Safety concerns.  The newness of the Internet and the media public-ity regarding untoward Internet experiences (e.g., abductions resulting
from Internet-enabled interactions) have made many parents fearful of
allowing their younger children on the Internet.¥Financing.  Even in the high-flying days of venture capital, it was
hard to develop plausible business models for how an Internet service
oriented toward children would eventually be profitable. Advertisers are
often uninterested in targeting children online, and Web sites that offer
traffic that consists mostly of children are not in high demand.Finally, creating compelling and safe content de novo is not the onlyway to assemble collections of such material.  Portals and Web sites that

lead to developmentally appropriate, educational, and enjoyable material
on a broad range of appealing topics (not just sex and sex education)
would help to keep young people away from inappropriate sexually ex-
plicit material (as well as other types of inappropriate material) by pro-
viding a venue that children preferred.   Lists of appropriate Web sites

suitable for classroom or in-home use are a Òpoor-manÕsÓ analog to thesekinds of portalÑteachers and/or parents can create lists of interestingand appropriate Web sites for easy browser access by bookmarking them,
and even a list of such sites on paper would be helpful in many circum-
stances.  Also, school districts and libraries are creating portals to educa-

tionally oriented Web sites to help students do their work.10.10PUBLIC SERVICE ANNOUNCEMENTS
AND MEDIA CAMPAIGNSBecause many adults do not know much about the need for Internetsafety, or about the nature and extent of dangers on the Internet, they39For example, COPPA requires a parent to send a note through the postal service or tofax a form to document parental permission for answering questions that ask for personalinformation, both of which are time-consuming, inefficient, and costly to process.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.255SOCIAL AND EDUCATIONAL STRATEGIESoften do not know what they do not know.  Thus, they can be complacent
and do nothing about protecting their children on the Internet, or they can
exaggerate the dangers, believing from media scare stories that Òpornog-raphyÓ and sexual predators on the Internet are as ubiquitous as commer-
cials on television or radio.By themselves, public service announcements (PSAs) and media cam-paigns cannot provide comprehensive education about complex topics.
However, they are ideal for relatively simple messages.  For example, the

late 1980s saw a major public awareness campaign offering the message,
ÒItÕs ten oÕclock. Do you know where your kids are?Ó A similar campaign
today for Internet safety might offer a message like, ÒWhat did your kidsdo online today?,Ó or 
ÒYou, too, can learn about protecting your kids onthe Internet!Ó or 
ÒWould you let a stranger in your childÕs bedroom?Ó to
encourage the placement of computers in public parts of the home.Since the mid 1990s, a number of concerned companies in the Internetpublishing industry have sought to demonstrate their interest in educat-
ing the public at large about the dangers that the Internet can present to
children. These industry-sponsored self-policing programs include Amer-
icaLinksUp, which ran roughly from December 1997 to October 1998, and
GetNetWise, which started in the spring of 1999 and still exists today.AmericaLinksUp was spawned by the Internet Online Summit: Focuson Children held in Washington, D.C., in December 1997.  The conference

consisted of a day of Clinton Administration, congressional, and Internet
industry leaders speaking to the importance of establishing a public-pri-
vate partnership to protect the public interest and obviate the need for
introducing legislation to regulate the Internet.  One of the outcomes was

AmericaLinksUp, which was funded primarily by several major media
companies, including AOL, Time Warner, and the Walt Disney Com-
pany, to demonstrate corporate commitment to raising public awareness
about the importance of parents monitoring their childrenÕs activities onthe Web and of children being aware of the dangers that can be encoun-
tered when surfing the Web.  AmericaLinksUp created television and

radio PSA spots that were designed to target parents and children as
separate demographic groups. ABC Television Network, ABC Radio Net-
work, Turner Broadcasting System, and Lifetime Television all provided
air time pro bono during August and September of 1998 to broadcast
these PSAs.  Despite the fact that the PSAs were very emotionally evoca-

tive, AmericaLinksUp most likely had minimal impact due to the limited
nature of any media campaign that has virtually no media budget.Operated under the auspices of the non-profit Internet EducationFoundation, GetNetWise was in many ways the successor to America-
LinksUp, and is supported by a wide range of Internet-related corpora-
tions and public service organizations.  GetNetWise had a larger agenda

than simply promulgating childrenÕs safety on the Internet; it extended toYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.256YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET40Thomas E. Backer and Everett M. Rogers, eds. 1993. Organizational Aspects of HealthCommunication Campaigns:  What Works?
, Sage, Newbury Park, Calif.promoting how families could enjoy the Internet together, as well.  Get-
NetWise launched a major Web site designed to be the focal point on the
Web for all Internet public interest information.  GetNetWise.org still is in

operation today, although the initial publicity campaign surrounding its
launch in mid-1999 has diminished, as has awareness of the initiative.Overall, despite the significant amount of energy and resources ex-pended to produce the PSAs for AmericaLinksUp and to launch the Web
site and public relations campaign for GetNetWise, there is little evidence
that either of these industry initiatives has had a major impact on dimin-
ishing the safety problems presented by the Internet for children.  If any

conclusion can be drawn from the programs, it is that, while they do offer
value (although that is difficult to measure) by raising peopleÕs aware-ness, it is difficult to sustain interest among industry participants over
any extended period of time.  For such campaigns to be most effective,

companies must believe it is in their commercial interest to finance them
(i.e., there must be a threat of some harm, such as potential governmental
regulation or loss of revenues, or some promise of benefit, such as greater
public awareness of their concerns for the welfare of children).  To truly

make a difference, public awareness campaigns must be funded on an
ongoing basis and be part of a multifaceted umbrella program that makes
Internet safety the responsibility of all key stakeholders in promoting
childrenÕs safety on the Internet.Another possibility is that strategies, along the lines of current cam-paigns to discourage drug and tobacco use among children, could be
designed to discourage children from seeking out sexually explicit mate-
rials.  Such strategies are likely to be controversial, in the sense that they

would call public attention to sexually explicit materials.  Moreover, most

of the literature suggests that health communication campaigns, such as
anti-smoking and anti-drug media campaigns, are least effective when
they are not conducted in concert and coordination with appropriate com-
munity-based supports.4010.11FINDINGS AND OBSERVATIONS ABOUT SOCIAL
AND EDUCATIONAL STRATEGIES1.Social and educational strategies directly address the nurturing of
character and the development of responsible choice.  Because such strat-

egies locate control in the hands of the youth targeted, children may makeYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.257SOCIAL AND EDUCATIONAL STRATEGIESmistakes as they learn to internalize the object of these lessons.  But ex-
plaining why certain actions were mistaken will help children to learn the
lessons that parents and other adults hope that they will learn.2.Though education is difficult and time-consuming, many aspects
of Internet safety education have been successful in the past several years.
While it is true that Internet safety education, acceptable use policies, and
even parental guidance and counseling are unlikely to change the desire
of many adolescent boys to seek out sexually explicit materials, parents
are more aware of some of the other dangers (such as meeting strangers
face-to-face) and know more about how to protect their kids then ever
before.  (This is true even though more needs to be done in this area.)

Children are better educated about how to sense whether the person on
the other end of an instant message is Òfor real.Ó  Many of them have
developed strategies for coping, and children with such strategies in-
creasingly understand the rules of the game better than many parents.
Little of this was true 5 years ago.3.Social and educational strategies are generally not inexpensive,
and they require tending and implementation.  Adults must be taught to

teach children how to make good choices in this area.  They must be

willing to engage in sometimes-difficult conversations.  And, social and

educational strategies do not provide a quick fix with a high degree of
immediate protection.  Nevertheless, they are the only approach through
which ethics of responsible behavior can be cultivated and ways of cop-
ing with inappropriate material and experiences taught.4.Social and educational strategies have relevance and applicability
far beyond the limited question of Òprotecting kids from porn on theInternet.Ó  For example, social and educational strategies are relevant to
teaching children to:¥Think critically about all kinds of media messages, including thoseassociated with hate, racism, senseless violence, and so on;¥Conduct effective Internet searches for information and navigatewith confidence;¥Evaluate the credibility and motivation of the sources of the mes-sages that they receive;¥Better recognize dangerous situations on the Internet;¥Make ethical and responsible choices about Internet behaviorÑand about non-Internet behavior as well; and¥Cope better with exposure to upsetting and disturbing experiencesand material found on the Internet.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.258There are a number of tools for protecting children from inappropri-ate Internet material and experiences.  Most common are filters that at-

tempt to block certain types of content, but tools for monitoring usage,
verifying age, and protecting intellectual property fall into this domain as
well.  While each of these tools offers some degree of protection, there are

many factors that enter into choices about what technology, or technolo-
gies, should be used, or whether technology is appropriate at all.11.1TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS
As in many other areas of life, the Internet is an arena in which manyadults (mostly parents) attempt to stay aware of their childrenÕs activities
and some young people, particularly adolescents, attempt to evade pa-
rental oversight.  Technology-based tools for protecting children from

exposure to inappropriate Internet material and experiences promise
ÒhardÓ security against unknown threats and offer to compensate for
parental lack of knowledge about how to understand and control the
Internet usage of their children.  Because they appear to promise such

security, it is easy to believe that all that must be done is to install the
technology and then one can forget about the problem.To be fair, technology vendors rarely make such claims explicitly.But the rhetoric of public discourse about technology solutions to Òthe
problemÓ most definitely has such a tone. Indeed, the advocacy of tech-
nology-based solutions has much of the same tone as commercials in11A Perspective onTechnology-Based Tools
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.259A PERSPECTIVE ON TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLSwhich cereal is seen to be Òpart of a balanced breakfast,Ó a qualification of
approximately 1 second in a 30-second commercial extolling the virtues
and pleasures of the cereal.Moreover, technology that helps to create a problem and technologythat helps to solve it are another instance of the familiar measure/coun-
termeasure game.  In banks, better safes inspire bank robbers to develop

better methods for cracking safes, which in turn inspire still better safes.
When safes become too hard to crack, bank robbers can turn to high-tech
fraud as a way of draining money from banks, starting the cycle all over
again in a different domain.  This implies that no technological solution is

durable.The desire for simple, inexpensive, decisive technology-based solu-tions is understandable.  But as noted in Chapters 8 and 10, a strong

infrastructure of social and educational strategies that help children de-
velop an internal sense of appropriate behavior and response is founda-
tional for childrenÕs safety on the Internet.  Technology-based tools can
serve useful roles in much the same way that Òtraining wheelsÓ have a
useful role in teaching children to ride bicycles.  In addition, technology

can strengthen the positive effects of good parenting, and serve as a

backup for those instances in which parents are temporarily inattentive
(as all parents are from time to time).For purposes of this report, tools are defined as information technol-ogy devices or software that can help to reduce the exposure of children
to inappropriate material and experiences on the Internet.  These devices

or software can be installed in any one of a number of locations.  Material

on the Internet originates at a Òsource.Ó  It is then transmitted through a
variety of intermediate points and is finally displayed on the userÕs screen.Inappropriate material can be identified at any point before the material
appears on the userÕs screenÑallowing some appropriate action to betaken at any of these points.  Box 11.1. describes in greater detail some of

the points of content identification and control.It is also worth noting that there are technological and business pressuresthat are likely to ameliorate the problem.  These include the following:
¥The development of most industries follows a pattern of innova-tion, copycat, and then shakeout.  The wide proliferation of adult Web

sites suggests that the industry is in its copycat phase.  If the industry

continues on the traditional trajectory, shakeout in the industry is likely to
occur in the future.  If so, the remaining players are likely to demonstrate
more corporate responsibility in differentiating children from adults in
giving access to their products and services, although non-commercial
sources of sexually explicit material are likely to be unaffected by this
trend.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.260YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET¥Decentralization of the Internet (discussed in Section 2.1.2) is anenabler for a variety of technology-based tools that can be deployed by
end users (e.g., individual families, schools, and libraries) to increase the
range of options available to help parents and other responsible adults
fulfill their responsibilities.¥Some technological developments, such as the trend away fromopen chat rooms to closed instant message rings, will make it more diffi-
cult for spammers and molesters to find individual victims.¥As todayÕs children become parents, the generational divide intechnical knowledge and sophistication may begin to close.These comments should not in any sense be taken to mean that tech-nology-based tools themselves are useless or unnecessary, and the re-
mainder of this chapter, as well as Chapters 12 and 13, describe how such
tools might be useful.  Nevertheless, the statements immediately above

are collectively a message that not all technology or business trends bode
ill with respect to the exposure of children and youth to inappropriate
sexually explicit material and experiences on the Internet.Box 11.1Points of Content Identification and Control¥Source or creator
.  Note the different levels of socially responsible behavior
possible on the part of content creators, publisher, and providers.ÑProduces content and labels it accuratelyÑProduces contentÑProduces content and puts entries in search engine databases that would  appeal to children
ÑProduces content and labels it inaccuratelyÑSends to e-mail inbox of childrenÕs accountsÑEngages in mousetrapping¥RecipientÑRecipient (including the recipientÕs judgment)ÑRecipientÕs adult alliesÑRecipientÕs young allies¥Intermediaries (e.g., transporter, host, archive)
¥Other potential points of interventionÑDevice manufacturerÑDevice ÒinstallerÓ or 
ÒconfigurerÓÑDistributor or publisherÑSearch engine onlyÑInternet service provider onlyÑBrowser onlyYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.261A PERSPECTIVE ON TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS11.2CONTEXTUAL ISSUES FOR TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS
All tools to protect someone from inappropriate content require judg-ments about what content should be deemed inappropriate.  While all

decisions about what is inappropriate are derived from human judgments,
the decision regarding any given content can be made by a computer
program that seeks to mimic these human judgments (and examines the
content itself as it is coming into the computer) or by people who examine
that specific content, generally in advance (and sometimes far in advance)
of an actual attempt to access this content.Not all tools, or even a given type of tool, are equally adept at identi-fying all kinds of inappropriate material.  For example, for reasons de-

scribed in Chapter 2, the identification of certain types of inappropriate
sexually explicit materialÑe.g., that which is found on adult Web sitesÑis considerably easier from a technical standpoint than the identification
of other types of sexually explicit material or other types of content that
may be judged inappropriate (e.g., material on bomb making, hate speech,
religious cults).Chapters 12 and 13 address several generic categories of tools.  But
before turning to those tools, it is helpful to make a number of comments
that apply across most technological options for protection.¥The party that decides that a given tool is appropriate is almostalways the party that must manage its use.  Management of a tool in-

cludes decisions about setting it up initially, maintaining it, and configur-
ing it so that it does the appropriate things in the particular environment.
It also entails decisions about the appropriate users (i.e., the children or
youth in question) and when and under what circumstances they are
subject to the restrictions imposed by the tool.  Further, the decision-

making process for considering the use of a given tool must consider a
wide variety of factors that may include some emanating from external
sources (e.g., government).¥Technology solutions are brittle, in the sense that when they fail,they tend to fail catastrophically.  In general, the catastrophe is not that

they suddenly allow the child to access all possible kinds of inappropriate
material (though this can sometimes happen), but rather in the sudden
violation of expectation that the given technology would not fail. A child
who has not been educated about what to expect and how to deal with
problematic material found on the Internet, but has been ÒprotectedÓ by
technology alone, will not have the coping skills needed to deal with such
exposure.¥Ease of use is a major factor in implementation of any technical tool.Tools do not provide effective protection if they are so difficult to use thatYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.262YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETthey go unused, and the complexity of a toolÕs setup and ongoing mainte-nance is a major factor in a toolÕs suitability.  As a general rule, the 
ÒdefaultÓsettings of a tool are the ones that are most often used.  And, there is a

distinct trade-off between simplicity of use and customizability to a userÕsspecific preferences.  Customization may, for example, require a user to

specify preferences in many different domainsÑpartial frontal nudity isacceptable while full frontal nudity is not (except in images of classical art);
violence is acceptable, while religious cults are not, and so on.  But a user,

faced with such choices, often tends to opt for the simplest solutionÑwhichis likely to be Ònot OKÓ for all of the specified domains because of the
defaults built into the software by the vendor.  Further, the wide variety of
computing environments often forces vendors into requiring a ÒsetupÓ pro-
cedure to adapt the tool to the userÕs particular hardware/software con-figuration.  And, because of the constantly changing nature of the Internet,
the tools must constantly be updated in order to remain current and valid.
This puts the onus on the user to acquire a fair degree of technical know-
how.   Unless this step can be made easy for the user, only the most skilled
or dedicated users will bother to use such a tool.¥As a general rule, most technology-based tools can be circum-vented with sufficient effort.  Furthermore, the history of information

technology suggests that a method of circumvention, once discovered, is
often proliferated widely.1  Not everyone is privy to such information, of
course, but those who care about the topicÑand about circumventionÑcan usually find it with a relatively small effort.  What technology can do
is to pose barriers that are sufficient to keep those who are not strongly
motivated from finding their way to inappropriate material or experi-
ences, and the fact that technology can be circumvented does not mean
that it will always be circumvented.  For many people, circumvention will

not be worth the effort.  For others, the circumvention techniques will not

always be available.  Still others may not receive the word on circumven-
tion.  Sometimes, circumvention may be illegal even if feasible.  For such

reasons, technology-based tools have utility even though circumvention
techniques exist.  Nevertheless, as most parents and teachers noted in

their comments to the committee, those who really want to have access to1Specifically, when the circumvention is based on a software technique (as it has usuallybeen to date), the circumvention can be easily broadcast at very low cost to many individu-als.  When changes to hardware are involved (as happens relatively rarely), proliferation of
such changes is more difficult.  A number of high school students told the committee that
once one of them finds a circumvention of some sort, he or she shares it with other inter-ested students almost immediately.  For example, a high school student developed a way to

bypass his school districtÕs filtering system, and publicized it by sending an e-mail to everyteacher and administrator in the district.  See <http://www.salon.com/tech/feature/2001/
06/14/net_filtering/index1.html>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.263A PERSPECTIVE ON TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLSinappropriate sexually explicit materials will find a way to get them, andtechnology is relatively ineffective in the long run against those who are
strongly motivated.  From this point it follows that the real challenge is to

reduce the number of children who are strongly motivated to obtain inap-
propriate sexually explicit materials.  This, of course, is one focus of the

social and educational strategies described in Chapter 10.¥Tools can and do improve over time as more effort is put intoresearch and development.  Some improvements are possible with better

design and implementation of known technologies.  Other improvements

await advances in the underlying technologiesÑand may eventually beincorporated into technology-based tools.  However, almost by defini-

tion, technological improvements are likely to be evolutionary rather than
revolutionary, and so it is unwise to base any approach to protecting
children and youth from inappropriate Internet materials and experiences
on the hope of revolutionary technological breakthroughs.¥Tools such as filters that are implemented on the local client ma-chine (i.e., at the receiverÕs point of interaction) tend to be easier to cir-cumvent than those elsewhere (e.g., those embedded in the network or in
the enterprise that provides service).  The reason is that tools co-located

with the receiver are more readily accessible to the potential circumventer,
and thus more subject to inspection, manipulation, and unauthorized or
improper alteration or disabling.  Moreover, tools that run on the client

machine add an additional layer of complexity that can make a computer
less reliable and more prone to lockups and system crashes.¥Because currently deployed technologies do not yet support accesspolicies to be associated with an individual rather than a workstation, a
simple change of venue (i.e., a movement of the child or youth to another
place where the Web can be accessed) is often all that is necessary to defeat
the most effective technological tools for protection.  A change of venue

may be a deliberate attempt to avoid technologically imposed restrictions,
as in the case of students using home computers with Internet access to
bypass filtered access at schools.  Alternatively, it may be entirely acciden-

tal, in the sense that a venue that the minor uses for reasons of convenience
on some occasions, for example, may not offer the same technological tools
in its computing environment as the ones that he usually uses.¥One of the principles underlying the architecture of the Internet isthat to the extent possible, functionality resides at the end points of a
communication, rather than in the middle.  Thus, to the extent that end-

to-end encryption is used, on-the-fly content identification by the content
carrier (e.g., the Internet service provider (ISP)) is impossible, and there-
fore interdiction based on such identification is impossible. (In practice,
this fact gives the interdictor of content only two choices: to allow all
unknown traffic to pass, or to block all unknown traffic.  Allowing all
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.264YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETunknown traffic to pass is likely to permit some inappropriate contentthrough, while blocking all unknown traffic is likely to block some appro-
priate content.)¥As with social and educational strategies, informed decisions about
the use of technology-based tools (whether to use them and if so, which
one(s)) must take into account the developmental stage of the children for
whose benefit they would be deployed.  Some tools are most appropriate

for younger children, who are presumably more impressionable, less ex-
perienced in the ways of the world, and less skilled in the use of informa-
tion technology, and for whom the consequences of exposure to inappro-
priate material of any sort might be considerable.  Other tools, perhaps

allowing more discretion on the part of the user, might be more appropri-
ate for older youth that are more experienced and mature.¥Improvements in technology can be rapidly deployed compared tothe time scale on which social and educational strategies change.  That is,

communities may be involved in the decision to use technology-based
tools, but do not generally get involved in the technical design or imple-
mentation of those tools, which are usually within the discretionary pur-
view of the tool designer and vendor.  By contrast, social and educational

strategies for a community (though usually not for individual families)
are often extensively debated, and once debated, an extensive training
effort is then needed to promulgate a new approach.¥The deployment of technological tools entails some financial cost,both initially and in ongoing costs.  Thus, one potential social inequity is

that those lacking in resources will be denied the benefits of various
toolsÑa Òdigital divideÓ issue.
2   Advocates of using tools might argue
2For example, in 2000, 54 percent of public schools with access to the Internet reported thatcomputers with access to the Internet were available to students outside of regular schoolhours, and secondary schools were more likely than elementary schools to make the Internetavailable to students outside of regular school hours (80 percent compared with 46 percent).
Large schools (1,000 or more students) were more likely than medium-sized and small schoolsto make the Internet accessible to students outside of regular school hours (79 percent com-pared with 53 and 49 percent, respectively).  In addition, schools with the highest minority

enrollment reported Internet availability outside of regular school hours more frequentlythan schools with the lowest minority enrollment (61 percent compared with 46 percent).Such statistics suggest that schools do provide a considerable amount of out-of-class Internet
access for many studentsÑand it is likely that many of these students do not have Internetaccess at home.  (Statistics are taken from A. Cattagni and E. Farris, 2001, 
Internet Access inU.S. Public Schools and Classrooms: 1994-2000, NCES 2001-071, Office of Educational Researchand Improvement, U.S. Department of Education, Washington, D.C.  A Kaiser Family Foun-
dation/NPR poll taken in 2001 found that schools are playing an important role in equalizingaccess to computers for kids.  Specifically, African American children and children from

lower-income households are considerably less likely to use a computer at home than are
white kids or kids from higher-income families, whereas virtually the same percentage of
all kids have used a computer at school.  See <http://www.npr.org/programs/specials/poll/
technology/>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.265A PERSPECTIVE ON TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLSthat it would be desirable for all people, rich and poor, to enjoy the protec-tion benefits that such tools confer, but if economics make such equity
impossible, better for some to enjoy such benefits than for none to do so.
On the other hand, detractors of tools, especially of tools whose use is
made mandatory, can argue that laws such as CIPAÑwhich make the useof filters mandatory in exchange for e-rate fundingÑforce the problemsof filters on the poor.11.3THE QUESTIONS TO BE ASKED OF EACH TOOL
Chapters 12 and 13 discuss seven major types of technology that canbe used to protect or limit childrenÕs exposure to inappropriate sexuallyexplicit material on the Internet.  These include filtering, adoption of spe-

cialized domain names, surveillance and monitoring, age verification tech-
nologies, instant help, tools for controlling spam, and tools for protecting
intellectual property.  To provide the basis for a systematic understand-

ing of each of these tools, the committee found the following set of ques-
tions useful.¥What is it?  
The answer to this question provides a clear descriptionof the tool and a discussion of its variants.  While the need for a clear

description may be obvious, the public debate has often been hampered
by a lack of common understanding about exactly what option is being
discussed.¥How well does it work?  
What are the benefits that the product isintended to offer?  As noted in Chapter 8, 
ÒprotectionÓ is a term with
multiple possible meanings, and not all options provide the same kind of
protection.   Only after the nature of the protection offered has been

established is it meaningful to ask about the toolÕs effectiveness.  Note
that effectiveness is a multidimensional concept, and efforts to reduce a
toolÕs effectiveness to a single metric are generally not useful.¥Who decides what is inappropriate?  
All options presume some defini-tion of inappropriate material, and such definitions reflect the values held
by the decision-making party involved.  Indeed, as indicated in Chapter

5, there are few universally held and objective standards for defining or
recognizing inappropriate material.  An understanding of the locus of

definitional control is thus important, because who ÒshouldÓ be respon-
sible for decisions about what is inappropriate for a child is at the center
of much controversy.  Advocates can be heard for the responsible party

being the child, the childÕs parents, the childÕs teacher, a representative ofthe school, the city council, the state legislature, the U.S. Congress, the
Supreme Court, local juries, and so on.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.266YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET¥How flexible and usable is it?  It is rare that a given implementation ofan option is perfectly matched to the needs of its user, and the details of
implementation may make a given product unsuitable for a user, even if,
in general, the philosophy underlying the product is consistent with a
userÕs needs.  (An example is the ease with which user-enabled 
Òover-ridesÓ of product settings is possible.)   A product may also have other
features that enhance or detract from its usability. Note also that people
are usually of two minds about the flexibility of a product.  On the one

hand, they generally believe that a product with greater flexibility can be
customized to their needs to a greater extent.  On the other hand, they

find the actual exploitation of a productÕs flexibility to be a chore that theytend to avoid.  As a result, the most common use of any technology tool is

in its default Òout of the boxÓ configuration.  (Thus, for practical pur-
poses, it is fair that any assessment of a tool place great weight on what
the tool does out of the box.)¥What are the costs entailed and infrastructure required to use it?  Pro-tection against inappropriate material does not exist in a vacuum, and in
general, an infrastructure is necessary to support the long-term use of a
tool that provides maximum protection consistent with the userÕs otherfunctional requirements.  Costs should be understood broadly, and they

include financial costs, ease of implementation, ease of use, false posi-
tives and false negatives, interference with the functions being served in
the chosen environment, and lack of transparency about the option in
operation.¥What are the implications of using it?  It is rare that the adoption of anoption will have no side effects, and understanding the possible unin-
tended consequences (which may be desirable or undesirable) may affect
judgments about a toolÕs desirability.¥What is its future?  Some technologies whose effectiveness is lim-ited today may increase in effectiveness tomorrow as research progresses.
Or, the technology necessary for a certain type of a tool might exist but
not be implemented in any product now on the market.  And, different

environmental circumstances may lead to different levels of effective-
nessÑwhich is especially true of tools or strategies whose effectivenessincreases as others make use of them.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.267This chapter discusses tools for the end user, here the party respon-sible for making decisions on behalf of the child or youth in question.
Thus, the Òend userÓ may be a parent in the case of a home or family, a
maker of school policy (e.g., a school principal or a school district), a
maker of policy for a public library (or library system), or some other
similar individual or body.  The focus on tools for end users is important

because such tools are intended to empower end users by providing a
wide range of options for the children in their care, more or less regard-
less of what other Internet stakeholders do or do not do.  (The only excep-

tion concerns instant help, in which the user is the child seeking help.)Table 12.1 provides a preview of this chapter.12.1FILTERING AND CONTENT-LIMITED ACCESS
Filters are at the center of the debate over protecting children andyouth from inappropriate sexually explicit material on the Internet.   A

good filter allows a specific filtering policy to be implemented with accu-
racy, has enough flexibility, and can be implemented with a minimum of
undesirable side effects.  Box 12.1 describes the dimensions of choice that
GetNetWise identifies for filters.12.1.1What Is Filtering and Content-Limited Access?
Today, Internet access is largely unrestricted.  That is, a user who
does not take some explicit action to limit the content to which he or she is12Technology-Based Tools for Users
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.268YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETTABLE 12.1  Technology-Based Tools for the End User
One IllustrativeOne Illust
rType of ToolFunctionAdvantageDisadvan
tCan be configured to denyaccess to substantial amountsof adult-oriented sexually
explicit material fromcommercial Web sitesProvides high confidence thatall accessible material conforms
to the acceptability standardsof the access providerSeparates content characteriza-tion (e.g., sexually explicit ornot) from decisions to block;
multiple content raters can beusedRarely prevents child fromreaching appropriate materialthat might have been
mistakenly flagged asinappropriateCan provide useful informationabout whether or notacceptable use policies are
being followedCan reduce the volume ofinappropriate e-mailssignificantlyProvides guidance for childwhen it is likely to be mosteffective, i.e., at time of needBlock ÒinappropriateÓ access to
prespecified content; typicallyblocks specific Web pages, may
also block generic access toinstant messages, e-mail, andchat roomsAllow access only to contentand/or services previously
determined to be appropriateEnable users to make informeddecisions about content prior toactual accessExamine a childÕs actions by anadult supervisor in real time orafter the factWatch the collective actions ofa group (e.g., a school) withoutidentifying individualsInhibit unsolicited e-mailcontaining sexually explicitmaterial (or links to suchmaterial) from entering childÕsmailboxProvide  immediate help when
needed from an adultNOTE: The Òend userÓ is generally the adult supervisor who makes decisions on behalf of a
child.  (This is true in all cases except for instant help, in which the user is the child seeking

help.)FilterContent-limitedaccessLabeling ofcontentMonitoringwith individualidentificationMonitoringwithoutindividual
identificationSpam-controllingtoolsInstant helpYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.269TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS FOR USERSVoluntary versusOne IllustrativeInvoluntary
DisadvantageExposure
Protects against both deliberate andinadvertent exposure for sites that areexplicitly blocked; can be circumvented
under some circumstancesVery low possibility of deliberate orinadvertent exposure, given that all
material is explicitly vettedLikelihood of exposure depends onaccuracy of labels given by labelingpartyWarnings can help to deter deliberateexposure; ineffective against inadvertentexposureWarnings can help to deter deliberateexposure; less effective againstinadvertent exposureMostly relevant to inadvertent exposure(i.e., unsought commercial e-mailcontaining sexually explicit material)Mostly relevant to inadvertent exposureIn typical (default) configuration,generally denies access to substantialamounts of Web material that is not
adult-oriented and sexually explicitMay be excessively limiting for thosewith broader information needs than
those served by the access providerEffectiveness depends on broadacceptance of a common labelingframeworkPotential loss of privacy zone for childDoes not enable individual account-ability for irresponsible actionsAmong users concerned about losingpersonalized e-mail, reduced tolerancefor false positives that block genuinelypersonal e-mails incorrectly identified as
spamRequires responsive infrastructure ofhelpersYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.270YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETBox 12.1GetNetWise Questions About FiltersDoes the product control:¥Access to Web pages?
¥Use of e-mail?

¥Access to chat rooms?
¥Movement of files in and out of your computer (FTP)?
¥Access to newsgroups (Usenet)?

¥Access to various forms of instant messaging?
¥Access to other Internet capabilities?
How are standards of ÒinappropriatenessÓ managed?¥By the company alone?

¥By the user selecting categories to be filtered from a list of preset categories?
¥By the user developing his or her own list of material to be filtered, based on
the companyÕs list of material to be filtered as a starting point?¥By the user adding to or subtracting from the companyÕs list of material to be
filtered?¥By the user developing his or her own list of material to be filtered, starting
from scratch?To what extent can the criteria for determining inappropriateness be reviewed?Can the user review¥The list of keywords?

¥The list of filtered URLs (Web page addresses)?

¥The companyÕs criteria for filtering a Web page?
On what basis does the company determine what content is inappropriate?¥PICS ratings (an independent rating system)?

¥Using the Web page address (URL)?
¥Human review of Web sites?
¥A list of keywords?

¥A list of keywords combined with an analysis of the context in which they
appear?What are the categories of inappropriate material?  These might include, for example,Violence/profanityPartial nudityFull nudity
Sexual actsGross depictionsQuestionable/illegal andgamblingAlcohol and tobacco.IntoleranceSatanic/cultDrugs/drug cultureMilitant/extremist
Sex educationYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.271TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS FOR USERSexposed has access to any content that the Internet provides through Webpages, e-mail, chat rooms, and the like.  This report uses the term 
ÒfilterÓto refer to a system or service that limits in some way the content to which
users may be exposed.  The vast majority of filters block access to content

on specific Web sites (though these sites may be specified as a class).
Other filters also block access on the basis of keywords appearing either
in a userÕs query to a search engine or contained in the about-to-be dis-played Web site.1  Some filters provide the capability to block more
broadly, so that an individual may be denied access to other common
Internet services, such as interactive services (e.g., e-mail, chat rooms),
Usenet newsgroups, file downloading, peer-to-peer connections, or even
e-commerce with credit card usage.Users who wish to use a filter have a number of technical options:¥Client-side filters.
  Filters can be installed on the devices (today,
desktop and laptop personal computers) that serve as the Internet access
point for the end user.  Client-side systems are installed as local software,

in the same way that any other software is locally installed, except that
standard uninstallation (which would disable the filter) can be done only
by someone with the appropriate password.  The party with the appropri-

ate password is also generally responsible for configuring the profile of
the system for those they are seeking to protect from inappropriate mate-
rials.   A common personal use is a client-side filter installed at home by a

parent wishing to protect children from inappropriate material.  Client-

side filtering is also feasible in an environment in which only some access
points in a local area network must be filteredÑfor example, in a libraryattempting to segregate ÒchildrenÕs areasÓ from areas for all patrons.
¥Content-limited Internet service providers.
  As a feature of their offer-ings, a number of ISPs provide Internet access only to a certain subset of
Internet content.  Content-limited ISPs are most likely to be used by orga-

nizations and families in which the information needs of the children
involved are fairly predictable.  Today, such dedicated ISPs are a niche
1The actual content of a list of such keywords is usually held as proprietary informationby the vendor of the filter.  However, such lists include a variety of 
Òfour-letter wordsÓassociated with sex, reproduction, and excretory functions, words such as Òsex,Ó Ònaked,Óand so on.  Other words that might be singled out for inclusion include 
Òbomb,Ó Òbond-age,Ó Òfetish,Ó Òspunk,Ó Òvoyeurism,Ó Òbabe,Ó Òerotica,Ó Ògay rights,Ó ÒNazi,Ó Òpot,Ó Òwhitepower,Ó Ògirlz,Ó and 
Òhard-core pornography.Ó  (These examples are taken from Lisa Guern-
sey, 1999, ÒSticks and Stones Can Hurt, But Bad Words Pay,Ó New York Times, April 9.)Also, a more sophisticated form of filtering is based on the analysis of word combinationsand phrases, proximity of certain keywords to certain other keywords, the presence of
various URLs, and so on.  In some cases, text-based analysis may also be combined with the
analysis of images on the Web page in question.  As a rule, tools based on this more
sophisticated filtering are not broadly marketed today.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.272YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETmarket and typically have subscriber bases in the thousands to tens ofthousands.  All subscribers
Ñwhich are often families and less often insti-tutionsÑare subject to the same restrictions.  Some content-limited ISPs,
intended for use by children, make available only a very narrow range of
content that has been explicitly vetted for appropriateness and safety.
Thus, all Web pages accessible have been viewedÑand assessedÑforcontent that is developmentally appropriate, educational, and entertain-
ing.  (This approach is known as 
Òwhite listingÓÑall content from sourcesnot on a white list are disallowed,2 as discussed in Section 2.3.1.)  Chat
rooms and bulletin boards are monitored for appropriate content, and
those violating rules of chatting or message posting are disinvited, forc-
ibly if necessary.  E-mail and instant messages (IMs) can be received only

from specified parties and/or other users of the system.  Other content-

limited ISPs, intended for use by both children and adults, allow access to
all content that is not explicitly designated by the ISP as inappropriate.
Monitoring and limits on e-mail are less strict or non-existent.Some services allow multiple Òlogin namesÓ or 
Òscreen names.Ó  Ascreen name is an online identity, similar to a CB radio Òhandle.Ó  Each
online session uses a single screen name, and families can choose not to
give the adult or ÒadministrativeÓ screen name password to youth.   An
online account may have multiple screen names, and a user with appro-
priate privileges (usually associated with paying for the master account)
can create arbitrary screen names at will for himself or someone else on
his account as long those names are not already in use.  With each name

can be associated unrestricted access or more limited access to online
content (which may include both Internet and proprietary content).  In

the case of America Online (AOL), a parent can identify the age of the
child for whom he or she is setting up a screen name.   AOL then puts into

place default limitations based on the age of the child, which the parent
can then adjust if necessary.  Such limitations might include, for example,

Web access only to age-appropriate content or to everything except ex-
plicitly mature themes, receipt of e-mail only without file attachments or
embedded pictures, and access only to chat rooms intended for children
(or no chat room access at all).¥Server-side filters.  Server-side filtering is useful in institutional set-
tings in which users at all access points within the institutionÕs purview2Note that sources on a white list can be specified in advance or identified as appropriatebecause a source contains one or several Ògood wordsÓ that may be found on a 
Ògood-wordÓ list.  For an example of the latter, see Gio Wiederhold, Michel Bilello, Vatsala Sarathy,
and XioaLei Qian, ÒA Security Mediator for Health Care Information,Ó pp. 120-124 in 
Pro-ceedings of the 1996 American Medical Informatics Association Conference, Washington, D.C.,October.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.273TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS FOR USERSmust conform to the access policy defined by the institution.  Server-side
filtering might be used by a school district that provides Internet service
to all schools in the district or a library system that provides Internet
service to all libraries in the system.  Server-side filters are located on

systems other than the client.3  An institution may contract with an ISP to
implement its filtering policy, or it may install a filter in the server that
manages a local area network (e.g., that of a school district or a library
system).4  (Note that there are no fundamental technological impediments
to having filtering policies that differentiate between schools within a
district, so that a high school might operate under a policy different from
that for an elementary school.  Such differentiation is simply a matter of

cost.)¥Search engine filters. In a special class of server-side filters are thosethat are today part of major search engines such as Google, AltaVista, and
so on.  Each of these search engines has the capability of enabling an

Internet safety filter (hereafter Òfiltered search engineÓ).  When activated
by the user, these filters do not return links to inappropriate content found
in a search, but they also do not block access to specifically named Web
sites (so that a user knowing the URL of a Web site containing inappropri-
ate sexually explicit material could access it).5  Other search engines are
explicitly designed for use by children.  For example, Lycos and Yahoo

both offer a special kids-oriented version of their general-purpose search
engine that restricts the universe of a search to child-appropriate areas.
(This is the white-list approach.)Filters can be used to block certain incoming inappropriate informa-tion (an application that is the most common use of filters), to block access
to certain Internet services (e.g., file downloads), or to block selected out-3The distinction between server-side filtering and content-limited ISPs is not a technicalone, because content-limited ISPs use server-side filters.  Rather, the point is that server-
side filtering provides a degree of institutional customization that is not possible with con-tent-limited ISPs, which tend to offer one-size-fits-all filtering policies.4The use of server-side filters may degrade performance.  In particular, a server-based
filter may rely on Òproxy serversÓ that are unable to take advantage of the caching tech-
niques that are often used by major Internet providers to speed the retrieval of commonly
requested pages.  Such a filter would be forced to retrieve information from its host server
and take whatever performance hit that might entail.  In other cases, performance is im-
proved because without irrelevant material taking up space in the cache, retrieval of rel-
evant material is faster.5In practice, a responsible adult would set the filtering provision to the ÒonÓ setting, and
save the configuration.  Thereafter, other requests on that client to the search engine would

encounter the ÒonÓ setting.  The setting can also be turned 
ÒoffÓ through entering a pass-
word known only to the individual who initially set it (a possible problem if that person isthe teenager in the household who manages the familyÕs information technology).Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.274YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETgoing information.  All technology-enforced methods for blocking access
to inappropriate information require a determination that certain pieces
of content are inappropriate.6  Content can be deemed inappropriate on
the basis of the methods discussed in Section 2.3.1.Many filter vendors establish lists of ÒsuspectÓ Web sites (compiled
as a list of specific URLs and/or IP addresses) deemed sources of inap-
propriate content.7  The number of such sites may range from several
hundred thousand to 2 million.  In addition, many vendors establish lists
of keywords (typically hundreds of words) that represent inappropriate
content.  Far fewer employ image analysis or statistical techniques to

analyze text.In addition, techniques for textual and image analysis can be used toidentify and block e-mail containing inappropriate content and for block-
ing outgoing content as well.  For example, the technology that identifies

inappropriate content by searching for keywords can also prevent those
words (or some set of them) from being used in e-mail messages or in chat
rooms.  (In this case, the adult supervisor can augment the keyword list to

include certain phrases that should not appear, such as specific addresses
or phone numbers.)Filters are perhaps the most widely deployed of all technological toolsintended to protect children from exposure to inappropriate material.
The majority of schools have deployed filters,8 while around 25 percent of
6Note that content that is transmitted through certain channels such as attachments to e-mail, videoconferences, instant messages, or peer-to-peer networking (in a Gnutella-like
arrangement) is very difficult (arguably impossible) to block selectively, though a filter canblock all interaction through these channels.  Moreover, to the extent that the content of
traffic is determined interactively, neither labeling nor sites are likely to provide a sufficient
basis.  The reason is that interactive sources, almost by definition, can support a variety of
different types of interactionÑthe best example of which is an online friend with whom onemay exchange sports trivia, conversation about school homework, and inappropriate sexu-
ally explicit material.  Only real-time content recognition has a chance of filtering such
content.7Note also that the list of blocked sites often includes sites that could help users circum-vent the basic filtering.  Thus, sites providing information on how to circumvent filters are
often included on the list, and a number of filters block sites that allow language translation(Seth Finkelstein and Lee Tien, 2001, ÒBlacklisting Bytes,Ó white paper submitted to the
committee, available online at <http://www.eff.org/Censorship/Censorware/20010306_eff_nrc_ paper1.html>) or access to Web archives (Seth Finkelstein, 2002, The Pre-SlippedSlopeÑ Censorware vs. the Wayback Machine Web Archive
, available online at <http://sethf.com/anticensorware/general/slip.php>).8According to the National Center for Education Statistics, nearly three-fourths of allschools use blocking or filtering software.  See A. Cattagni and E. Farris.  2001.  Internet

Access in U.S. Public Schools and Classrooms: 1994-2000.  NCES 2001-071.  Office of Educa-
tional Research and Improvement, U.S. Department of Education, Washington, D.C.  Avail-
able online at <http://www.nces.ed.gov/pubs2001/internetaccess/>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.275TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS FOR USERSlibraries filter at least some workstations.9  Through AOL
Õs parental con-trols (Box 12.2), a substantial number of Internet-using children enjoy the
benefits and endure the costs of filtering.  However, as a percentage of all

children using the Internet, the fraction whose Internet access is filtered
apart from school usage is small.10It is noteworthy that filters are increasingly common in corporate andbusiness settings and thus affect the Internet use of adults.11  Many com-
panies, driven primarily by concerns about productivity and time wasted
on non-business Internet activities and about the possible creation of hos-
tile work environments and the consequent liability, use filters to prevent
inappropriate use of company IT facilities.1212.1.2How Well Does Filtering Work?
Denying access to inappropriate material through technological means,filters are intended to protect against both inadvertent and deliberate ac-
cess.  However, as discussed in Section 2.3.1, all filters are subject to over-

blocking (false positives, in which filters block some appropriate material9By contrast, around 57 percent of public libraries do not filter Internet access on any work-station, while about 21 percent filter access on some workstations.  About 21 percent filter all
workstations.  See Norman Oder.  2002.  
ÒThe New Wariness,Ó The Library Journal, January 15.Available online at <http://libraryjournal.reviewsnews.com/index.asp?layout= article&articleid=CA188739>.10A survey conducted by Family PC magazine in August 2001 found that of 600 families
surveyed, 26 percent used parental controls of some kind.  About 7 percent of those using
parental controls (about 1.8 percent of the total) used off-the-shelf store-bought filteringpackages.  The rest used filtering offered by an Internet service provider.  (This study is not
available in print, because it was scheduled for publication in October 2001, and Ziff Davis,the publisher of Family PC, terminated the magazine before that issue was printed.)11For example, a survey taken by the American Management Association in 2001 foundthat 38 percent of the firms responding do use blocking software to prevent Internet con-nections to unauthorized or inappropriate sites.  Seventy eight percent of the responding
firms restricted access to ÒadultÓ sites with explicit sexual content, though it is not clear
how the remaining 40 percent are enforcing such restrictions.  (The survey suggests that
they are doing it by actively monitoring Internet use.)  See American Management Associa-tion. 2001.  2001 AMA Survey, Workplace Monitoring and Surveillance: Policies and Practices.Available online at <http://www.amanet.org/research/pdfs/emsfu_short.pdf>.12Potential overlap between the business market and the school and library filtering mar-ket raises the following operational concern: a blocked category may be defined by a ven-
dor so that it is appropriate in a business environment, but that definition may not beappropriate in a school or library context.  For example, information about sexually trans-
mitted diseases, safe sex practices, and pregnancy may not be necessary in most business
environments (and hence an employer may have a legitimate business reason for blockingsuch information), but many would argue that older students using school facilities shouldnot be blocked from receiving such information.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.276YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETBox 12.2AOLÕs Parental ControlsAOLÕs parental controls provide a number of options for restricting in some waysthe privileges associated with a given screen name.1¥An online timer limits the amount of time a user can spend online.
¥Web access is provided at three levels
Ñunrestricted, unrestricted except forWeb sites that are explicitly deemed inappropriate, and limited only to Web sites
that are explicitly deemed appropriate for children.¥IM controls allow or prevent the user
Õs sending and receiving of instantmessages.¥E-mail controls allow or prevent the user
Õs sending and receiving of e-mail,and can further be set to allow e-mail only from certain parties.¥Chat controls can be set to allow the user to participate in any chat rooms,
in only selected monitored chat rooms appropriate for children, or in no chat roomat all.¥Download controls allow or prevent the user
Õs sending and receiving fileattachments (which may include images).¥Newsgroup controls allow or prevent the user
Õs gaining access to Usenetnewsgroups.AOL parental controls distinguish between four categories: Kids Only, YoungTeen, Mature Teen, and 18+ (General Access) categories.¥Kids Only (12 and under) allows access to age-appropriate features and con-tent through AOLÕs Kids Only Channel and the rest of the Internet (when accessedthrough AOL). Fee-based services such as shopping, instant message notes, access tomember profiles and all chat rooms, home pages based on AOL, and links to Websites obtained in e-mail are blocked.¥Young Teen (13 to 15) allows access to age-appropriate interactive features
and information on AOL and the rest of the Internet (when accessed through AOL).Fee-based services such as shopping, instant message notes, access to member pro-
files as well as private and member chat rooms, home pages based on AOL, andlinks to Web sites obtained in e-mail are blocked.¥Mature Teen (16 to 17) gives the most freedom compared to other childrenÕscategories, and allows access to most interactive features and information on AOLand the rest of the Internet (when accessed through AOL). Web sites with explicitlymature content are blocked. Internet newsgroups and fee-based services are blocked.¥General Access (18+) allows full access to all features and content on AOL
and the rest of the Internet.SOURCE: America Online.
1A screen name is an online identity, similar to a CB radio Òhandle.Ó  An individual may
have multiple screen names, and a user with appropriate privileges (usually associated with
paying for the master account) can create arbitrary screen names at will for himself or someone
else on his account as long those names are not already in use.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.277TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS FOR USERSfrom the user) and underblocking (false negatives, in which filters passsome inappropriate material to the user).  While the issue of underblocking

and overblocking should not, in and of itself, rule out filters as a useful tool,
the extent of underblocking and overblocking is a significant factor in un-
derstanding and deciding about the use of filters.13There is no agreed-upon methodology for measuring a filterÕs effec-tiveness, as might be indicated by an overblocking rate and an under-
blocking rate (discussed in Section 2.3.1).14 Filter vendors sometimes pro-
vide estimates of overblock and underblock rates, but without knowing
the methodology underlying these estimates, the cautious user must be
concerned that the methodology is selected to minimize these rates.  (The

discussion in Box 2.7 illustrates some of the problems in estimating these
rates.  Note further that the lists of blocked Web pages change constantly,

with both additions and subtractions made regularly.)Underblocking results from several factors:¥New material appears on the Internet constantly, and the contentsof given Web pages sometimes change.  When content changes, the judg-
ing parties must revisit the sources responsible for the content they pro-
vide frequently enough to ensure that inappropriate information does not
suddenly appear on a previously trusted source or that the inappropriate
material remains on the Web pages in question.  Technology is available

that can indicate if a page has changed (thus flagging it for human assess-
ment), but not to tell if it continues to be developmentally and education-
ally appropriate.  Vendors of filtering systems generally provide updates
from time to time, but there is inevitably a lag between the time inappro-
priate material first appears and the time that item is entered into the list
of blocked sites.  (Content-based filtering systems are not subject to this

particular problem.)¥The algorithms (i.e., the computational techniques) used to iden-tify inappropriate material are imperfect.  For example, the emergence of
13Note also that legal challenges brought against the mandated use of filters in institu-tional settings have relied significantly on the existence of underblocking and overblockingas inherent flaws in the technology that make filters unsuitable for such use.14For Òbake-offsÓ comparing Internet filters, see Christopher D. Hunter, 2000, 
ÒInternetFilter Effectiveness: Testing Over and Underinclusive Blocking Decisions of Four PopularFilters,Ó Social Science Computer Review 18 (2, Summer), available online at <http://
www.copacommission.org/papers/filter_effect.pdf>; Karen J. Bannan, 2001,  ÒClean It Up,ÓPC Magazine, September 25, available online at <http://www.pcmag.com/article/0,2997,a%253D12392,00.asp>; and ÒDigital Chaperones for Kids,Ó Consumer Reports, March2001.  For a critique of the 
Consumer Reports analysis, see David Burt, 2001, 
ÒFiltering Advo-cate Responds to Consumer Reports Article,Ó February 14, available online at <http://
www. politechbot.com/p-01734.html>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.278YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETnew slang for sexual acts will thwart filters based on keyword recognitionuntil the new slang is incorporated into the filtering criteria.  Another

possibility is that the use of clothed people having sex may thwart image-
recognition algorithms based on the assumption of searching for naked
people.¥Sites with adult-oriented content are often given names that areclose in spelling to the names of legitimate sites.  For example, <http://

www.whitehouse.com> is often reached by people intending to reach
<http://www.whitehouse.gov>.  While most filtering programs have

fixed this specific problem, close-but-not-identical names can pop up for a
large number of legitimate general-purpose sites.Overblocking arises from three factors:
¥Content may be less than clear-cut, especially in the context ofmachine-assisted understanding.  As noted in Chapter 2, both text and

images can be ambiguous.15  Moreover, the precise definition of what
should be blocked is inevitably subject to the vagaries of individual judg-
ments.  For reasons discussed below, filter vendors generally have more

incentives to block ambiguous information than to allow it to pass, a fact
that leads to overblocking.¥Information on the Internet is updated constantly.  Thus, a site that
may have been blocked for good reason in the past may post new infor-
mation that does not meet the criteria for blocking.  As in the case of

underblocking, until records of the site are updated in the filter, that filter
will continue to mark such sites as inappropriate even if the information
contained therein is perfectly innocuous.15Two particularly egregious examples include Beaver College and online biogra-phies of individuals who have graduated magna cum laude.  Beaver College in Penn-

sylvania recently changed its name to Arcadia College because its name was beingfiltered out (ÒbeaverÓ has crude sexual connotations in American English slang).  Bea-
ver College spokesman Bill Avington was quoted in Wired as saying, 
ÒWe have a lot ofevidence that people arenÕt able to get our information in high schools because of Webfilters in the librariesÓ that block out sites with 
ÒBeaverÓ along with other presumed
smut words.  He continued, ÒWith so many people using the Net as the initial means tolook at colleges, thatÕs a serious disadvantage.Ó  In addition, he claimed that filters
sometimes block e-mail from Beaver college staffers to prospective students.  (See Craig
Bicknell, 2000, ÒBeaver College Not a Filter Fave,Ó Wired, March 22, available online at<http://www.wired.com/news/politics/0,1283,35091,00.html>; and CNN story, 2000,ÒBeaver College Changes Oft-derided Name to Arcadia University,Ó November 20,
available online at <http://www.cnn.com/2000/US/11/20/embarrassingbeaver.ap/>.
The Òmagna cum laudeÓ problem was demonstrated when filtering software blocked
access to all biographies of COPA Commissioners who had graduated magna cum laude(see <http://www.cdt.org/speech/filtering/001002analysis.shtml>).Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.279TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS FOR USERS¥A site (or a given Web page) may contain both appropriate andinappropriate material.  If the filter cannot separate appropriate from

inappropriate, it will usually block (overblock) the entire site or page.The above three factors are basic to the fundamental imperfection ofthe filtering process.  A fourth factor that can lead to overblocking results

from the ways in which some filtering systems are implemented.  If a

filter blocks sites on the basis of the IP addresses of adult-oriented, sexu-
ally explicit sites, and those sites are hosted on a server that makes use of
IP-based virtual hosting (described in Chapter 2), other non-adult sites
hosted on that server (and sharing those IP addresses) will be blocked.16Note an important distinction between overblocking and an overlybroad scope of blocking (i.e., an overly broad blocking policy).  Over-

blocking is inadvertent and results from the inability of the automated
systems for blocking to perfectly track human decision making.  The

model human decision maker, examining overblocked material, would
conclude that the material should in fact have been free to pass.  An

example would be a search for Òbeaver damsÓ that results in pages beingblocked because the word ÒbeaverÓ is present on the page.
An overly broad policy is more subjective, and results from a dis-agreement between the end user and the human decision maker about
what information the end user should be allowed to receive.  From the
16The magnitude of overblocking due to IP-based virtual hosting is unclear.  One esti-
mate (Art Wolinksy, 2001, ÒFilterGate, or Knowing What WeÕre Walling In or WallingOut,Ó MultiMedia Schools, May/June, available online from <http://www.infotoday.com/mmschools/may01/wolinsky.htm>) suggests that such overblocking far outstrips over-
blocking for other causes.  However, a number of factors should be considered in assess-
ing the potential impact of IP-based virtual hosting:¥Most large sites are not hosted on virtual hosting services.  Furthermore, large sites tend tobe more heavily promoted and are often more likely to appear in a prominent position in a
search engineÕs result list.  Thus, large sites
Ñwhich typically account for the Web requests ofmost usersÑare much less likely to be improperly blocked than smaller sites.¥Many virtual hosting services ban adult-oriented, sexually explicit material and othermaterial that they regard as offensive as well, and they enforce their acceptable use policiesvigorously.  Thus, the amount of sexually explicit material hosted overall by such services is
likely to be small.  (But, if such a service does host even one site containing inappropriate

sexually explicit material and that fact is picked up by a filtering vendor that uses IP-basedfiltering, it will exclude all of the acceptable sites on that host.  All of the acceptable sites that
are improperly blocked will stay blocked until the hosting service eliminates the inappropri-
ate site and the fact of elimination is communicated to the vendor.)¥Different implementations of filtering (e.g., use of name-based filtering) can lead to thesame intended result without the overblocking caused by IP-based filtering.  As a rule, the

primary reason for wishing to use IP-based filtering is technicalÑwhen a hosting service isused primarily for adult-oriented, sexually explicit material, IP-based filtering reduces theamount of storage and processing needed by the filter.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.280YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETperspective of the end user, a certain piece of material is blocked inappro-priately.  However, upon examination of that blocked material, the hu-

man decision maker concludes that the blocking decision was proper.  For

example, a student may wish to search for information on marijuana.  But

Web sites containing the word marijuana may be blocked because of a
policy decision to block information about drugs.17The effectiveness of a filter also depends on whether its use is en-forced at all sites available to a child.  In a specific venue, filters will block

some material that some parties deem inappropriateÑand there is a rea-sonable argument to be had over whether the blocking that occurs is
worth the cost of overblocking.  But it is impossible for a filter deployed in

a school to block material sought in a cyber-caf” or at home, and filteringlimited to schools and libraries will not prevent the access of children to
inappropriate sexually explicit material if they are determined to search
for it and have other venues of access.  The most common unfiltered

venues are home Internet access or Internet access provided at a friendÕshome.  (Filtering at home is not the norm,
18 even though a significant
fraction of U.S. youth do have Internet access at home,19 a point well
represented by the adolescents to whom the committee spoke during its
site visits.)Filters that are not based on real-time content-based identification ofinappropriate content can be circumvented by users in a number of
ways,20 both direct and indirect:
17The distinction between overblocking and an overly broad scope of blocking is furthercomplicated by the fact that from time to time, a given site can be used for multiple pur-
poses.  Most filters include adult-oriented Web sites in their 
Òto be blockedÓ categories.
However, a high school student undertaking, for example, a study of the economics of theadult online industry might have an entirely legitimate purpose for seeking access to such
sites.  More generally, any student wanting to study a controversial issue and needing to
consult sources for different sides of an argument may well find that advocates of one pointof view or another are blocked because they are regarded as ÒinappropriateÓÑwhere, inpractice, ÒinappropriateÓ is likely to mean 
Òcontroversial.Ó18 See footnote 10.
19According to Grunwald Associates, 17.7 million children aged 2 to 17 had Internet accessfrom home in the last quarter of 1999. (The Web site <http://cyberatlas.internet.com/big_picture/demographics/article/0,,5901_390941,00.html> provides a summary of the Grun-
wald study.  The full study is available online at <http://www.grunwald.com/survey/

index.htm>.)  The U.S. Census indicates about 65.7 million children in the United States in
this age bracket, for a percentage of about 27 percent.20Many filtering products, especially those on the client side, are easily breakable byknowledgeable users.  See Michael J. Miller, 2001, 
ÒWhen Does Web Filtering MakeSense?,Ó PC Magazine, September 25, available online at <http://www.pcmag.com/article/0,2997,s%253D1499%2526a%253D12632,00.asp>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.281TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS FOR USERS¥It may be possible to defeat the filter itself.  When this occurs, a
specific Web page that the filter should block is made accessible to the
user.  Defeating the filter may sometimes be accomplished by:
ÑUninstalling the filter;ÑObtaining the privileges needed to disable the filter.  While such
privileges are intended for the parental supervisor (and are usually pass-
word-enabled), the ability of youth to obtain privileges is not uncommon
in households in which the resident teenager serves as the de facto system
administrator because of superior technical knowledge);ÑAccessing the Web page indirectly through a proxy server,21 atranslation service, an anonymizing service, or some other route;ÑFinding a click route to the page other than the one that was di-rectly blocked; and/orÑManipulating the reload/refresh and back/forward keys.Note that defeating a filter can be more difficult when the filter isserver-based, because the circumventer does not have direct access to the
system on which the filter resides.  Further, note that because a child-

oriented content-limited ISP would most likely be chosen by families in-
terested in filtering for fairly young children (say, 10 and younger), the
likelihood that the ISPÕs restrictions could be circumvented is substan-tially lower than it would be if users included older youth.In addition, inappropriate material (sexually explicit and otherwise)can flow to a child through routes other than Web sitesÑpeer-to-peer filetransfers such as those available through Gnutella, e-mail attachments,
and so on.  While some filters can be set to block the use of such routes,

such blockage is indiscriminate and insensitive to the content carried on
these routes.¥The user can obtain information that is generically similar to theinformation on the blocked Web page.  As a general rule, information not

associated with a specific source is resident on many locations on the
World Wide Web, and the likelihood of all of those locations being blocked
is low.   These comments apply particularly to sexually explicit material,

especially material containing images.  An individual seeking explicit

images for the purpose of sexual arousal is not particularly sensitive to
which of hundreds or thousands of images on as many Web pages can be
retrieved.21A proxy server is a server that happens to be accessible from the client machine.  The
use of a proxy server, which can channel all requests ÒaroundÓ a server-side filter, can
enable circumvention.  Many local area networks, however, are configured in such a way as
to prevent the use of proxy servers.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.282YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETIt is also true that the content provider could provide ways of circum-venting filters.  For example, misspelled sexual words (e.g., 
Òpormography,ÓÒdicck,Ó Ò0rgyÓ) may be used in a siteÕs metatags to circumvent filters thatsearch for keywords.   As a general rule, though, commercial vendors of

sexually explicit material argue that they are not economically motivated to
expend a lot of effort to get through these filters, because children are unable
to pay for such material.  Those providing other types of content without

commercial intent may be more likely to attempt to circumvent filters.Many of these methods of circumvention do not apply to filters thatare based on real-time content-based identification of inappropriate con-
tent.  However, filters that are based on real-time content-based identifi-

cation are not nearly as commonly available as filters based on lists of
inappropriate sites and keywords.  Furthermore, the technology of con-

tent-based identification is relatively sophisticated compared to that re-
quired for developing lists of sites and keywords, and hence is more
difficult to implement properly.The effectiveness of label-based filters depends on the ubiquity oflabels for Internet content and the willingness of the user to decide which
labels indicate content that should be blocked.  Label-based filters, such as

those that incorporate PICS-compliant labels, are built into the major Web
browsers, Internet Explorer (IE) and Netscape.  However, PICS-compliant

labels are not in wide use as of this writing (May 2002; but see Section
12.1.5).   Both IE and Netscape provide the user with the option of allow-

ing or blocking unlabeled material, with the consequence that users of
these browsers can either have access only to a very small segment of the
Web (if unlabeled material is blocked) or enjoy minimal protection from
inappropriate material (if unlabeled material is allowed).  For this reason,

label-based filters today do not work particularly well in reducing expo-
sure to inappropriate material unless one is willing to tolerate a very high
rate of overblocking.  Whether they will work more effectively in the

future depends on the extent to which Internet content will be labeled.While filters are designed to reduce childrenÕs access to inappropriatematerial on the Internet, there are some interesting psychological and
social phenomena related to their use.  In most of the schools and libraries

that the committee visited, teachers, librarians, and administrators told
the committee that filters played a very small role in protecting students
and library users from inappropriate material, largely because most of
these students and library users had unfiltered Internet access somewhere
else (usually at home).  (Of course, for the significant fraction of students

without non-school access, such comments did not apply.22)   Neverthe-
22U.S. public schools are increasingly providing Internet access to students outside regularschool hours.  For example, 80 percent of public secondary schools provided such a service inYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.283TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS FOR USERSless, the school or library filter served a useful political purpose in fore-stalling complaints from the community about Òpublic facilities beingused for shameful purposes.Ó23  In virtually every school the committee
visited, avoiding controversy and/or liability for exposing children to
inappropriate sexually explicit material was the primary reason offered
for the installation of filters.24In a public library setting, filters have also been used to prevent thedisplay of material that would be regarded as offensive to other patrons
walking by.  For example, one technique used to shock other patrons is to

display an adult-oriented Web site on a public Internet terminal and to
ÒhideÓ it behind the terminal
Õs screen saver (which places some innocu-ous image on the screen on top of whatever is on the screen).  When an

unsuspecting user clears the screen saver image, he or she is suddenly
surprised by a sexually explicit image.25Teachers and librarians can derive substantial benefit from filters.For example, most schools and libraries have acceptable use policies
(AUPs, as discussed in Chapter 10) that forbid use of school or library
computer resources for certain purposes, such as viewing sexually ex-
plicit sites.  In the absence of a filter, a teacher or librarian must confront

the user and inform him or her that such use violates the AUP.  For many,

such confrontations can be unpleasant and can provoke anxiety.  To the
2000.  In addition, schools with high minority enrollments provided Internet availability out-
side of regular school hours more frequently than schools with lower minority enrollments(61 percent versus 46 percent), a figure consistent with the notion that minority students mayrely on schools to provide access more than do non-minority students.  See A. Cattagni and E.

Farris.  2001
.  Internet Access in U.S. Public Schools and Classrooms: 1994-2000
.  NCES 2001-071.
Office of Educational Research and Improvement, U.S. Department of Education, Washing-ton, D.C.  Available online at <http://www.nces.ed.gov/ pubs2001/internetaccess/>.
23Indeed, in one community, the public library system provided filters for 10 to 20 per-cent of its Internet access points but made no special attempt to guide children toward thesefiltered workstations.  Nevertheless, the presence of these filters on 10 to 20 percent of its

workstations was sufficient to allow it to assert to the community that Òthe library providesfiltered access,Ó an assertion that seems to have met the concerns of local government.
24In the site visits of the committee, committee members explicitly avoided leading ques-tions regarding the motivation for use.  So, when teachers said, 
ÒOur school has filtersÓ(which was true in all schools visited), committee members asked, ÒWhy do you havethem?Ó  ÒWhat is the benefit having filters?Ó  It is in this context that teachers said 
Òtoreduce exposure to liability.Ó  For the most part, the committee believes that given the
overall context of all of the comments received in this manner (e.g., the accessibility of theInternet in unfiltered non-school venues for a large number of students), the avoidance of
liability was indeed a primary or at least a very important reason for having filters inschools.  Nevertheless, the committee recognizes the possibility that responders felt the
protection benefits were so obvious so as not to need mentioning.25Of course, a filter is not the only way to solve this particular problemÑit would bealmost as effective to install software that would clear the browser cache and return to thelibraryÕs home page after a short period of inactivity.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.284YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETextent that a filter reduces the possibility of a student or library patronviewing such sites, it also reduces the frequency of such confrontations.
In addition, given community pressures for teachers and librarians to
supervise or monitor the use of Internet resources by students and library
users, filters reduce the burden on teachers and librarians to police usage
and free time for other, more productive activities.  Finally, many teach-

ers and librarians are themselves uncomfortable in viewing certain types
of inappropriate material26Ñand in the committeeÕs informal discussionsin its site visits, this was especially true for many sexually explicit images.Even apart from the claimed benefits of preventing exposure to inap-propriate material, filters can offer children other benefits.  In the school

environment, teachers reported that filters helped them to keep students
Òon taskÓ while doing school-related Internet work by reducing the dis-
tractions that might otherwise be available to them (the students); Box
12.3 provides some data on the extent to which filters may keep students
on task.  A number of younger students with whom the committee spoke

during various site visits thought that the parental use of filters (generally
AOLÕs parental controls) was a positive indication of their parentsÕ con-
cern, independently of whether they felt the filters were effective.  (Ac-

cording to the Kaiser Family Foundation, about two-thirds of teenagers
and young adults support the ChildrenÕs Internet Protection Act whenprovided with a description of it.  This view does not vary among those

who go online a lot or who have been denied access to Web sites because
of filtering.27)Because they confine the user only to material explicitly consideredappropriate, child-oriented content-limited ISPs provide the greatest de-
gree of protection for children.  By design, their approach seeks to mini-

mize underblocking at the expense of overblockingÑall questionable ex-posure is blocked or at least monitored.  For example, they evaluate for

educational or developmental benefit every Web page that is accessible to
a child.  Under these circumstances, the likelihood of exposure to inap-

propriate content is very low, especially with respect to sexual imagery.
Interactive dialog in chat rooms and on bulletin boards is monitored, so
that the first posting or sending of inappropriate messages can be cen-
sured.  (Such censure also provides observers with a lesson in the conse-
26In a preliminary finding issued in May 2001, the Equal Employment Opportunity Com-mission found that pornography downloaded on library computers was intended to create a
sexually hostile work environment for a group of Minneapolis librarians.  See Michael Bartlett,
2001. 
ÒNo Internet Filtering Is Sex Harassment for LibrariansÑEEOC,Ó Newsbytes, May 25.
Available online at <http://www.newsbytes.com/news/01/166171.html>.
27Victoria Rideout. 2001.  Generation Rx.com: How Young People Use the Internet for HealthInformation. The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, Menlo Park, Calif. Available online at<http://www.kff.org/content/2001/20011211a/GenerationRx.pdf>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.285TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS FOR USERS46 s60 s48 s51 s58 s52 s44 sBox 12.3Student Use of Filtered Internet Access at SchoolHow do students actually use filtered Internet access at school?  One study examined
the usage in schools in which a given filtering system was used.  In particular, the 300 most
frequently accessed sites were examined, and these 300 sites accounted for Òroughly halfÓof the total page views.  For each instance of access to these 300 sites, the per-page
viewing time was recorded, with the results shown below in the table below.Fraction ofFraction of Over-Average Time
Total Pageall Time SpentSpent on Site

Viewson All 300 Sitesin This Category
56.8 percent14.2 percent10.6 percent10.5 percent5.0 percent1.5 percent1.4 percent51.7 percent20.0 percent(41.4 percent)9.5 percent(19.7 percent)10.0 percent(20.7 percent)6.2 percent(12.8 percent)1.9 percent(3.9 percent)0.7 percent(1.4 percent)According to these data, in-school Web access to sites related to e-commerce, chat andmessage board services, and recreational activities accounted for 20 percent of student activ-
ity.  If access to portals and search engines is spread out proportionately over all other

categories, non-educational Internet accesses accounted for 40 percent of student activity.

Noting that these data are derived from schools in which a filtering system was in place, it is
likely that the filter inhibited to some extent student use of inappropriate (and hence non-
educational) sites, and so in the absence of the filter, the fraction of student Internet accesses

spent on non-educational activities might have been higher than 40 percent.  These data

suggest that the presence of the filter does not keep students Òon taskÓ for much of their
Internet time, but it is unknown what would have happened if the filter had not been present.SOURCE: N2H, Inc. Analytic Services. 2000. K-12 Internet Use, N2H2 Winter Quarter, Learn-ings Report.  Available online at <http://web.archive.org/web/20000930212613/www.n2h2.

com/edwhite/edwhite.pdf>.Portals and search (sites that attemptto branch out and connect users with
content)Instructional reference and computing(sites that could be used for specific
instructional purposes by teachers or
students, general research and refer-
ence resources, and computer net-
work resources)Music, games and fun (sites geared toentertainment and leisure)Commerce and e-services (commer-cial sites offering products or online
services)News and sports (online versions ofnational news, sports magazines, local
news)Business and finance (financial newssites and online brokerage firms)Communities (sites providing contenttargeted to specific demographic
groups and typically containing a large

amount of user-generated content such

as chat and message boards)Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.286YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETquences of such behavior.)  The identities of e-mail and IM senders is notmonitored, but because they are restricted for the most part to users of the
service, the universe of those who might engage a child in e-mail or IM
dialog is much smaller than on the entire Internet.  Perhaps of equal or

greater benefit, at least from the perspective of some adults, is that the
content accessible to kids has definite educational or developmental value,
rather than being simply not inappropriate.12.1.3Who Decides What Is Inappropriate?
Filtering is based on the premise that a party or parties other than thechild himself or herself decides what content is inappropriate.  In general,

the first pass at determining potentially inappropriate content is the ven-
dor of the filter or the content-limited ISP.  For those who choose to accept

without change this determination (as is the case with subscribers to con-
tent-limited ISPs or those who do not wish to customize further), this
initial determination stands.For example, a school that installs a filter without additional customi-zation accepts the determination of the vendor about what is or is not
appropriate.  Even if it does undertake customization, it uses the vendor
Õsdetermination as its point of departure, and detailed editorial control on a
site-by-site basis for all sites in the vendorÕs database is not possible inpractice.To accommodate those who wish to customize the characterization ofinappropriate material for their own individual or institutional needs,
filter vendors usually offer two options (which may be combined or imple-
mented by themselves):¥The characterization of inappropriate material can be divided intocontent categories with labels such as pornography, sex education, hate
speech, violence, weapons, cults, and so on.  (For example, a list of inap-

propriate URLs or keywords flagging inappropriate content might be
grouped into such categories.)  These filters then provide the user with

the option of blocking or accepting content by category, so that a user can,
for example, block only pornography and hate speech while accepting all
other content categories.  Category-by-category blocking obviously re-

duces the list of blocked URLs to a subset of the original list.¥Some filters enable the end user (or, more precisely, the end-usersupervisor who knows the appropriate password) to create a local Òex-ceptionsÓ list, which specifies additional URLs to be blocked or URLs that
should be allowed even if they are on the blocked list.  For example,

despite the filter, a child may view a URL that the supervisor deems
inappropriate.  A filter with this option enables the supervisor to add that
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.287TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS FOR USERSURL to the list of blocked sites.  If a child is blocked from viewing a
particular site, it may be apparent from the description accompanying the
original link (e.g., as displayed by a search engine) or from the site name
in the link that the site should not be blocked.  In this case, a 
Òuser over-rideÓ can be used to unblock the site.  For practical purposes, the number
of such sites that are either added to or subtracted from the original list is
small compared to the size of the original list.The vendorÕs characterization of inappropriate content is quite sig-nificant, as it is at the very least the primary point of departure for a userÕscustomization (described below) even when such customization is pos-
sible.28  Filter vendors have many incentives to err on the side of over-
blocking and few to err on the side of underblocking.  Based on its site

visits, the committee believes that the reason is that schools and libraries,
which are the largest users of filters for purposes of this report, tend to
receive many more complaints from parents and the community about
sites that are not filtered (i.e., complaints about underblocking) than about
sites that are filtered improperly (i.e., complaints about overblocking).2928One concern raised by analysts such as Nancy Willard is that filter vendors sometimeshave strong connections to religious organizations, and that the social and cultural valuesespoused by these organizations may drive the vendorÕs characterization of inappropriatecontent.  For example, Willard finds that 
Òmost of the companies have filtering categories inwhich they are blocking web sites . . . known to be of concern to people with conservative
religious valuesÑsuch as [Web sites involving] non-traditional religions and sexual orienta-tionÑin the same category as material that no responsible adult would consider appropriatefor young people.Ó  She also notes that 
Òbecause filtering software companies protect theactual list of blocked sites, searching and blocking key words, blocking criteria, and blockingprocesses as confidential, proprietary trade secret information it is not possible to prove or
disprove the hypothesis that the companies may be blocking access to material based onreligious bias.Ó  At the same time, Willard finds that while 
Òinformation about the religiousconnections can be found through diligent search, such information is not clearly evident on
the corporate web site or in materials that would provide the source of information for localschool officials,Ó though she acknowledges openly that 
Òit is entirely appropriate for conser-vative religious parents or schools to decide to use the services of an ISP that is blocking sites
based on conservative religious values.  It is equally appropriate for parents to want their
children to use the Internet in school in a manner that is in accord with their personal familyvalues.Ó  See Nancy Willard, 2002, 
Filtering Software: The Religious Connection, Center for Ad-vanced Technology in Education, College of Education, University of Oregon, available onlineat <http://netizen.uoregon.edu/documents/religious2.html>.29As with so many other ÒnullÓ observations, the absence of complaints about over-
blocking can be interpreted in many ways.  One interpretation is, of course, that over-
blocking simply does not occur very much (and/or that filters do not block a great deal ofuseful and appropriate information).  But information collected through site visits is not

consistent with this interpretation, and testimony to the committee suggests other explana-tions as well.  For example, the relative lack of complaints may be partly explained by the
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.288YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETIn the various site visits conducted by the committee, only a few stu-dents or parents reported making a formal complaint to the school about a
site needed for research or schoolwork that was blocked by a schoolÕs filter,even though they (mostly high school students) often reported that infor-
mation on the blocked sites might have been useful for legitimate academic
research purposes.30   (The same was not true with most teachers, who
reported that educationally relevant sites were blocked regularly.  Still, in a

number of cases, they were able to use their supervisory privileges to ob-
tain access to blocked sites.)  And, given that schools and libraries install

filters largely to forestall complaints, it is clear that filters that do not gener-
ate complaints would be highly preferred.As for label-based filters, the labeling party can be either the contentcreator or any third party.  However, it is the adult or adults directly

responsible for determining what a child should or should not see who
make the actual decision about how content labeled in a certain manner
should be handled.Because the vendorÕs philosophy regarding inappropriate material isthe primary determinant of what will and will not be blocked, trust is a
fundamental element in the userÕs selection of a filter.  That is, the user
places considerable trust in the vendorÕs judgment about what is and isnot appropriate (or in the case of labeling, places trust in the labels deter-
mined by various content raters).  Thus, a person who wishes his or her

religious values to be reflected in the content that is accessible to his or her
children might choose a filter or a content-limited ISP that is sold by a
firm with similar religious commitments.  A person who wishes his or her

childrenÕs Internet experience to be limited to positive, developmentallyfact that filters for institutional use are increasingly flexible (see Section 12.1.4).  If blocked
pages that are needed for educational purposes, for example, can be obtained quickly (e.g.,in a matter of minutes), the issue of overblocking need not be as salient.  (One school system
told the committee that a filter used previously had not allowed such flexibility and had
resulted in a large number of complaints from teachers and students.  Other faculty and
librarians in other locations told the committee that unblocking sites was cumbersome anddifficult.)  A second reason for the lack of complaints is likely to be the fact that once a filter
is in place, the expectation of users is that access will be filtered.  The committee heard
stories of a number of complaints regarding filtering when filters were first installed, but inmost such instances, the complaints ceased after a few months.  Students without home

Internet access seemed to accept a schoolÕs filtering policy as a given, and simply adaptedto it, even if they were prevented from accessing valuable information.  One librarian told
the committee that a blocked Web page was analogous to a book that was not present in the
library, and that the alternative approaches to obtaining the information were similar tousing interlibrary loan.  Students with Internet access at home have no particular reason or
incentive to complain aside from issues of efficiency or convenience.30In general, when students encountered blocked sites at school, they simply went toanother venue to reach those sitesÑmost of the students to whom the committee spoke hadunfiltered home access.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.289TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS FOR USERSappropriate, and educational material may choose a filter or a content-limited ISP that explicitly screens content for such criteria, rather than
another vendor that might screen content for inappropriateness.Finally, Òviewpoint discriminationÓ (discussed in Chapter 4) gener-
ally cannot be practiced by public institutions, but the law in this area is
currently unclear.  In particular, it is not clear how a court would decide

whether a public institutionÕs use of a particular filter vendorÕs determi-nations of inappropriate material constitutes such discriminationÑforinstance, where the line is drawn between viewpoint discrimination and
content discrimination, and what weight should be given to the extent to
which the institution relied upon the filter vendorÕs settings.  It is also not
clear to what extent public schools, as opposed to public libraries, may
engage in certain kinds of viewpoint discrimination.12.1.4How Flexible and Usable Is the Product?
Server-side filters can be easier to use than client-side filters, if onlybecause they do not require installation on the client.  Nevertheless, al-

most all filters allow some degree of customization to a parentÕs (or otheradult supervisorÕs) requirements. Filters can (but do not necessarily) al-low flexibility in many dimensions:¥Changes to the criteria used for blocking.  Sites or keywords to identify
inappropriate material can be added or subtracted by the end user:  when a

filter program erroneously blocks a site, or fails to block something the user
deems inappropriate, the parent or other administrator of the program can
create an exception list that deletes or adds the site from or to the black list.

An important consideration is the extent to which the blocking criteria are
known to the user.  While nearly all filter vendors provide a list of catego-

ries that are blocked, very few provide a public list of all of the sites on their
default Òto be blockedÓ list,
31 and to the committee
Õs knowledge, no filter31In general, they protect the list by encrypting it and had hoped that the Digital MillenniumCopyright Act (DMCA) would outlaw reverse engineering to decrypt such lists.  However, on

October 27, 2000, the U.S. Copyright Office issued its final rule implementing the anti-circum-vention provisions of the DMCA.  The statutory provisions of DMCA prohibit the circumven-
tion of technical measures that prevent the unauthorized copying, transmission, or accessing of
copyrighted works, subject to this rulemaking of the Copyright Office.  The final rule establishes
two exceptions to the anti-circumvention provisions, one of which allows users of Internetcontent filtering programs to view lists of Web sites blocked by such software.  The Copyright

Office recognized a First Amendment interest in access to this information and stated the needfor circumvention in this instance Òsince persons who wish to criticize and comment on themcannot ascertain which sites are contained in the lists unless they circumvent.Ó  This exception
to the DMCA rule may have an impact on the ongoing public debate about filters.  In March
2000, two programmers who revealed the list of thousands of Web sites blocked by the Internetfiltering program CyberPatrol faced charges of copyright violation.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.290YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETvendor provides a list of the objectionable words sought in keywordsearches.  Most companies that do not release the list of blocked sites regard

such lists as intellectual property and argue that the non-release protects
the effort that went into creating them.  However, if users of these products

do not know the criteria explicitly, they will know that sites are blocked
only when access to those sites is blocked and they are told that they have
been blocked.  Thus, they cannot make an a priori determination of such a

filterÕs fitness for use.¥Ease of making authorized changes.  A filter to which anyone can
make changes would not be very useful.  In general, the ability to make

changes is restricted to Òauthorized parties.Ó The effort and time needed
to implement a change can vary.  Some filtering systems allow individu-

als (e.g., teachers, librarians) with the appropriate password to add or
subtract a site or a keyword essentially instantaneously.  Others require

the submission of a request to the filter vendorÑwhich then evaluates therequest and implements it or not at its discretion, a process that may take
days or even longer.  For educational purposes, the former is likely to be

much better than the latter.  On the other hand, increasing the effort

needed to implement a change is likely to reduce the number of changes
to the original filtering policy, an outcome that may be regarded as a
benefit for those who want to enforce a uniform policy, or who have little
faith that adult supervisors will act judiciously.¥Granularity of content categories.  Different vendors divide 
Òinappro-priateÓ material into different categories, using more or fewer categories
depending on their intended user base.  Categories may be divided into

subcategories (e.g., ÒsexÓ might be divided into 
ÒpornographyÓ and 
Òsexeducation,Ó or nudity might be differentiated as 
Òfull frontal nudityÓ ver-
sus Òpartial nudityÓ).¥Age or grade differentiation.  As discussed in Chapter 5, information
that is inappropriate for one age or grade level may not be inappropriate
for older ages or higher grade levels.  (Specifically, the information needs

of high school students are typically different from those of students in
middle school.)  Some filters allow more or less restrictive filtering de-

pending on age or grade.¥Individually configured filtering policies.  In a home context, a parent
might wish to have different filtering policies (or none at all) for children
of different ages.  (Such differences would reflect the parent
Õs belief thatolder children with more maturity and a broader scope of information
needs might also require broader and less restricted Internet access.)  To

support different filtering policies, a filter would require the child to log
into the system so that the childÕs individual filtering profile could beused.   Individual policies can also support age or grade differentiation
Ñrequiring a student to log in with his or her grade (or associating a gradeYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.291TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS FOR USERSwith an individual login).  In a library context, an age-appropriate filter-
ing policy might require the system to ask the user if he or she were over
18, and if under 18, ask the user to enter his or her age, thus providing the
information necessary to set an age-appropriate policy.Many filtering products add a variety of features meant to offer par-ents, teachers, and others even further control.  Some of these include:
¥Time windows for blocking.  Under some circumstances, the inappro-
priateness of a site may depend on the time of day.  For example, in a

school environment, sites referring to games and media entertainment
may be inappropriate during school hours (because they constitute Òoff-taskÓ material) but appropriate in an after-school program in which Inter-
net usage may be less restricted.¥Records or logs of attempted access to inappropriate materials.  To un-
derstand patterns of usage, records of attempted access may be kept.
Note that such records, if individual logins are not used, can reflect at-
tempted usage only from a given access point; further, if individual logins
are not used, no records can be matched to individuals.¥Bi-directional filtering.  Some filters enable the blocking of certain
outgoing user-entered information, such as phone numbers, addresses,
foul language, and so on.  Such blocking can be used to promote the

safety of children and to enforce prohibitions against giving out such
information.  In addition, some filters can block certain types of Internet

access entirely:  instant messages, e-mail, chat rooms, file transfers, and so

on.  As noted in Chapters 2 and 5, e-mail, chat rooms, and instant mes-

sages allow the child to send as well as to receive, and thus to engage in
text-based interaction with other parties.  File transfers allow images,

video clips, and sound files to be sent and received.  Usenet newsgroups
Ñsimilar to bulletin boardsÑcontain a great deal of content that is un-moderated and inappropriate for children by the standards of many
adults.In general, flexibility adds to the complexity of the filterÑusually inits initial configuration and sometimes for its use.  For example, there is

debate about whether consumers prefer less nuanced granularity and
simpler choices, or prefer to have detailed control over their filtering.
Some products have garnered praise for offering a simple age-by-age
default set of parameters on what to block that may then be overridden
with more levels of nuance.In a number of filter-using sites visited by the committee, the flexibil-ity of an installed product (especially the ability to unblock selected Web
sites) was not used by administrators and teachers.  In some cases, they
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.292YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETwere simply unaware of the capability; in others, they lacked either thetime or the knowledge to do so.  In still other cases, the ability to unblock
sites was limited to district-level administrators (rather than the local
administrators or teachers).  During site visits, a number of teachers told

the committee that requests sent to district-level administrators to over-
ride sites often met with resistance, and were slowly acted on and often
refused.  Furthermore, to the extent that flexibility is tailored for different

individuals (e.g., for middle school students versus high school students),
identification of these individuals is requiredÑand the appropriate policymust be mapped to the access points of those individuals.An additional dimension of functionality is the provision of explana-tions for blocking.  A site that is blocked for no apparent reason has a

lower perceived legitimacy than a site that is blocked for a stated reason.
For example, many filters tell the user that a site has been blocked because
it falls into Category X, where X may be pornography, sex education,
weapons, violence, and so on.   By contrast, a site that is blocked simply

with the message Òaccess deniedÓ does not provide the child with useful
feedback, and may increase his or her motivation to go to a nonblocked
access device to retrieve the information.  Note that filtered search en-

gines provide the lowest level of transparency of allÑbecause a filteredsearch engine never returns even a link to content that is deemed inappro-
priate, the user has no way of knowing what has been filtered out or even
that anything has been filtered out.12.1.5What Are the Costs of and the Infrastructure
Required for Filtering?Financial CostsAs with all technology deployments, the financial costs of using fil-ters can be divided into acquisition costs and maintenance costs.  Acquisi-

tion costs can be quite low, especially for server-based filters in which an
installation of the filter at each access point need not be undertaken.
Maintenance costs of server-side filters are usually absorbed into a per-
year per-seat charge.However, payments to the vendor are not the only cost, as some on-site effort must be made to ensure that filters are working properly.  On-

site technical support is generally necessary. Management of the environ-
ment must be taken into account as wellÑin particular, teachers,librarians, and parents may be faced with managing requests to unblock
sites that are blocked.  In an institutional environment, there are costs of

teaching the responsible adults what the filter can and cannot do, and
providing training that familiarizes them with operating in a filtered en-Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.293TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS FOR USERSvironment. When filtering impedes their own legitimate searches for in-formation, they must know how to obtain that information despite the
presence of filtering.  And, for those institutions that rely on centralized

(e.g., district-based) administration of the unblocking function, the staff
time needed to manage these decisions can be significant (and hence
costly).Use of content-limited ISPs appears to entail fewer financial coststhan the use of server-side or client-side filters.  Because the major selling

point of using a filtered ISP is that the user gets to delegate to another
party all of the responsibilities of deciding upon and enforcing a filtering
policy, it is likely that users will be comfortable for the most part with the
default policy of the filtered ISP.  Thus, the costs of filtered ISPs for this

class of users will be relatively small. Also, filtered ISPs makes the cost of
updating the filtering algorithm or database invisible to most users.One trend pushing toward the lowering of filtering costs is that thebasic technology of filtering is increasingly available in certain common
hardware products.  For example, a variety of hardware routers for home

or small office use (generally to support a small local area network at a
home or office site) have native site-based filtering capabilities (that is,
they have the ability to exclude traffic from specified sites).  Some also

have the ability to search for objectionable keywords embedded into site
URLs.  If trends toward hardware-based filtering continue, such filtering

may well become ubiquitous.  If and when vendors of these hardware

products provide these routers with lists of sites to be blocked, with up-
dates as a service to purchasers, the cost may well drop significantly.Restrictions on Information FlowAs noted in Chapter 5, it is likely that in most communities therewould be a rough consensus on some kinds of sexually explicit material
on the Internet that should be made unavailable to children.  But on other

kinds of sexually explicit material, such consensus would be unlikely.
Moreover, some of such material would undoubtedly constitute protected
speech according to established First Amendment interpretations.The discussion in Section 12.1.2 points out that overblocking is inher-ent in any process that makes decisions about what to filter (so is
underblocking, but underblocking is not a restriction on information).
Thus, for inappropriate sexually explicit material that might loosely be
classified as Òfor adults only,Ó some material that should not be placed
into this category will beÑand will therefore be improperly blocked.Filter vendors often provide options for blocking entire categories inaddition to the category of sexually explicit material:  violence, weapons,

pro-choice and anti-abortion material, gay and lesbian lifestyles, and soYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.294YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETon.  Much of the material in these categories does not fit the legal defini-
tion of material that is Òobscene with respect to minors,Ó but based in thedefault setting of many filters, would be blocked anyway.  While this

restriction is not a legal problem in the context of home use, it may present

a problem in publicly funded institutions, which are constrained by the
requirements and current interpretations of the First Amendment.32In an educational context, the restrictions on information flow associ-ated with filters may lead to substantial problems for teachers and librar-
ians who are trying to develop useful and relevant educational activities,
assignments, projects, and so on.  Indeed, some teachers reported to the

committee during site visits that sometimes their lesson preparations were
hampered by the fact that their Internet access was filtered at school.  In

other cases, when they prepared a lesson plan at home (with unfiltered
Internet access), they were unable to present it at school because a site
they found at home was inaccessible using school computers.Restrictions on information flow may also reduce the benefits of theInternet as an information retrieval mechanism.  Specifically, one of the

advantages of the Internet is that it facilitates the comparison of how
different sources treat a given topic.  While it is true that there are often

many unblocked sources for basic information (and hence blocking any
one of these sources may not be critical in this context),33 advanced work
in which the specific source providing information affects its presentation
or credibility is more adversely affected by overblocking.  Such might also

be the case when alternative political points of view or analyses may be
blocked as being inappropriate.Psychological CostsAnother potentially major cost of filters is that their use reduces op-portunities for young people to practice responsible behavior on their
own.  That is, to the extent that filters work as they are intended (i.e., they

block rather than discourage access to material that may be inappropri-
ate), children have fewer opportunities to chooseÑand thus fewer oppor-32A study by the Kaiser Family Foundation found that among teenagers aged 15 to 17who have sought health information online, 46 percent reported that they experiencedblocking from sites that they believed were non-pornographic.  For example, 15 percent of
those who were blocked reported that they were searching for information on sexual health
topics.  See Rideout, 2001, 
Generation Rx.com: How Young People Use the Internet for HealthInformation.33Because of keyword filtering, sites containing certain keywords may be blocked.  How-ever, synonyms to these keywords may not be filtered, and sites with these synonyms willnot be blocked.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.295TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS FOR USERStunities to learn how to make responsible decisions.  Such children may
well have greater difficulty in developing internal standards of appropri-
ateness.  In addition, while some youth have reported that the use of

filtering by their parents makes them feel loved, others have reported that
it makes them feel untrusted by their parents.Filters also create forbidden fruitÑin this context, specific contentthat is made (more) desirable simply because it is inaccessible.  A com-

mon response to forbidden fruit is to engage in more active and deter-
mined efforts to obtain it.  Given the technological sophistication of some

teenagers, these efforts often succeed.  Even worse, from the standpoint of

minimizing exposure of children to such material, the results of technical
circumvention efforts are often widely circulated, with the ultimate effect
of greater exposure to inappropriate material rather than less, at least
within the immediate circle of individuals close to those with the neces-
sary skills.The introduction of filters may also serve to create resentments andresistance among the children to whom they are targeted.  That is, be-

cause filters are explicitly intended to limit oneÕs freedom of access, it isentirely possible that introducing filters, especially into an environment
in which unrestricted access was the rule, would create tensions and an-
ger in the children against those responsible for the decision.  This dy-

namic is likely to be most significant in a family environment, in which
parental rules are generally negotiated to some extent with children.Finally, unfair treatment of youth can result from the use of filters.  A
young Internet user, knowing that the Web sites she or he is viewing are
filtered, can make the reasonable assumption that what is not filtered
conforms to parental or organizational policy (e.g., an acceptable use
policy, as discussed in Chapter 10), and thus that access to those unfil-
tered sites is not restricted.  However, because filters inevitably allow

some inappropriate material to pass, this may not be a good assumption,
and a child who relies on a filter that allows objectionable material to be
viewed can get into trouble with parents or organizational authority.InfrastructureBecause a critical issue in filtering is the extent of underblocking andoverblocking, users are well advised to test in advance what may be
improperly blocked or passed.   Apart from this predeployment testing,

source- or content-based filters require minimal infrastructure.  However,

label-based filters require content providers or third parties to cooperate
in labeling content.  To develop such an infrastructure, providers and

third parties must have incentives to label content.  The minimal success
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.296YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETof labeling schemes for Internet content to date suggests that the presentenvironment does not provide such incentives.34Note also that labeling by third parties entails essentially the sametype of effort that must be undertaken by filter vendors to develop lists or
criteria for inappropriate content.  For labeling to be useful, a large vol-

ume of information must be examined and rated; otherwise, the user is
left with the choices described in Section 12.1.3.Recognizing that the primary impediment to the success of ratingschemes is the extent to which Internet content is currently not labeled,
the Internet Content Rating Association (ICRA) has undertaken a global
effort to promote a voluntary self-labeling system through which content
providers identify and label their content using predefined, cross-cultural
categories (Box 12.4).  ICRA is a global, non-profit organization of Internet

industry leaders committed to making the Internet safer for children while
respecting the rights of content providers.According to ICRAÕs chief executive officer, ICRA hopes that over thenext several years the most popular Web sites and portals, those account-
ing for the most Internet traffic, will have labeled with ICRA.  If these

efforts are successful, ICRA labels will be associated with sites that ac-
count for a large fraction of Web traffic, though not necessarily with a
large fraction of existing Web sites.  The operators of these sites will

encourage their business partners and the sites they host to use ICRA
labeling.  (However, because these sites do not in general have a business

relationship with other Web sites that might turn up through use of their
search engines, these other Web sites cannot be expected to be labeled in
general.)Another approach is to mandateÑby government fiatÑthe labelingof all Web content.  But such an approach involves a number of significant

issues:¥Such compelled speech raises important First Amendment issues.¥The enforcement of label accuracy is complex.  Even labels created
by the content owner may be inaccurate.¥The volume of Web information is so large that a government man-date requiring labeling would impose an enormous expense on content
providers.34It is interesting to note that industry labeling initiatives in other media have been moresuccessful and widely accepted and used; these other media include movies (through theMPAA), TV (through a joint effort of the Motion Picture Association of America, the Na-tional Association of Broadcasters, and the National Cable Television Association), and
software CD-ROMs and games (through the Interactive Games Developers Association).One reason for this success is that the volume of content produced in these media is muchsmaller than the volume of content produced for the Web.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.297TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS FOR USERSBox 12.4The Labeling System of the Internet Content Rating Association
The Internet Content Rating Association (ICRA) labeling system takes the pres-ence or absence of the following factors into account in generating content labels:ViolenceSexual violence/rape
Blood and gore, human beingsBlood and gore, animalsBlood and gore, fantasy characters(including animation)Killing of human beingsKilling of animals
Killing of fantasy characters (includinganimation)Deliberate injury to human beings
Deliberate injury to animalsDeliberate injury to fantasy characters(including animations)Deliberate damage to objectsNone of the aboveContextÑthis material . . .¥Appears in a context intended tobe artistic and is suitable for young
children¥Appears in a context intended to beeducational and is suitable for young
children¥Appears in a context intended to bemedical and is suitable for young
children¥Appears only in a sports-relatedcontextLanguageExplicit sexual language
Crude words or profanity
Mild expletivesNone of the aboveChatChat
Moderated chat suitable for childrenand teensNeither of the aboveNudity and Sexual MaterialErections or female genitals in detail
Male genitalsFemale genitalsFemale breasts
Bare buttocksExplicit sexual actsObscured or implied sexual acts
Visible sexual touchingPassionate kissingNone of the aboveContextÑthis material . . .¥Appears in a context intended tobe artistic and is suitable for youngchildren
¥Appears in a context intended to beeducational and is suitable for youngchildren
¥Appears in a context intended to bemedical and is suitable for youngchildrenOther TopicsPromotion of tobacco use
Promotion of alcohol use
Promotion of drug useGamblingPromotion of weapon use
Promotion of discrimination or harmagainst peopleMaterial that might be perceived assetting a bad example for youngchildrenMaterial that might disturb youngchildrenNone of the aboveSOURCE:  See <http://www.icra.org>).
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.298YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET¥Web content can be posted in many different national jurisdictions,and it would be easy for content creators and providers to evade such a
mandate by moving offshore.Apart from government-required content labeling, the widespreaduse of labels will turn on private incentives.  Incentives can be positive
Ñby labeling, a content provider or creator could receive some financial
benefit, either directly or by attracting more parties to its content.  How-

ever, the committee did not see a compelling business case for how con-
tent providers or creators can benefit commercially from labeling, and
testimony to the committee indicated how difficult it is to develop child-
friendly Internet businesses.  Or, incentives can be negative
Ñby labeling,a content provider or creator might receive immunity from prosecution
(for example, for obscenity) for the content being labeled (e.g., as adults-
only).  Such a safe harbor might be particularly applicable in labeling of

sexually explicit material (as discussed in Section 9.3).To date, child-centered content-limited ISPs are small enterprises, andmany efforts to establish a viable business model for providing good,
attractive, and educational content for kids have foundered, as noted in
Chapter 10.35  Thus, it is an open question whether children will be able to
take advantage of consistent, dependable, long-term service of this nature
Note also that because content is explicitly vetted for appropriateness, it
is likely that the content offered by such ISPs would be more limitedÑand hence more suitable for younger children whose information needs
are generally less than those of older children.By contrast, certain Internet portals, such as Yahoo and Lycos, havesearch engines that search only within the appropriate (and educational)
child-oriented universe of content.  Available for free, these search en-

gines return only links to appropriate and educational content, and as
long as the child does not surf outside these links, a responsible adult can
have confidence in his or her childÕs activity.12.1.6What Does the Future Hold for Filtering?
Image-Only FilteringVisual imagery often results in a highly visceral impact compared totextual descriptions of the same image. As discussed in Section 6.3.3,
males tend to respond to visual sexual imagery more than females do.35Of course, entrepreneurs in other areas are also struggling to find viable long-termInternet business models.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.299TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS FOR USERSAnd, as a general rule, sexually explicit text does not generate nearly thesame controversy that sexually explicit imagery generates.36A filter that blocks images on Web pages that have been determinedto be inappropriate rather than all of the content of the Web pages them-
selves is thus well suited to meet this concern.  Most of today
Õs filtersblock specific Web pages, based on criteria established by their filtering
policies.  But there is no technical reason that the filter could not instead

block all images contained on those Web pages, while passing through all
text on those pages.  (However, icons and text rendered in image format,

such as those in banner advertisements and sidebars, would be blocked as
well.  And, concerns about overbreadth of blocking would remain, so that

given images of the Greek gods, Leonardo DaVinciÕs Vetruvian man,paintings by Rubens, and MichelangeloÕs David might still be blocked.)Such a filter addresses many of the concerns raised by students, teach-ers, and librarians about children who need information that would oth-
erwise be blocked by a page-blocking filter; as a general rule, such infor-
mation is presented textually and would be passed by an image-blocking
filter.  Of course, to the extent that the concerns of filter advocates involve

text, an image-blocking filter is not helpful.A more sophisticated approach to filtering of embedded imageswould involve analyzing them.  Very small images are likely to be only

icons, and very small images (say 200 x 200 pixels) do not convey much
excitement.  The content of larger images could be analyzed using tech-

nology described in Section 2.3.1 and Appendix C, and if found to be
sexually explicit, those images would be blocked (subject to all of the
difficulties inherent in image recognition).Selective Degradation of ServiceAs discussed in Chapter 8, it is possible to reduce the appeal ofdeliberate contact with inappropriate material.  Such an approach

changes the yes/no approach to filtering to one in which the user can
still gain access to material that might have been improperly classified
as inappropriate, but only at some cost.  Two easy technical methods to
do so are slowing down the speed with which images of offensive con-
tent are displayed or reducing the visual resolution (or the audio fidel-36In the future, it may be possible that other kinds of content (e.g., sound files associatedwith sexually explicit content) will be regarded as being as objectionable as images.  (Recallthat Òdial-a-pornÓ services had some appeal for adolescent youth, and that the availability
of such services to minors created significant controversy in the early 1990s.)  If that future
comes to pass, the media containing such particularly objectionable content might also beselectively blocked (e.g., by blocking all sound files on sexually explicit Web pages).Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.300YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETity) of such images.  Presuming that such content can be identified, a
child who must wait a few minutes for an image to be displayed is likely
to lose patience with it.  Such a tactic is most relevant if the child knows

that the image being sought is inappropriateÑit reduces the immediategratification usually available from Internet downloads, and it increases
the risk of being discovered in the act.  (It also provides more time for

the child to reflectÑDo I really want to do this?  Am I being respon-
sible?)  Similarly, an image of significantly reduced resolution is far less

appealing than one with high resolution.  Another possible approach

depends on penalizing the user after viewing inappropriate content by
automatically logging out, freezing the computer so that a reboot is
necessary, or simply delaying for several minutes the childÕs accessingof other Internet content.Approaches that depend on degradation of service force the child tomake decisions about whether the cost and inconvenience of access are worth

the appeal of accessing content that adults might deem inappropriate.Bundling Filters with Other FunctionalityFilters are a special-purpose tool.  Parents and others who purchase
and install filters or filtering services thus can be assumed to feel that the
problems raised by unfiltered Internet access are worrisome enough to
warrant such efforts.  However, other individuals may be concerned but

reluctant to foster resistance or resentment that their introduction might
generate (as discussed under ÒPsychological CostsÓ in Section 12.1.5).
For such individuals, associating filters with packages that provide other
useful features may make it easier to obtain the benefits of filtering.  For

example, parents wishing to obtain filtering services might subscribe to a
content-limited ISP, and ÒsellÓ it to their children on the basis of addi-
tional content that the ISP would make available to them.Warning Rather Than BlockingBuilt into any filter is a specification of content that should be blocked.Instead of blocking access, a filter could warn the child of impending
access to inappropriate material, but leave it to his or her discretion
whether or not to access the material.  Because the child does have

choices, such a feature would have pedagogical advantages with respect
to helping children to make responsible choices, assuming an environ-
ment structured in a way to facilitate such assistance.  (A feature to

warn of impending access to inappropriate material might or might not
be combined with logging of such accessÑa point discussed in Section12.2 below.)Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.301TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS FOR USERSOpportunities for Internet Safety EducationBecause child-oriented content-limited ISPs are oriented toward pro-viding information especially for kids, they provide unique opportunities
for Internet safety education.  For example, these opportunities might

include material that provided context for children and explained con-
cepts about judging the value and or validity of the site being flagged or
blocked.Future ProspectsOver time, filtering is likely to gradually improve, decreasing bothunderblocking and overblocking.  However, these improvements will al-

most certainly be incremental rather than revolutionary, and users would
be well advised to view with some skepticism claims of revolutionary
improvement. (For example, the phenomenon of blocking breast cancer
sites because a user performed a search for ÒbreastÓ is now rare.  How-
ever, the reason this particular error is no longer frequent is that many
users complained about it, and breast cancer sites were specifically taken
off the black list.37)One goal is quite unlikely to be metÑthe generation of a class ofobjectionable or inappropriate material from a single example.  It would

be highly desirable for a user who has received an objectionable image
(for example) to be able to tell a filtering program, ÒI donÕt want to see anymore stuff like this.Ó  But what counts as 
Òlike thisÓ is virtually impossible
to generalize from one example, which is why even the best training
systems today require hundreds or thousands of samples of objectionable
material to offer any hope of even a minimally adequate categorization of
material.12.1.7What Are the Implications of Filtering Use?
TodayÕs filters cannot be the sole element of any approach to protect-ing children from inappropriate sexually explicit material on the Internet37The first widespread instance of such blocking occurred in 1995 when a major onlineservice provider blocked all sites containing the word Òbreast,Ó including those dealing
with breast cancer.  In the wake of widespread complaints, the service provider in questionquickly restored access to breast cancer sites.  Since then, this particular problem has oc-

curred only rarely, as a number of techniques described in Section 2.3.1 can be used toavoid problems arising from simple-minded keyword matching.  Still, the problem has not
been eliminated entirely, and a recent instance of a Web site involving breast cancer being
blocked was brought to the committeeÕs attention in January 2002 (personal communica-tion, Bennett Haselton, Peacefire.org).  In this instance, the reason for such blocking appar-
ently arises from the use of IP-based virtual hosting.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.302YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET(or any other inappropriate material), and it is highly unlikely that to-morrowÕs filters will be able to serve this role either.   But they can be a
useful element, as long as their limitations are kept in perspective.  In

particular, with or without filters, Internet-using children will have op-
portunities for encountering some non-zero amount of inappropriate
material, and thus regardless of the benefits that filters do confer, they
will have to internalize codes of conduct and appropriate online behavior
if they are to be safe.Using a child-oriented content-limited ISP is approximately analo-gous to allowing a child to watch only selected videos on television, rather
than broadcast or cable television.  And, as in that case, the use of such a

practice is most likely appropriate for fairly young children.  However, as

a childÕs Internet information needs outgrow what a kid-friendly servicecan provide, he or she will have to turn to other sources.   Other sources
Ñby definitionÑwill provide information that is less thoroughly vetted,and will likely involve exposure of the now-older child to some inappro-
priate information; however, an older child may well be better able to
cope with inadvertent exposures to such material.  Furthermore, there is

no guarantee that the point at which a childÕs information needs outgrowa kid-friendly service will coincide with the point at which he or she can
cope well with such exposure, and it is likely that the former point occurs
earlier than the latter point.As for server- and client-side filtering, it is helpful to regard suchfiltering as Òtraining wheelsÓ for children on the Internet as they learn to
make good decisions about what materials are and are not appropriate for
their consumption.  An adult who explains the purpose of the filter to the

child (and different explanations are appropriate at different ages), and
who can provide some in-person guidance when the child first encoun-
ters blocked material, is in a much better position to help the child inter-
nalize the rules than an adult or institution that simply installs the filter
with no explanation or rationale either before or after the fact.  Indeed, the

latter situation is what the detractors of filters have in mind when they
argue that the use of filters can lead to a false sense of security:  a filter

user (parent, library, school), knowing that a filter is in place, will then be
tempted to assume that all is well, and then fail to exercise appropriate
oversight or to take other measures when such oversight or other mea-
sures would still be necessary.Underlying much of the concern about the deployment of filtersÑeven on a voluntary basisÑis a fear that the creation of a technical infra-structure that supports filtering will inexorably, over time, lead to even
stronger pressures for formal content regulation (a so-called ÒslipperyslopeÓ argument).
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.303TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS FOR USERSFurthermore, even without the pressures for formal content regula-tion, those advocating the free flow of information are concerned that
authorities (parents, schools, libraries, businesses, and others) will find
the use of filters irresistible to block any kind of content or information
that they find objectionable, and not just for children. (Just such a se-
quence of events was related to the committee in one of its site visits:  a

county-wide library system installed filters to block sexually explicit ma-
terial from all patrons, not just children, though the concerns were first
raised in the context of childrenÕs access to such material.)12.1.8Findings on Filters
1.Filters have some significant utility in denying access to content
that may be regarded as inappropriate.  However, many of today
Õs youthhave access to unfiltered Internet venues (e.g., at home, at a friendÕshouse), and school and library filters do not block content accessed from
these other venues.2.All filters
Ñthose of today and for the foreseeable futureÑsuffer(and will suffer) from some degree of overblocking (blocking content that
should be allowed through) and some degree of underblocking (passing
content that should not be allowed through).  While the extent of over-

blocking and underblocking will vary with the product (and may im-
prove over time), underblocking and overblocking result from numerous
sources, including the variability in the perspectives that humans bring to
the task of judging content.3.Filters are capable of blocking inappropriate sexually explicit ma-
terial at a high level of effectivenessÑif a high rate of overblocking is alsoacceptable.  Thus, filters are a reasonable choice for risk-averse parents or

custodians (e.g., teachers) who place a very high priority on preventing
exposure to such material and who are willing to accept the consequences
of such overblocking.  (For example, these individuals may be more in-

clined to take such a stance if the children in question are young.)  Such

consequences may include the blocking of some material that would be
mistakenly classified as inappropriate sexually explicit material, and/or
the blocking of entire categories of material that are protected by the First
Amendment  (a consequence of more concern to publicly funded institu-

tions such as public libraries than to individual families).4.Automated decision making about access is generally inferior to
decision making with a responsible adult involved in the decision-mak-
ing process.  Furthermore, to the extent that the content of concern is in

multimedia formats and unaccompanied by textual descriptions, auto-
mated decision making is subject to a high degree of overblocking (iden-Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.304YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETtifying content as objectionable when it is benign) and underblocking(identifying content as benign when it is objectionable).5.To the extent that Internet content is created or produced in real
time (e.g., a live videoconference over Webcams), it will be impractical to
insert a human reviewer into the decision making process about whether
access to that content should or should not be grantedÑthus weakeningthe role that filters play.6.Overblocking must be distinguished from overly broad blocking
policies.  Overblocking is a mistake
Ñcontent is blocked that should nothave been blocked, even in the judgment of the human being responsible
for identifying content that should be blocked (the censor).  Overly broad

blocking policy represents a disagreement with that human being in
which the content seeker asserts that certain content should be accessible
and the censor believes that content should be blocked.7.Based on information gathered in its site visits, the committee be-
lieves that filters are deployed by schools and libraries at least as much for
political and management reasons as for the protection of children, be-
cause the deployment of filters enables staff to pay more attention to
teaching and serving library patrons.8.Because most filters are deployed to forestall complaints, and com-
plaints are more likely to be received about underblocking rather than
overblocking, filter vendors have more incentive to block content that
may be controversial than to be careful about not blocking content that
should not be blocked.9.Transparency of operation is important, in the sense that filters
that inform a user that a site is being blockedÑand that provides thereason for blockingÑare more likely to be seen as legitimate than thosethat do not provide such information.10.The use of blocking filters does not promote the development of
responsible choice in children.  With removal of the option of making

certain choices, children are denied an opportunity to chooseÑand hencedo not learn appropriate decision making skills from the fact of blocking.11.Filters are a complement to but not a substitute for responsible
adult supervision.  Using filters without adult supervision and/or in-

struction for users in what constitutes appropriate behavior is not likely
to result in children learning what is or is not appropriate behavior.  Fur-
thermore, filters cannot guarantee that inappropriate material will not be
accessed.12.2MONITORING
Tools that provide monitoring of the Internet activities of childrenhave been proposed by some as an alternative to filters in certain con-Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.305TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS FOR USERStexts.38  Tools for monitoring have not received nearly the same attentionas filters, but are potentially controversial as well.  Box 12.5 describes the

dimensions of choice that GetNetWise identifies for monitoring tools.12.2.1What Is Monitoring?
Monitoring, as a way of protecting youth from inappropriate content,relies on deterrence rather than prevention per se.  In some cases, it is the
threat of punishment for an inappropriate act that has been caught
through monitoring that prevents the minor from behaving in an inap-
propriate manner.  In other cases, 
Òcatching someone in the actÓ can
provide an important Òteachable momentÓ in which an adult can guide
and explain to the child why the act was inappropriate, and why this
content is on the Internet.Monitoring a childÕs use of the Internet is a generic approach that canbe implemented in both technical and non-technical ways.  Adult super-

vision of Internet use, a non-technical strategy, is discussed in Chapter 10.
But the technical methods for monitoring someoneÕs use of the Internetare many.¥The simplest means of monitoring are built into the browser or theoperating system.  Parents and other monitors do not need to rely on any

additional technology to do this simple monitoring.38John Schwartz. 2001.  ÒSchools Get Tool to Track StudentsÕ Use of Internet,
Ó New YorkTimes, May 21.Box 12.5GetNetWise Questions About Monitoring ToolsDoes the product allow the user to review or monitor¥E-mail?¥Online chat?¥The Web sites that have been visited?¥Instant messaging sessions?¥Offline (non-Internet) computer use?Can the product operate¥Without the knowledge of the child being monitored?¥Alongside a filter?¥To warn children when they attempt to access inappropriate material?Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.306YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETÑThe major Internet browsers have a ÒhistoryÓ file that indicates all
of the sites visited most recently.  (The time frame for which such histories

are kept can be adjusted by the userÑa typical default time frame is 20days.)  Such a history file can be easily viewed by an adult supervisor, a

step that requires no additional technology and very little computer savvy.
On the other hand, older kids may be knowledgeable enough to erase the
history file (it takes just one click) or even to forge a history file with
enough innocuous entries to allay suspicion.ÑMost browsers make use of a temporary ÒcacheÓ that contains im-
ages that have been displayed on a userÕs screen.  Inspection of this cache
can show most of the images that have appeared recently on a userÕsscreen.ÑCookie files can indicate the sites with which a child has interacted,as well as who has received information from the child.  In Windows, for
example, the cookie file is found in the Windows program directory and
can be viewed using any text editor.¥Commercially available monitoring systems go a step further:ÑCertain devices and programs can capture all of the keystrokesmade by a child.  Thus, comments or input made by a child can be re-

corded for future inspection.ÑThe workstation of a supervising adult can be set up to captureand/or display the contents of a childÕs monitor in real time.  Thus, a
supervisor (e.g., a teacher or librarian) could monitor what appears on a
childÕs screen from his or her office.ÑE-mail is generally not encrypted in storage, and thus may be read-able by an adult who is responsible for a child.Monitoring tools can provide a variety of functions, enabling a re-sponsible adult to review incoming and outgoing e-mail, instant message
and chat room dialogs, Web pages accessed, and so on.   Further, such

tools may or may not provide notification to the child that monitoring is
occurring.A monitoring tool can also use technology to identify inappropriatematerial (the same technology that filters incorporate) so that it can pro-
vide a warning to the child when he or she is about to be exposed to
inappropriate material.  The child can then decide whether or not to heed

that warning.  If the child does not, the monitoring tool may or may not

provide a record of that access.  Warnings can also be accompanied by

making a log of access to such exposures or notifying a responsible adult
about such access.Depending on the tool selected, monitoring tools can be used at homeand in libraries or schools.  One distinguishing characteristic is that moni-

toring tools generally require human responses to detections of access toYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.307TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS FOR USERSinappropriate information, or at least the threat of such a response.  Thus,
a parent or librarian or teacher must be involved to talk to the minor
engaged in inappropriate behaviorÑand in institutional contexts the costof reviewing access logs and following up on these reviews would likely
be substantial.For monitoring to be effective, usage must be tied to specific individu-als.  Thus, in an institutional setting, individual logins
Ñwhich tend to bemore common in higher grades than in lower onesÑare necessary if moni-toring information is to be acted on after the fact of inappropriate usage.39(If immediate action is taken, individual login information is not needed,
since an adult can simply walk over to the Internet access point and talk to
the child in question.)  The same is true in a home setting, especially with

multiple individuals accessing one computer.  Indeed, without the ability

to associate a given Web access (for example) with a given child, individu-
alized guidanceÑor punishmentÑcannot be provided.As with filters, monitoring is also increasingly common in corporateand business settings.4012.2.2How Well Does Monitoring Work?
Because monitoring tools do not place physical blocks against inap-propriate material, a child who knowingly chooses to engage in inappro-
priate Internet behavior or to access inappropriate material can do so if he
or she is willing to take the consequences of such action.   However, the

theory of monitoring is that knowledge of monitoring is a deterrent to
taking such action.Note, however, that unless warnings are given repeatedly and in dif-ferent forms, users are known to habituate rapidly to themÑand behaveas though they had never been given.41   Warnings
Ñin and of them-39Note also that individual logins are a necessary though far from sufficient aspect ofmaintaining computer, network, and system security.  In the absence of individual logins, it

is essentially impossible to hold any specific individual responsible for actions that mightcompromise security.  For more discussion, see, for example, Computer Science and Tele-
communications Board, National Research Council, 1997, For the Record: Protecting Elec-tronic Health Information, and 1991,
 Computers at Risk: Safe Computing in the Information Age
(National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.).  Thus, there are advantages for institutions to
consider individual logins for reasons entirely apart from protecting their youth from inap-
propriate material.40See, for example, Associated Press, 2002, ÒIM Monitoring Grows in Popularity,Ó April12.  Available online at <http://www.msnbc.com/news/737956.asp?0si=-#BODY>.
41See Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, 1996,CryptographyÕs Role in Securing the Information Society, Kenneth W. Dam and Herbert S. Lin,eds., National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.308YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETselvesÑare not likely to deter inappropriate access in the long run.  The
same habituation may not be true, however, of warnings or monitoring
associated with a human presence.  An adult supervisor who forces a

non-routinized interaction with a child has a far better chance of captur-
ing his or her attention.Browser histories log Web sites that have been viewed, though tolearn the actual content of these sites, the adult supervisor must either
examine these Web sites or make inferences about their content on the
basis of the siteÕs URL.  Keystroke monitors are equally capable in moni-
toring Web sites, e-mail, and anything else that requires user input.  Moni-

toring of screens being used by children, if done on a large scale (i.e.,
many screens being supervised by one person), in practice monitors ac-
cess to inappropriate imagery.  Text also can be monitored remotely, but

in this case, the adult supervisor cannot tell at a glance if the text contains
inappropriate material, and thus must spend more time in reading that
text to make a judgment.Because monitoring leaves the choice of access up to the child, inad-vertent access to inappropriate material is possible.  (For this reason, moni-

toring is arguably less appropriate for children whose decision making
capabilities have not matured.)   But the child also retains the choice to

gain access to information that may be relevant to his or her information
needs, and thus the problem of overblocking described in Section 12.1.2
does not exist.Judgments about the effectiveness of monitoring are mixed.  Monitor-
ingÑcoupled with punishmentÑhas deterrence effects at least in the shortterm and at least for some fraction of youth.  But because the decision

making party is the youth, rather than an adult (e.g., the filter vendor),
denial of access to inappropriate material cannot be assured.  Moreover,

as with filters, a change of venue will often suffice to eliminate overt
monitoring.A critical dimension of monitoring is the kind of adult response thatis coupled to a detection of inappropriate access or behavior.  If an adult

offers guidance and explanation rather than punishment (as is most ap-
propriate if a violation is accidental), the youth may learn how to differen-
tiateÑfor himself or herselfÑappropriate from inappropriate actions.  To
the extent that this is true, protection from inappropriate material may be
extended to non-monitored venues and for much longer periods of time.
(On the other hand, once clear explanations for rules have been provided,
punishment for intentional infraction of rules is entirely appropriate for
demonstrating that infraction carries consequences.)Another critical dimension is whether monitoring is covert or overt.Covert monitoring, if undiscovered, is more likely to provide information
about what the child is doing Òwhen left to his or her own devices.Ó  And,
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.309TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS FOR USERSif undiscovered, the individual being monitored will not change venues.But covert monitoringÑby definitionÑcannot deter, because the youth inquestion must be aware that monitoring is happening if it is to have an
effect on his or her behavior.Moreover, undertaking monitoring covertly leaves the question ofwhat the responsible adult should doÑif anythingÑin the event thatmonitoring reveals that the child is behaving inappropriately.  If the adult

does nothing except watch, learning that is directly coupled to inappro-
priate access or behavior cannot occur, and the inappropriate behavior
may well continue. Yet, if the adult does respond to such a revelation, he
or she may be forced to disclose the fact of monitoring, with all of the
attendant consequences (e.g., a child who reacts negatively because the
adult is changing the rules from what was expected).In principle, an adult could act without disclosing the fact of monitor-ingÑfor example, the adult may draw the child into a general discussionof appropriate Internet behavior without reference to any specifics that
might be associated with the childÕs behavior.  However, many adults are
likely to find it difficult to act on such information without revealing the
source.Overt monitoring can deter.  But it can also have negative effects, as
described below.If monitoring is coupled to explanations and guidance about appro-priate and inappropriate behavior, there is some potential that this ap-
plication can promote the long-term development and internalization of
appropriate behavioral norms.  But the explanation and guidance are

essential.  If, as is much more likely in an institutional setting and in

many home situations, the primary or exclusive consequence of detec-
tion of inappropriate access is punishment, such learning may well not
occur.  Even more destructive would be punishment resulting from in-

advertent access to inappropriate material, as one can easily imagine
might be imposed by an adult supervisor who did not believe an asser-
tion by his or her charge that the inappropriate Web page was viewed
by accident.Finally, as with filtering, monitoring can be circumvented by a changeof venue in which monitoring is not present.12.2.3Who Decides What Is Inappropriate?
Decision making is shared between adults and youth.  It is the re-
sponsibility of responsible adults (e.g., parents and school officials) to
provide general guidelines about what constitutes inappropriate material
or behavior.  However, it is the responsibility of the youth to interpret
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.310YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETthese guidelines.  And it is the interaction between adult and youth that
can provide guidance in any particular instance.For those products that identify inappropriate material, the relevantdecision makers are the same as those for filtering.12.2.4How Flexible and Usable Are Products for Monitoring?
Given the burden imposed on responsible adults when all access ismonitored, some monitoring products make a record only when inappro-
priate material has been accessed.  Of course, such a product requires

definitions of inappropriate materialÑand all of the discussion above inSection 12.1 is relevant to such definitions.Monitoring can also be intermittent.  For example, a product may take
a ÒsnapshotÓ of a given computer screen that records its contents at ran-
dom intervals that average once an hour.  In this case, the auditing burden

is directly proportional to the frequency of screen capture and the number
of screens being monitored.  Monitoring software that never records the

screen when Web content from an innocuous site is shown further re-
duces the number of snapshots that need to be reviewed.Real-time display of a childÕs screen can be performed at any level ofresolution desired.  In the instance when the supervisor
Õs monitor dis-plays simultaneously Òscreen shotsÓ of multiple user screens (e.g., all of
the monitors in use by a class), each image appears in a smaller Òthumb-nailÓ version that makes reading most text on those screens difficult or
impossible while at the same time usually enabling the supervisor to
determine if an image is being displayed.  Moreover, many inappropriate

sexually explicit images are easy for humans to recognize even at low
resolution and/or smaller size.  The product might then offer the supervi-

sor the chance to Òzoom inÓ on this screen shot for closer examination,
and perhaps capture the image for documentation purposes.Records of access may be kept or not, and if kept, at different levels ofdetail.  For example, recorded screen images can be kept at high resolu-

tion, enabling the reading of words on the screen, or at low resolution,
enabling only a general identification of pictures that may be on the screen.
Keystrokes can be recorded for differing lengths of time, enabling a su-
pervisor to know in detail what the minor has done.  And, some monitor-

ing packages allow the tracking of timing and sequencing of access that
would help administrators to distinguish between intentional and unin-
tentional access.Tools for monitoring Web usage in the aggregate (without individualtracking of users) can provide important information on whether usage
conforms to acceptable use policies.  Such tools would not compromise

individual privacy (indeed, individual logins would not even be re-Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.311TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS FOR USERSquired), but would provide data on the Web sites children visited and theInternet activities in which children engage.  Such data could then be

reviewed to determine the extent to which a given audience is in fact
conforming to an AUP.If the system is configured to not monitor Web browser windowswhere the same page has not been on the screen for at least some period of
time, perhaps 15 seconds, and to never monitor e-mail where the same
incoming item has not been on the screen for at least that period of time,
then the young person may not have the anxiety that Òthe adults willdiscover I inadvertently saw this material, but wonÕt believe it was unin-tentional.Ó  Youth will know that as long as they quickly determine that
the content is inappropriate, and exit that Web site or that e-mail, no
record will be established and no adult will know.  To the committee
Õsknowledge, current monitoring software does not have this Òdo not cap-ture within threshold feature,Ó as it opens a potential loophole: a student
clicking through a series of pages of inappropriate Web content, as long
as each page is on the screen for less than the threshold time.12.2.5What Are the Costs and Infrastructure
Required for Monitoring?Financial CostsThe primary financial cost of monitoring is the human effort andlabor needed to monitor usage.  Monitoring records can be extensive, and

in the absence of automated tools to flag questionable accesses, the exami-
nation of extensive audit records is both tedious and time-consuming.
(Recording screen images frequently for a large number of users also
consumes hard disk space at a rapid rate.)A second cost in the institutional setting is that the effort needed tomanage individual logins is significant.   Login names and passwords

must be managed, and procedures must be set up to deal with children
who lose or forget passwords, passwords that become known to other
individuals, revocation of passwords and login names, and so on.42Psychological and Emotional CostsPunishment that is given soon after undesirable acts are initiated ismore effective in deterring a repetition of such behavior than is punish-
ment administered long afterward, suggesting that monitoring systems42For more discussion, see CSTB, NRC,  Computers at Risk, 1991, and 
For the Record, 1997.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.312YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETare unlikely to build positive habits in students unless feedback is re-ceived more quickly than may be practical in most situations.  (Feedback

is needed in minutes or hours, whereas review of access logs may take
days or weeks.  On the other hand, real-time monitoring can provide

opportunities for feedback to the child when the offense occurs.)  To be

effective in deterring undesirable behavior, punishment must be consis-
tent, which suggests that intermittent monitoring, which saves time and
energy, will not be conducive to helping students learn to resist the temp-
tation of seeking out inappropriate materials.  To be a component of

effective discipline also requires that the basis for punishment (or conse-
quences) not be seen as arbitrary authority but rather an explanation for
why certain behavior is unacceptable.A second point is that monitoring and privacy can be antithetical.While the desirability of privacy as an element of an appropriate develop-
mental environment is a cultural issue, most of Western society places
privacy in high regard, especially for adolescents who are at a develop-
mental stage during which they often seek some separation from their
parents.  A need for privacy is an essential component of separation as

adolescents begin to create their own identity, an identity that includes an
understanding of himself or herself as a sexual person.43  There are some
personal issues that adults want to keep to themselves because they are
embarrassed or have other feelings or behaviors that they do not want to
share generally.  Many children (especially adolescents) have those same

feelings.  To deny them that personal freedom by constant electronic moni-

toring may convey a lack of trust by an adult community that tells them
that there is no personal space that belongs to them and them alone.Monitoring can easily be regarded by youth as a violation of privacyand an unwarranted intrusion that demonstrates a lack of trust, and one
common unfortunate consequence is that when mistrusted, an individual
often proceeds to act in ways that justify that mistrust.  Certainly parents
do monitor their childrenÕs activities, but the balance of how much chil-dren and adolescents are watched varies, depending on characteristics
such as age, gender, maturity, and parenting practices.  In general, a

childÕs need for personal freedom increases as he or she grows older.43According to a survey by the Kaiser Family Foundation in 2001, teenagers place a highvalue on privacy with respect to their Internet usage: 76 percent of online youth agreed that
Òlooking up information online is good because I can look things up without anybodyknowing about it.Ó  Where looking for health information is concerned, 82 percent said thatconfidentiality is very important.  A sizable minority of young people are concerned about

the privacy of their online searches for information, with 40 percent saying they are worriedthat the computer might keep track of what they do online.  See Rideout, 2001,  
GenerationRx.com: How Young People Use the Internet for Health Information.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.313TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS FOR USERSFurthermore, children who are constantly watched by parents haveless opportunity to develop their own internal controls about their own
behavior.  They have less opportunity to confront the challenges of life

that ultimately develop character, for it is that struggle that makes us who
we are.  Parents cannot always watch their children.  It is then that the

effectiveness of socialization is put to the test, for it is what children do in
the absence of a parent or an adult that tells of their character.  A child

who has not internalized parental values may well attempt to break the
rules whenever an adult is not watching, for the rules are outside, not
inside, the child.  By contrast, a child who has internalized those rules

generally follows them, regardless of whether they are being watched.
Sometimes they will fail, but they can also learn from those mistakes.At the same time, the level of privacy that students can expect inschoolÑin using a computer as well as in other aspects of school lifeÑisdifferent from what they can expect at home, and school computer sys-
tems are not private systems. The expectation of privacy when students
use computers in schools is more limited, as demonstrated by a variety of
actions that have been supported in court decisions, including searches of
student lockers, backpacks, and so on.  Thus, provided that students have

been given notice that their use is subject to monitoring, the use of moni-
toring systems raises fewer privacy concerns.In libraries, privacy expectations have traditionally been fairly high.That is, libraries have traditionally protected the materials used by their
patrons, and have even resisted the efforts of law enforcement authorities
to investigate such use.  Thus, monitoring in a library context
Ñeven withexplicit noticeÑmay violate such privacy traditions.Note also that technological monitoring has a different psychologicalrelationship to the one being monitored than does in-person oversight.
Consider, for example, a student using an Internet access terminal in the
school library.  In one scenario, a school librarian walks the floor periodi-

cally; if she sees something suspicious on the studentÕs screen, she walksover and asks, ÒWhat are you doing?Ó  In a second scenario, the screen on
the Internet access terminal is displayed on the school librarianÕs terminal(in her office) for several seconds at random intervals ranging from once
every 5 minutes to once every 20 minutes.  Five or ten seconds before the
image of the screen is transmitted to the librarianÕs terminal, an unobtru-sive but noticeable warning flashes on the studentÕs terminal to indicatethat monitoring is about to take place.  In addition, the display on the

librarianÕs terminal is blurred so that words cannot be read, but blurredimages can appear, and no records of the screen on the terminal are kept.
If the school librarian sees something going on that warrants attention,
she can leave her office, walk over to the student, and ask, ÒWhat are youdoing?ÓYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.314YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETFor most people, the first scenario feels like responsible supervision.However, reactions to the second scenario are decidedly mixed, despite
the fact that the monitoring system described does nothing that the librar-
ian does not do.  What accounts for this mixed reaction?
One factor is that the person being monitored from the librarianÕsoffice would have no particular assurance, beyond the say-so of the li-
brarian, that any of these assertions would be true.  However, where the

monitoring takes place by walking the library floor, it can be seen that the
librarian is not taking photographs of the library patrons or their screens.
But more importantly, the fact of technological monitoring is also likely to
change the nature of the relationship between school librarian and stu-
dent.  In the first scenario, the interaction between librarian and student is

a human one, and the events have unfolded for the reasons that one
would expectÑa chance encounter that leads to an open question.  But in
the second scenario, the school librarian approaches the student with
apparent foreknowledge of what the student is doing, and the question is
more disingenuous than open.  An additional point is that the foreknowl-

edge provided by the monitoring system invites the librarian to jump to
conclusions about what the student is doing, and she will be less likely to
give the student the benefit of the doubt when she does engage him.
Under such circumstances, a useful educational experience is less likely to
occur than if she approached the user with an open mind.InfrastructureWhile filters can be installed on the client side without the coopera-tion of any other party, real-time monitoring requires a mechanism for
displaying the contents of one monitor on another.  When tools for moni-

toring are used on a large scale, a sufficient number of responsible adults
is necessary to provide in-person intervention.  (How many adults are

required depends on how thorough the monitoring is.)An alternative is after-the-fact review of behavior or actions, a pro-cess that requires storage of logs, screen snapshots, and so on, and auto-
mated tools to flag suspect behavior.  The administrative burdens can be

sharply reduced if the records reflect only potentially suspect accesses
and exposures rather than all Internet use.12.2.6What Does the Future Hold for Monitoring?
As noted above, one major difficulty with monitoring is the effortneeded to review audit trails.  Thus, there is a role for automated tools

that can review audit trails to identify patterns of behavior that are worth
further investigation.  For example, tools could be available that:
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.315TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS FOR USERS¥Identify problematic viewing, resulting from accessing knownproblematic sites or by analyzing material on Web sites for inappropriate
content;¥Determine how long someone stayed on inappropriate sites or inwhat sequence sites were accessed; and¥Notify responsible adults in real time of access to inappropriatesites (e.g., in a home context, notification might consist of a light flashing
on a monitor carried by the parent when a child using the Web is access-
ing a potentially inappropriate site, or an e-mail sent to a parent). Alterna-
tively, a request for access to a potentially inappropriate site can be trans-
mitted to a responsible adult for approval within a certain period of time
(e.g., 1 minute).  If approval arrives, access can be granted and the deci-

sion remembered by the system.Some of the functionality described above is available in some moni-toring products today, but it is far from common.12.2.7What Are the Implications of Using Monitoring?
In general, our society subjects criminals to a high degree of monitor-ing because they have proven untrustworthy.   For the most part, indi-

viduals follow societal rules, not through constant monitoring and the
invasion of privacy, but because they have learned to internalize the val-
ues underlying those rules.  Put another way, if laws were followed only

because of police monitoring and enforcement, then we would need as
many police as other people to maintain law and order.Children make mistakes, and criminals make mistakes, but to be a childis not to be a criminal.   Nevertheless, active supervision of children is often

appropriateÑnot because they are criminals but because it is the responsibil-ity of adults to teach them how to internalize the appropriate values and to
become better at avoiding inappropriate behavior as they mature.For example, responsible parenting always entails monitoring chil-dren in inverse proportion to their capability and maturity, something
only a parent can ultimately determine.  But as noted in Section 12.2.5, the

wise parent couples monitoring with education and discussion in support
of helping the child internalize the parentsÕ values, an outcome that will
help him or her (or them) to behave appropriately whether parents are
watching them or not.  Parents have rights to what might be called the

Òimposition of sanctions,Ó which, like any other part of parenting, fails if
used alone.44  As always, the density of loving wisdom in a parent
Õs44Even these rights have limits.  Parents, for example, cannot subject their children to
abuse in the name of discipline.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.316YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETactions is everything, and it is the nature of the existing parent-childrelationship, the intent of the monitoring process, and how it is carried
out that counts in understanding its ultimate implications.Is the monitoring of children and adolescents a step in the erosion ofprivacy for all citizens?  Many people believe that it is, and point to other
measures that they find equally disturbingÑemployers who track thebehavior of their employees, and commercial online sites that track the
behavior and clicks of those who pass through them.  The monitoring of

children raises special concerns because of the fear that a younger genera-
tion will grow up never having known a world in which they had rights
to privacy, and thus never realizing what rights they might have lost.Others argue that such fears are overplayed, pointing to social andcommercial benefits of increased customization of information delivery
and an assumed lack of government interest in the affairs of ordinary
people, as well as the fact that schools are expected to act in loco parentis
with respect to the students in their care.  Indeed, some believe that it

would be a positive development in society if adults in all venues felt
some responsibility for looking after the welfare of children and for su-
pervising children when they are in a position to do so.45  Resolving
this question is beyond the scope of this study, but noting the question
raised by monitoring of children is certainly not.4612.2.8Findings on Monitoring
1.Monitoring that warns when exposure to inappropriate material
may occur is an alternative to filtering and eliminates the problem of
overblocking associated with filtering.2.Overt monitoring in concert with explicit discussion and education
may help children develop their own sense of what is or is not appropri-
ate behavior.  Monitoring coupled primarily with punishment is much

less likely to instill in children such an internal sense.  In general, the

simple presence of monitoring equipment and capabilities (or even the
assertion of such capabilities) may create a change in behavior, though
the change in behavior is likely to be restricted to the situation in which
monitoring occurs.3.Because human intervention is required on a continuing basis,
monitoring is more resource-intensive than filtering.  For the same rea-

son, monitoring is more likely to be construed as a violation of privacy
than are other techniques that simply block access.45In this instance, there are debates about the role of technology in supervising childrenvis-‹-vis an in-person adult doing so.46A current CSTB study on privacy in the information age will address these issues.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.317TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS FOR USERS4.Covert monitoring leads to an entirely different psychological
dynamic between responsible adult and child than does overt moni-
toring.  (Furthermore, because people habituate to warnings, children

may respond to overt monitoring as though it were covertÑi.e., morenegatively.)12.3TOOLS FOR CONTROLLING OR LIMITING ÒSPAMÓ
ÒSpam,Ó e-mail that is similar to the 
Òjunk mailÓ that an individual
receives through the post office in the brick and mortar world, is sentÑunsolicited and indiscriminatelyÑto anyone with a known e-mail ad-dress.  E-mail addresses can be purchased in bulk, just as regular mailing
lists can be purchased: a typical rate for buying e-mail addresses is 5
million addresses for $50.  Alternatively, e-mail addresses can be found

by an e-mail address Òharvester.Ó  (See Box 12.6 for more details.)  Spam
Box 12.6Activities That Result in Spam MailIn an informal test, a CNET study identified a variety of behaviors that were likelyto result in spam mail being sent to users.  In this test, the researcher opened 12 free
e-mail accounts (and monitored some older ones), dedicating each to one typical
online activity (including the activity of doing nothing).  He also provided an e-mail
address on a number of Òsign-upÓ sites, posted messages on message boards around
the Web, registered domain names, and visited chat rooms. Over the course of a few
months, he checked to see which activities attracted the most unsolicited e-mail toan account, and then he tried to figure out how to remove the spam.His conclusions were that posting messages on certain message boards run byunscrupulous operators and participating in AOL chat rooms (even those that werenot sexually oriented) or in an online lottery were activities that resulted in the great-est volume of spam mail (as much as 10 spam messages per day).  Activities such as

registering a new domain and placing e-mail links on oneÕs own Web site resulted inintermittent spam e-mailÑmonths with nothing, and then sudden bursts.  Some com-
mon activities (including shopping online, registering at member sites, subscribing to
an e-mail newsletter, signing up for a free e-mail account (and doing nothing with it,not even registering in an online directory), and registering software online) oftenthought to generate spam in fact resulted in virtually no spam at all.The researcher also found that while many spam messages offered a way toremove oneself from spam lists (Òonly the most egregious porn spamÓ did not), he
found that many of the offered opt-out processes did not necessarily work (e.g., opt-
out links were invalid).  He found that clicking unsubscribe links did result in elim-
ination of spam, but also noted that his experience may not be typical.SOURCE:  Adapted from Matt Lake, 2001,  
ÒWe Reveal the Riskiest E-Mail Behaviors on theNet,Ó July 26, available online at <http://cnet.com/software/0-3227888-8-6602372-1.html>.
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.318YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETrefers to any form of unsolicited e-mail a person might receive, some ofwhich might be sent by publishers of adult-content Web sites.  A typical

spam message with sexual content would contain some Òcome-onÓ words
and a link to an adult-oriented Web site, but would in general arrive
without images.Policy issues associated with spam are addressed in Chapter 10.12.3.1What Are Technologies for Controlling Spam?
Technologies for controlling spam fall into two categoriesÑtools thatseek to conceal the e-mail address (because if an e-mail address is not
known, spam cannot be sent to it) and tools that manage spam once it has
been received.  Whether an individual can implement such tools varies

with the ISP and/or e-mail service used.To conceal e-mail addresses with certain ISPs, one can create differentlogin names.  For example, online services such as AOL enable a user to

create more than one login name that can serve as an e-mail address.  An
individual can thus use this special login name for activities that might
result in spam (e.g., for participating in a chat room).  This special name

becomes the attractor for spam, and mail received at that address can be
deleted at will or even refused.  A number of services (some free, some

not) automate this process, enabling users to create special-purpose ad-
dresses that can be turned off or discarded at will.   In addition, e-mail

systems may allow a user to disallow all e-mail except e-mail from a
specified list of preferred addresses and/or domain names.To manage spam that does reach the userÕs mailbox, a number oftools are available.  Most of these tools depend on the ISP or the use of an

e-mail program with filtering capabilities (e.g., Eudora, Netscape Messen-
ger, Microsoft Outlook).   Spam e-mail can be identified and blocked on

the basis of:¥Content.  Content-based analysis examines the text, images, and
attachments to e-mails to determine its character.  (The technology for

content-based analysis is much like that for content-based filtering, as
described in Section 2.3.1.)¥Source.  E-mail being received from a particular e-mail address or aparticular domain name may be defined as spam after a few examples
have been received.  AOL mail controls are based in part on identifying

certain sources as spam sources.¥Addressees.  For the most part, spam mail is not explicitly addressed
to a specific individual.  Instead, a spam e-mail is addressed to a large

number of people in the Òblind copyÓ field.  (On the other hand, 
ÒblindYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.319TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS FOR USERScopiesÓ (bcc: foo@example.com) sent to an individual and e-mail sent
through mailing lists to which an individual has subscribed also make use
of the hidden address technique.)  Mail filters (e.g., one based on 
Òprocmail,Óa mail processing system for Unix and some other platforms) can check and
file or delete an e-mail if it arrived at the userÕs location via blind copyaddressing.   (Steps can be taken to set up exceptions for mailing list mes-

sages and bcc: messages from legitimate correspondents.)Users can also take a number of procedural measures.  For example,
Web sites often ask for information from the user.  By inserting false

information (e.g., indicating an income lower than is actually true), it is
sometimes possible to avoid marketing attacks based on demographic
information consistent with the group being targeted by the marketers.Internet service providers also take measures to limit spam.  For ex-
ample, AOL limits how fast other users can repeatedly enter and exit chat
rooms, because a pattern of repeatedly and rapidly entering and exiting
chat rooms can also be an indication that someone is harvesting e-mail
addresses.  Most ISPs also have lists of known spammers from which they

refuse to carry traffic.12.3.2How Well Do Spam-Controlling Technologies Work?
Spam-control technologies for dealing with e-mail that has arrived inoneÕs mailbox suffer from the same underblocking and overblocking is-sues that are discussed in Section 12.1.2.  One important issue is that spam

often contains links to inappropriate sexually explicit material rather than
the actual material itself, and no content-screening spam-controlling tool
known to the committee scans the content for links that may be embed-
ded in an e-mail.That said, some spam-controlling technologies are highly effectiveagainst spammers.  Those that restrict the e-mail that can be received to a

given set of senders are very effective (i.e., do not accept mail unless the
sender is on a list of permissible senders or from specific domains).  On the

other hand, they also sharply restrict the universe of potential contacts, so
much so that a user may fail to receive desired e-mail.  (For example, a

friend who changes his or her sending e-mail address will not be able to
reach someone who has identified a white list of preferred senders.)ISP-based or e-mail-service-based spam filters are partially effective.For example, the researcher mentioned in Box 12.6 found that the spam
filter on one popular free e-mail service reduced the volume of spam by
about 60 percent, though it still passed more than one message per day.
Spam filters that are based on content analysis techniques have all of the
problems with false positive and false negatives that Web filters have.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.320YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET12.3.3Who Decides What Is Spam?
Some spam filters have preconfigured lists of known spammers.  Butin general, it is the user who must decide what is spam and what is not.
Of course, the difficultyÑespecially for a childÑis to recognize spamwithout opening the e-mail.  In some cases, it is easy to recognize from the

header or subject line.  But many spam messages reveal themselves only

when they are opened.  (Note also that one person
Õs spam is anotherpersonÕs service or information.  Unsolicited notices for ski vacations or
material on a local political candidate may be useful to some individuals
and useless to others.)12.3.4How Flexible and Usable Are Products
 for Controlling Spam?
Because many ISPs filter out spam for most users, users of those ISPsneed not take any action at all to reject spam.  However, when spam leaks

through the ISP filters (or if e-mail is not filtered for spam at all), as is
typical of most e-mail, the user must take action.Note that unsolicited e-mail, and the resources and attention it con-sumes, is not limited to sexually explicit e-mail for youth.  It would be

reasonable to assume that the number of parties sending unsolicited e-
mail, the frequency with which they send it, and the volume that they
send  will all increase.  Therefore, approaches to this problem are likely to

be developed, regardless of the concerns about youth and sexually ex-
plicit material.  However, this can easily turn into another race: as better

spam-discriminating technologies are invented, alternative ways of wrap-
ping the unsolicited e-mail are invented, and the cycle continues.12.3.5What Are the Costs and Infrastructure Required
for Using Spam-Control Products?Spam can be controlled in a variety of locations.  When control is
located at the receiver, locally installed software spam filters can help to
process and eliminate spam.  Conceptually, the cost of local spam filters is

similar to that for content filters.  However, spam filters must be inte-

grated into software for processing e-mail in general.Control points based in the network (or an ISP) are both more com-plex and more comprehensive.  Some ISPs have extensive capabilities for
detecting the sending of spam mail (e.g., by monitoring the volume of e-
mail sent in a given time interval), preventing the ÒharvestingÓ of e-mail
addresses, and so on, and developing these capabilities entails substantial
effort.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.321TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS FOR USERSIndividual organizations often incur cost in configuring software andservers to stop spam from going through their own internal networks.
Such efforts are often undertaken to help manage internal bandwidth
more effectively.Finally, there may be costs incurred for infrastructure that may beneeded to support legislative efforts to curb spam.  For example, one

method for dealing with junk mail and phone telemarketers is to establish
a clearinghouse where people can register their names, addresses, and
phone numbers.  But the effectiveness of this approach is based on the fact

that it is in the marketerÕs self-interest to refrain from wasting phone andmail effort and time on people unlikely to buy.  Because sending spam is

so much cheaper than mail and phone calls, a similar approach is unlikely
to work effectively without some kind of legal cause of action that can be
taken against those who ignore the clearinghouse.  (Policy-based solu-

tions are discussed in Chapter 9.)12.3.6What Does the Future Hold for
Spam-Controlling Systems?There has been an acceleration of commercial organizations introduc-ing their messages into schools, although almost always after signing an
agreement with the school board (which agreement usually includes new
funds flowing to the school to supplement the budget).  However, schools

may wish to install some mail filtering before the marketing department
of some soft-drink manufacturer decides to send e-mail to students just
before lunch, promoting its product while also, to prevent uproar, giving
Òthe spelling word of the day,Ó Òthe math hint of the day,Ó or whatever.
It is easier for the school district to add another item to the spam filter
than to have its lawyer sue the sender of the e-mails.  As in the case of age

verification technologies, expanded use of Òmail deflectionÓ beyond is-
sues of sexually inappropriate material may warrant the trouble of install-
ing spam-controlling systems.12.3.7What Are the Implications of Using
Spam-Controlling Systems?As described in Chapter 9, legislative efforts to curb spam do havesocietal implications.12.3.8Findings on Spam-Controlling Technologies
1.Spam-controlling technologies generally do not allow differentia-
tion between different kinds of spam (e.g., hate speech versus inappropri-Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.322YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETate sexually explicit material).  Rather, they seek to identify spam of any
nature.2.Spam-controlling technologies that filter objectionable e-mail have
more or less the same screening properties that filters have.  That is, they

do block some amount of objectionable content (though they do not gen-
erally screen for links, which are often transmitted in lieu of actual explicit
content).  However, they are likely to be somewhat less effective than

filters at preventing such e-mail from being passed to the user because
users are likely to be more apprehensive about losing e-mail that is di-
rected toward them than about missing useful Web sites, and thus would
be more concerned about false positives.3.Behavioral and procedural approaches to avoiding spam (rather
than filtering it) have at least as much potential as spam-controlling tech-
nologies to reduce the effect of spam.  However, using such approaches

adds somewhat to the inconveniences associated with Internet use.12.4INSTANT HELP
The technologies discussed in Sections 12.1 and 12.2 are intended toprevent the exposure of children to inappropriate material.  Instant help

is a tool to deal with exposure after the fact.12.4.1What Is Instant Help?
The philosophy underlying instant help is that from time to timechildren will inevitably encounter upsetting things onlineÑinappropri-ate material, spam mail containing links to inappropriate sexually explicit
material, sexual solicitations, and so on.  When something upsetting hap-

pens, it would be helpful for a responsible adult to be able to respond
promptly.  An 
Òinstant helpÓ function would enable the minor to alert
such an adult and appropriate action could then ensue, could provide
another channel to law enforcement through which threats, and solicita-
tions, and obscene materials or child pornography could be reported.To the best of the committeeÕs knowledge, there are no commerciallyavailable tools that provide instant help.  But current technology could

easily support an instant help function.  For example, a secure one-click

call for help47 could be:
47Security for this Òone-clickÓ button is an important element of help
Ñthe functionalityof the button must not be disabled, as it is in mousetrapping (when the ÒbackÓ button sends
the user to a new adult-oriented Web site).Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.323TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS FOR USERS¥On ISPs, an Òalways-on-topÓ button that would connect the user
directly to a trained respondent;¥On Internet browsers, a Òplug-inÓ represented by a button on the
toolbar;¥On search engines, an icon that would always be displayed on theresults page;¥On e-mail readers, an ÒI object to this e-mailÓ button on the toolbar;
¥On a computer desktop, a button that activates an application thatallows a remote helper to take over control of the userÕs machine andview the screen.These buttons might be as simple as an icon for the CyberTipline(CTL) that would serve as an easily accessible channel for the public to
use in reporting child pornography.  The CTL icon has proven to be an

effective tool in reporting obscene or child pornography because it is
user-friendly and is the most direct method to report such images to the
appropriate law enforcement authority. Because the CTL icon was built
for the sole purpose of interfacing with the public to facilitate reporting to
law enforcement computer-assisted crimes against children, it is more
effective than other mechanisms for such reporting.Depending on the context of the technology through which the user iscoming into contact with inappropriate content or interactions, a wide
range of functionality is possible once the button is clicked.  For example,

Òinstant helpÓ on a browser or an ISP could immediately connect the user
to a helper who provides assistance.  To provide context, an image of the

screen could be transmitted to the helper.  Such assistance might be most
useful if the user encounters a solicitor or inappropriate conversation in a
chat room or an instant message.  Or, if a user encounters inappropriate

material, the last several Web pages viewed could be shared with the
helper, who could assist the user in whatever action he or she wished to
take (e.g., sending URLs to the CyberTipline).  For Internet access on a

LAN, instant help could be configured to summon assistance from a re-
sponsible adult within the LAN, such as a teacher or a librarian.Instant help would be applicable in both home and institutional con-texts.   Implementing instant help functionality must be undertaken by

service providers and technology vendors.  But such functionality is not

helpful without a human infrastructure to assist those seeking helpÑthehuman infrastructure may be provided by the ISP, a parent, a school, a
library, or even an expanded National Center for Missing and Exploited
Children (NCMEC).Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.324YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET12.4.2How Well Might Instant Help Work?
By providing assistance to the minor, instant help could potentiallyreduce the negative impact that may result from exposure to inappropri-
ate material or experiences.  Such exposure can come from either deliber-

ate or inadvertent access, but in practice instant help is more likely to be
useful in the case of inadvertent access.  Instant help obviously does not

enable the user to avoid inappropriate material but does provide a means
for trying to cope with it.  It also provides opportunities to educate chil-

dren about how to avoid inappropriate material or experiences in the
future, and it might lead to the creation of more civil norms online.  It

provides immediate assistance in the case of aggressive solicitations and
harassment.  Finally, it might lead to greater law enforcement activity if

the materials involved are obscene or constitute child pornography.Metrics of effectiveness that indicate the extent to which children arenot exposed to inappropriate materials do not apply to instant help.
Rather, effectiveness is better assessed on the basis of the quality of the
assistance that helpers can provide, and the responsiveness of the instant
help function.  Assistance that arrives 20 minutes after the user has pressed

the instant help button is obviously much less helpful than if it arrives in
5 seconds, and of course, human helpers must be trained to handle a wide
variety of situations.A specialist trained to provide this kind of help to youth, or a peerwith special training, could potentially be more effective than the childÕsown parent or teacher or librarian.  However, because this approach has

never been implemented on a wide scale, staffing needs for instant help
centers are difficult to assess.  In many urban areas, crisis intervention

hotlines (focused on helping people subject to domestic abuse, or feeling
suicidal, struggling with substance abuse addictions, and so on) exist, but
there are none known to the committee that give training to their volun-
teer staffs concerning childrenÕs exposure to sexually explicit material onthe Internet.12.4.3Who Decides What Is Inappropriate?
Unlike other tools, the locus of decision making in the context ofinstant help rests with the minor.  The minor decides what is upsetting

and determines the situations in which he or she needs help.12.4.4How Flexible and Usable Is Instant Help?
The purpose of an instant help function is to ensure that somethingcan be done with very little difficulty.  Thus, the flexibility and usability

of an instant help function are paramount.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.325TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS FOR USERSFor example, individual parents, libraries, or schools could customizewho is contacted when the instant help button is pressed.  Thus, a family
with strong religious ties could set instant help to alert helpers from a
group associated with their religious tradition, while a school district
could set the instant help button so that in the elementary school, a mes-
sage went to a staffer in that building and in the middle school, to a staffer
in the middle school building.  This is in some sense analogous to the

national phone emergency number 911 going to a local 911 dispatch cen-
ter based on the exchange from which 911 was dialed.12.4.5What Are the Costs and Infrastructure
Required for Instant Help?The infrastructure and institutional cooperation needed for instanthelp to work successfully are considerable.  Vendors must be willing to

use precious screen space to provide instant help buttons.  The infrastruc-

ture of helpers must be developed and deployed.  For an ISP, such an

infrastructure might well be expensive; for the NCMEC or law enforce-
ment agencies, it would be very expensive.  But for a school or library (or

even for responsible adult guardians), the infrastructure of helpers may
already be in place.48The costs are roughly proportional to the size of the helper infrastruc-ture; helpers (who could be volunteers) must be trained in how to re-
spond to a call for help.Note also that a skilled adult predator or even adolescents bent onmischief could create a flood of diversionary instant help requests so that
the responding individuals would become backlogged, during which time
the predator could attempt to continue an interaction with a young per-
son.  Thus, some mechanism for protection from 
Òflooding attacksÓ would
be needed by any responding center that serves a large number of anony-
mous end users or devices.12.4.6What Does the Future Hold for Instant Help?
To the committeeÕs knowledge, instant help functionality has not beenimplemented anywhere, and it remains to be seen if children would actu-
ally use it if and when they are confronted with inappropriate material or48It is true that in schools or libraries a child should be able to request help from theseindividuals without instant help features.  The primary advantage of clicking an instant
help icon is that it can be done privately and without drawing attention from other users.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.326YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETexperiences that upset them.  Thus, some small-scale piloting of the con-
cept to evaluate how it might work is likely to be very helpful before any
major effort to implement instant help is considered.12.4.7What Are the Implications of Using Instant Help?
A potential downside of a Òlow-costÓ implementation that would
require the child to describe the material and how he or she got there is
that the child might be forced to focus more on the inappropriate mate-
rial, perhaps causing at least discomfort to the child who may be better off
if transferred back to appropriate activities as soon as possible.  Such a

negative outcome could be avoided if the inappropriate material could be
automatically transmitted to the helper.  (Since the material may well not
be present on the childÕs screen when he or she contacts the helper, theautomatic display of material might have to retrieve the last several
screensÑthis may be a difficult technical task under some circumstances.)In cases where a new type of offensive material or communicationbegins to occur for the first time on the Internet, the first instant help
response center to identify this new material could share that information
with schools and parents, other instant help response centers, youth (as
warnings), or even filtering vendors.  In that sense, instant help might

harness all youth who use it to improve the monitoring of the Internet for
new offensive material or communication.  Dissemination of the insights

of the staff of an instant help center should be considered a networked
response, as opposed to the response of assisting a child when requested.
The Internet technical community has experience with networked re-
sponse in the CERT system to propagate information about worms, secu-
rity holes, and the like.12.4.8Findings on Instant Help
As the committee is unaware of any implementation of instant helpthat fits the description above, there are no findings to report.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.327Complementing the discussion of Chapter 12 on tools for the enduser, this chapter focuses on tools for other Internet stakeholders, such as
Internet service providers, content providers, or operators of adult-ori-
ented Web sites.  As a general rule, these tools are most relevant to entities

that have some commercial reason for existingÑthey have less relevance
to non-commercial sources of sexually explicit material (e.g., individuals
with exhibitionist preferences, friends sharing sexually explicit images,
and so on).Table 13.1 provides a preview of this chapter.13.1A .XXX TOP-LEVEL DOMAIN
13.1.1What Is a .xxx Top-level Domain?
A .xxx top-level domain (TLD) would be reserved for those entitiesproviding adult-oriented, sexually explicit material.1 For example, www.foo.xxx would name a site on which such content would be found, and
any pages within it (e.g., www.foo.xxx/example1) or any subdomains
(e.g., www.fetish.foo.xxx) would be assumed to have similar content as
well.  A key element of proposals for .xxx is whether the use of .xxx would
13Technology-Based Tools Available
to Non-End Users1Ò.xxxÓ is pronounced as Òdot-xxx.ÓYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.328YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETTABLE 13.1  Technology Tools for Use by Non-End Users
ToolFunctionOne Illustrative AdvantageOne Illust
rProvides a way of identifyingadult-oriented sexually explicitmaterial from these sites with
minimal effortEnables sites that wish to beknown for providing sexuallyexplicit material to self-identify, thus making inad-
vertent access to such sites lesslikelyProvides high assurance thatmaterial from .kids Web sites isappropriate for childrenPlaces a major obstacle in thepath of minors seeking adult-oriented sexually explicit
content from commercial sitesReduces dissemination ofillegally copied sexuallyexplicit images, which
constitute a significant amountof the adult-oriented materialavailable onlineRequires that Web sites withadult-oriented sexually explicitcontent must have a .xxx suffixGives any content provider theoption of selecting a domainname with a .xxx suffix.kids domain names reservedfor site with contentappropriate for childrenSeeks to ensure that someoneseeking to access adult-orientedsexually explicit content is
actually an adultProvides tools for contentowners to help controldissemination of images they
own.xxx domain(mandatory).xxx domain(voluntary).kids domain
Age verificationtechnologiesTools forprotectingintellectual
propertybe voluntary or mandatory.  If use were mandatory, all providers of adult-
oriented content would be required to place such content on a Web page
with the .xxx TLD, and penalties would be established for not doing so.Today, assignment of domain names in some TLDs is done on apurely voluntary basis, whereas for other TLDs, an adjudicating body
determines eligibility.  For .com, .net, and .org, registrars of domain names

perform a strictly administrative function; for the .edu, .mil, .gov top-
level domains, some institutional entity decides that an organization is or
is not eligible.  However, regardless of the TLD involved, the content that

a domain name owner wishes to place on its Web site is not necessarily
related to the assignment of the domain name to that owner, and there is
no requirement today for such a relationship.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.329TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS AVAILABLE TO NON-END USERStageOne Illustrative DisadvantageVoluntarey versus Involuntary Exposure
Similar to filtering; prevents both kindsof exposure to .xxx domains, but is notuseful against materials not found in
.xxx domainsSimilar to filtering; prevents both kindsof exposure to .xxx domains, but is notuseful against materials not found in.xxx domainsSee discussion in text of content-limitedInternet service providersWhen implemented, can prevent bothdeliberate and inadvertent access forminors, although if user is willing to lie
about age, may not be able to protectagainst deliberate accessNot applicableRequires difficult-to-obtain clearlyspecified and international standard forwhat constitutes material that must be
placed in .xxx domainsMay lead to stronger political pressuresfor mandatory inclusion in .xxx domain;also likely to leave many Web pagescontaining objectionable materials
unidentified as such, thus facilitatinginadvertent accessRequires difficult-to-obtain clearlyspecified and international standard forwhat material is appropriate for
children; does not allow for age-baseddifferentiation among childrenLittle applicability to non-commercialsources of sexually explicit materialHard to use against non-commercialsources of sexually explicit material thatdo not depend on Web distribution (e.g.,
Usenet, peer-to-peer networking)Proponents of a .xxx domain argue that it would provide an easy wayof recognizing material presumed to be inappropriate for children, obvi-
ating the need for a laborious inspection of Web pages for such content
and simplifying the filtering task by simply blocking access to sites in the
.xxx domain.The institution authorized to establish new top-level domains is theInternet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN), a non-
profit corporation that was formed in October 1998 to assume responsibil-
ity for the IP address space allocation, protocol parameter assignment,
domain name system management, and root server system management
functions previously performed under U.S. government contract by the
Internet Assigned Name Authority (IANA) and other entities.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.330YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETIf and when a .xxx TLD is established, it would remain for productvendors to build software that would provide users with the option of
rejecting all domain names ending in .xxx. Parents, schools, teachers, and
other concerned adults would then have to be willing to exercise the
options enabled in the software.13.1.2How Well Would a .xxx Top-Level Domain Work?
In essence, the use of a .xxx TLD amounts to a label to identify contentas inappropriate or appropriate for children that is based on the source of
that content.  Thus, from the standpoint of the end user, all of the pros and

cons of label-based filtering described in Chapter 12 apply to the use of a
.xxx domain.A .xxx domain would be intended to facilitate the blocking of accessto sexually explicit material.  Thus, in principle, it
Ñalong with filtersÑwould help to protect against both deliberate and inadvertent access.
From a filtering perspective, the effectiveness of such schemes depends
on the reliability of the assumption that adult-oriented, sexually explicit
material will be confined to a .xxx domain.By definition, a .xxx domain name is reserved for sexually explicitmaterialÑand is thus irrelevant for any other material that is non-sexualin nature.  It is likely that certain parties will have some incentives to

place their content in such a domain.2   After all, they wish their content to
be found, and segregating it into an adult-oriented TLD helps to make it
found.  (Indeed, a concentration of adult-oriented Web sites may in fact

provide children and adults with a Òtarget-richÓ environment in which
they could much more easily seek out sexually explicit material.)  On the

other hand, a .xxx domain does not deal at all with the issue of peer-to-
peer transfers, e-mail attachments, and so on.  For example, college stu-

dents may post collected sexually explicit material on various servers run
by universities or public Web hosting servicesÑand there is no guaranteethat all sexually explicit material will be contained on Web sites in the
.xxx domain, even if all commercial adult-oriented providers choose to
cooperate.2For example, Seth Warshavsky, president of the Internet Entertainment Group, an adultentertainment company, told the U.S. Senate Commerce Committee in 1998 that he wouldlike to see a .adult domain: ÒWeÕre suggesting the creation of a new top-level domain calledÔ.adultÕ where all sexually explicit material on the Net would reside.
Ó  See 
ÒCongress WeighsNet Porn Bills,Ó CNET article, February 10, 1998, available online at <http://news.cnet.com/
news/0-1005-200-326435.html>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.331TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS AVAILABLE TO NON-END USERSTwo issues related to a .xxx TLD are whether the use of the TLD ismandatory or voluntary, and whether there is an adjudicating body that
monitors the content contained in one or another of these TLDs.3  Today,
no Web site owner is forced to use a given TLD, and there is no adjudicat-
ing body that determines if the content on a Web site matches its TLD.For a .xxx domain, these two issues are related.  Mandatory use of a
.xxx domain for sexually explicit material would imply creating a body
whose role was to decide what content must be placed into a .xxx domain,
and thus would affect all domain name owners, not just those associated
with adult-oriented content.  However, because 
Òharmful to minorsÓ laws
are community-specific, a single body might be tempted to use a Òlowestcommon denominatorÓ approach to such decisions.  Thus, some organi-
zations and firms would be forced to use a .xxx domain even if they did
not believe their content was adult-oriented and sexually explicit.  (Stig-

matization might also result from forced placement into a .xxx domain,
with the .xxx TLD becoming a de facto ghetto into which all controversial
material is placed.)  Coupled with filters that block Web sites with a .xxx

suffix, this approach would lead to a bias in favor of overblocking.  On the

other hand, in the absence of an adjudicating body, or if the use of a .xxx
domain is voluntary, adult-oriented, sexually explicit material could eas-
ily be found on non-.xxx domains.  Filters designed to block sites based

solely on the .xxx TLD designation would be ineffective against such
content, and so commercial sites uninterested in differentiating between
children and adult traffic could take advantage of the lack of the .xxx
TLD.  A voluntary .xxx domain might also reduce filter overblocking,

since operators of sites with sexually explicit material that was not ori-
ented towards adult entertainment (e.g., museums, medical schools)
would not choose a .xxx domain name and hence would be less likely to
be blocked.A finalÑand criticalÑquestion for the mandatory use of a .xxx TLD ishow it would apply internationally.  That is, how would U.S. law be able
to compel foreign Web site owners to use a .xxx domain?4  (Such a ques-
tion is particularly relevant given the commonness of full frontal nudity
in many mainstream foreign publications and Web sites.)3An adjudicating body refers only to an entity that could make such a determination.  A
wide range of entities fit such a characterizationÑfrom an organization or agency estab-lished with a charge to make such determinations to a court or jury instructed to make such
determinations in accordance with applicable law.4A particularly thorny issue in this regard concerns the implications of such efforts forattempts by foreign governments to enforce their laws on Web sites based in the United
States.  For more discussion, see Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, Na-
tional Research Council, 2001, Global Networks and Local Values, National Academy Press,Washington, D.C.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.332YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET13.1.3Who Decides What Material Should Be
Confined to .xxx Web Sites?For voluntary use (in the absence of adjudicating bodies), only theorganization in question makes decisions about what material is adult-
oriented and sexually explicit.  For non-voluntary use requiring an adju-

dicating body, the adjudicating body makes decisions about what should
and should not be placed in each domain, thus raising the question of
what communityÕs standards would be used by the adjudicating bodyand how they would be determined.13.1.4How Flexible and Usable Are Schemes
Based on a .xxx Top-Level Domain?The usability of schemes based on .xxx would depend in large part onwhether or not domain names with these suffixes contain the content
implied by the TLD (as described above).Another issue is whether the .xxx TLD would receive ICANN en-dorsement.  A number of schemes have been proposed to circumvent

ICANN in the establishment of other TLD names.  Such proposals have

been controversial, because they violate principles that have been re-

garded by many as integral to the smooth operation of the Internet.  In

particular, a non-endorsed TLD name might not be uniformly accessible
from every Internet access point (and today only a very small percentage
of Web users could access sites based on non-endorsed TLDs), and under
some circumstances, a user seeking to access a site based on a non-
endorsed domain name might wind up at different Web sites depending
on the location from which it was accessed.513.1.5What Are the Costs and Infrastructure
Required for a .xxx Top-Level Domain?For .xxx domain names, the adjudicating body must make decisionsabout every Web page that is posted on the Internet, because it must
decide if such material belongs in a .xxx domain name.  Such a task is

daunting, and it is virtually impossible that an adjudicating body could
do so.  More likely, it would undertake what sampling it could do at

reasonable expense and would examine non-.xxx sites that were reported
as having sexually explicit content.5This point is discussed in more detail in a Computer Science and TelecommunicationsBoard report on domain name systems that is currently in preparation.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.333TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS AVAILABLE TO NON-END USERSIn addition, a .xxx domain would pose a number of technical difficul-ties.6  An adult Web site may reside on a .xxx domain, and indeed may
wish to reside on such a domain.  However, consider the example of a

universityÑwhich hosts a wide variety of content, some of which isdeemed to be adult-oriented and sexually explicit by the adjudicating
body.  Web pages for such content will
Ñby assumptionÑreside under-neath the .edu domain of the university.  Under a .xxx domain name,

another separate category in the domain name service tree must be main-
tained by the university.  Alternatively, a university could require that

projects containing such content set up their own Web servers in the .xxx
domain, which does not involve a high cost.  Project Web sites under the

.edu domain could contain links to the Web sites in the .xxx domain.A second technical difficulty is the fact that the domain name serviceof the Internet supports page redirection.  That is, the owner of the site

www.safe_for_kids.com has the technical capability to force individuals
intending to visit the www.safe_for_kids.com site to visit a .xxx Web page
instead, whether or not the owner of the .xxx Web page wishes this redi-
rection to happen.7  Such a scenario raises a question of responsibility if a
minor is channeled to the .xxx site.  The owner of www.safe_ for_kids.com

has no sexually explicit content on its site, but is responsible for directing
the minor to the .xxx site.  The owner of a .xxx domain name may have

taken no actions to attract children to the .xxx site.  Who bears responsibil-

ity for this exposure?13.1.6What Does the Future Hold for
a .xxx Top-Level Domain?At least one legislative proposal has been offered to support the es-tablishment of .xxx domains.8  As this report goes to press in May 2002,
the prospects of these proposals are unclear.6See Ò.xxx Considered DangerousÓ online at <http://search.ietf.org/internet-drafts/
draft-eastlake-xxx-01.txt> for more discussion of these and other technical issues.7In redirection, the request from the userÕs software (e.g., browser) arrives at the site whoseaddress was entered, but that site does not return content.  Instead, the site returns a standard
Internet message saying, ÒThe content you seek is located at this address,Ó and the user
Õs soft-ware immediately fetches data from that address.  Since the first system may send an address

without a symbolic host name, but rather with a numeric IP address, such as that in the messageÒthe content you seek is located at http://111.222.333.444/aWebPage.html,Ó client-side filtering
has no clues that this is actually a host in the .xxx domain.  Redirection exists in the Internet

protocols because organizations do change what systems host their content but still want theold well-publicized URLs to work, and because it can be used as part of load balancing:  a
nearly overloaded server can redirect some percentage of requests elsewhere, potentially based
on the geographic location of the requester as inferred from the IP address.8See, for example, <http://www.adlawbyrequest.com/legislation/tldsex.shtml>, whichdescribes a proposal supporting .xxx.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.334YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET13.1.7What Are the Implications of Using
a .xxx Top-Level Domain?The establishment of a .xxx domain, even if use is voluntary, wouldestablish a Òbig fat targetÓ for subsequent regulatory efforts.  In other
words, even if its use is voluntary, it may not remain that way for long as
policy makers take note of its existence.13.1.8Findings on a .xxx Top-Level Domain
1.A .xxx domain that is selected voluntarily may have some appeal
for enterprises that are involved primarily in providing access to sexually
explicit material intended to arouse desire (i.e., what is often known as
ÒpornographyÓ) and that use a distribution channel requiring the use ofdomain names.  Such enterprises are likely to use a .xxx domain as a part
of their advertising strategies.2.A .xxx domain would have little effect on (a) sexually explicit ma-
terial that is not intended to arouse desire but which some parties may
regard as inappropriate anyway, (b) a mixed-use domain (e.g., a univer-
sity with a .edu Web site with a faculty member who does research on
human sexuality or studies the evolution of sexuality in art and media
and wishes to post research materials on a university Web site), or (c)
sources of inappropriate sexually explicit material that are located out-
side the United States (if these sources do not wish to be identified with a
.xxx domain).3.The use of a TLD to identify inappropriate content would require
software (e.g., Web browsers) that can be configured to block content
coming from .xxx sites.  Conceptually, this arrangement is identical to

that of filtering based on content, except that the task of developing black
lists and white lists is made much easier.4.The benefits associated with a .xxx domain would depend on the
association of a TLD with specific content.  This fact raises the question of

an institutional entity that might be established to promote such associa-
tion.  If the benefits associated with a purely voluntary use of either do-

main are sufficient, then no such entity need exist.  But if the affected

public requires higher confidence in the association between TLD and
content, such an entity may be required, and that entity would be ventur-
ing into difficult uncharted waters as it sought to determine whether
certain content should or should not be contained within a given TLD.  In

the case of a .xxx domain, the scope of its responsibility would be to
ensure that all sexually explicit material was hosted on a .xxx domain and
nowhere elseÑan entirely daunting task.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.335TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS AVAILABLE TO NON-END USERS13.2A .KIDS TOP-LEVEL DOMAIN
13.2.1What Is a .kids Top-Level Domain?
A .kids top-level domain would be reserved for those entities provid-ing material intended and appropriate for children.9 That is, it would be
explicitly designed for the use of children, providing safe, lawful, and
appropriate content (e.g., information and entertainment), services, and
facilities of especially high interest for them.  Further, it would safeguard
the privacy and safety of all children accessing .kids domain names.For example, www.foo.kids would name a site on which such contentwould be found, and any pages within it (e.g., www.foo.kids/example1)
or any subdomains (e.g., www.nature.foo.kids) would be assumed to have
similar content as well.  In general, use of a .kids domain has been dis-

cussed in entirely voluntary terms, and it would make no sense to make it
mandatory.Proponents of a .kids domain argue that it would provide an easyway of recognizing material presumed to be appropriate for children,
simplifying the filtering task by simply allowing access only to sites in the
.kids domain.  As in the case of a .xxx domain, product vendors would

have to build software that would provide users with the option of ac-
cepting only domain names ending in .kids.   Parents, schools, teachers,

and other concerned adults would then have to be willing to exercise the
options enabled in the software.13.2.2How Well Would a .kids Top-Level Domain Work?
Because the use of a .kids TLD amounts to a label to identify contentas appropriate for children that is based on the source of that content, all
of the conceptual pros and cons of label-based filtering described in Chap-
ter 12 apply to the use of .kids.  However, in addition to the baseline

question of the extent to which it would help to keep children away from
inappropriate materials, a second question particularly relevant to a .kids
domain is the extent to which it would succeed in providing appropriate,
educational, and informative content and experiences for children.A .kids domain would be intended to promote access to child-friendlymaterial.  To the extent that this occurs, children have less time available

to seek out inappropriate material.  Thus, a .kids domain alone may help
9Ò.kidsÓ is pronounced 
Òdot-kids.ÓYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.336YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETto reduce deliberate access to inappropriate material but cannot addressthe problem of inadvertent access.  A browser or Internet service provider

restricting access only to .kids Web pages effectively provides the same
kind of protection as a content-limited ISP service.From a filtering perspective, the effectiveness of such schemes de-pends on the reliability of the assumption that material intended for chil-
dren will be found on a .kids domain.  It can be anticipated that many

firms seeking to provide content for children will have incentives to ob-
tain .kids domain names, because such a domain name would guarantee
their audience.  Today, no Web site owner is forced to use a given TLD,

and a Web site operator can post anything on his or her Web site.  If this

were true in the .kids domain, it could defeat the intent of keeping chil-
dren away from inappropriate content.It is unlikely that those in the commercial enterprise of providingadult-oriented, sexually explicit content would choose to place their ma-
terials in a .kids domain.  Furthermore, other enterprises, especially those

operating in the commercial mainstream, would select quite carefully the
content they would place in a .kids domain.  However, it is easy to imag-
ine that if .kids domain names were as freely available as todayÕs .comdomain names, certain parties would place inappropriate content of some
kind on a Web site with a .kids domain name.Thus, the safety of a .kids domain name likely depends on the exist-ence of some mechanism to ensure that the content available from any
given .kids site matches the intent of the .kids domain.  One such mecha-
nism is an adjudicating body that decides what organizations would be
eligible for a .kids domain name (so that .kids domain names would not
be as freely available as todayÕs .com or .net names).  Further, the body
would make decisions about specific content that would be eligible for
placement.  The effectiveness of a .kids domain would depend, then, on

the wisdom of the judgments of the adjudicating body and the extent to
which it had the power to enforce its judgments.  The body
Õs enforcementpower might depend on its ability to take away a .kids domain name from
an owner found to be misusing it, or an acceptance of civil liability for
false and deceptive advertising or business practices in that event (sug-
gesting a possible role for the Federal Trade Commission).The second question involves the extent to which a .kids domainwould succeed in providing appropriate, educational, and informative
content and experiences for children.  It is clear that commercial entities

that market their products and services to children would make signifi-
cant use of a .kids domain.  But as discussed in Section 10.9, non-commer-

cial entities could also have an important role to play in populating the
.kids domain.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.337TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS AVAILABLE TO NON-END USERS13.2.3Who Decides What Material Should Be
Allowed in .kids Web Sites?In the absence of an adjudicating body for allocating domain names,only the organization seeking a domain name makes decisions about what
material is appropriate for children.  In the presence of an adjudicating

body, the body makes decisions about what should and should not be
placed in each domain, thus raising the question of what standards should
be used by the adjudicating body and how they would be determined.An undetermined aspect of a .kids domain would be the develop-mental or age level that should govern placement.  As noted in Chapter 5,

what is perfectly appropriate for a 16-year-old may be inappropriate for a
7 year-old.  Coupled with the fact that the information needs of small

children are generally less than those of older children, it would seem that
content for .kids would tend to be oriented toward younger children.One possibility for definition of Web sites eligible for a .kids domainname is a site that is subject to the requirements of the Child Online
Privacy Protection Act (COPPA), that is, a site ÒdirectedÓ to children
under 13.  To determine whether a site is ÒdirectedÓ toward children, theFederal Trade Commission (FTC) considers several factors, including Òthesubject matter; visual or audio content; the age of models on the site;
language; whether advertising on the Web site is directed to children;
information regarding the age of the actual or intended audience; and
whether a site uses animated characters or other child-oriented fea-
tures.Ó10  If a .kids domain is indeed intended for use by children under
13, the FTC definition of a site directed to children is one reasonable point
of departure for a working definition.13.2.4How Flexible and Usable Are Schemes
Based on a .kids Top-Level Domain?The usability of schemes based on .kids depends in large part onwhether or not domain names with this suffix contain the content implied
by the TLD (as described above).  As with a .xxx domain, another issue is

whether these TLDs receive ICANN endorsement.  A number of schemes

have been proposed to circumvent ICANN in the establishment of other
TLD names, and the discussion above about a .xxx domain in this area
applies identically here.10See Federal Trade Commission, 1999, ÒHow to Comply with the Children
Õs Online Pri-vacy Protection Rule,Ó November. Available online at
 <http://www.ftc.gov/bcp/conline/pubs/buspubs/coppa.htm>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.338YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET13.2.5What Are the Costs and Infrastructure
Required for a .kids Top-Level Domain?For mandatory adjudicating bodies to make decisions about content,an effort would be required that is proportional to the volume of informa-
tion posted by entities with a .kids domain name.In addition, owners of Web sites in a .kids domain face liability issues.The proposition that a .kids site is appropriate for children is the draw for
many users.  Content deemed inappropriate by someone that is found in

a .kids domain is likely to lead to lawsuits about false and deceptive
advertising; if an adjudicating body is involved, it is likely to be named as
well.  Also, while the intent of a .kids TLD is to make certain material easy

to find for children, the existence of a .kids TLD makes it easy to restrict
childrenÕs access only to Web sites in a .kids domain, even though muchother material might be both useful and appropriate for them.13.2.6What Does the Future Hold for a
.kids Top-Level Domain?At least one legislative proposal has been offered to support the es-tablishment of a .kids domain.11  As this report goes to press in May 2002,
the prospects of this proposal are unclear.13.2.7What Are the Implications of Using a
 .kids Top-Level Domain?
A Web site can offer users more than passive viewing of content.  If a
Web site in the .kids domain offers opportunities for a child to interact
with other users on the site (e.g., through chat rooms, e-mail, bulletin
boards, and so on), adults seeking to interact with children, such as pedo-
philes, are likely to be drawn to the site as well because of the high
likelihood that a user will be a child.  This fact is not likely to be reassur-

ing to parents.A second implication is the following:  if a .kids domain consists only
of Web sites explicitly designed for children, especially younger ones, it
would be highly restricted.  In particular, it would not carry sites that

provided information for a range of ages (e.g., information found in ency-
clopedias, which are not designed only for children).  Thus, a child re-

stricted only to accessing a .kids domain may not have access to informa-11See, for example, David McGuire, 2001, ÒBill Would Require ICANN to Create Ô.KidsÕDomain,Ó Newsbytes, June 29.  Available online at <http://www.newsbytes.com/news/
01/167478.html>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.339TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS AVAILABLE TO NON-END USERStion necessary to do certain homework assignments.  (Indeed, part of the
appeal of Internet access is the access that people have to a broader range
of informationÑand so restricting a user to a .kids domain reduces theInternetÕs appeal.)  Such restrictions may be most appropriate for the
youngest Internet users.13.2.8Findings on a .kids Top-Level Domain
1.A .kids domain may have some appeal for enterprises whose busi-
nesses are involved primarily in providing access to child-friendly and
appropriate material.  Such enterprises are likely to use a .kids domain as

a part of their advertising strategies.2.The use of a TLD to identify child-appropriate content could re-
quire software (e.g., Web browsers) that can be configured to accept only
content coming from .kids sites.  Conceptually, this arrangement is iden-

tical to that of filtering based on content, except that the task of develop-
ing white lists is made much easier.3.The use of a .kids TLD would also be useful as an indicator of
appropriateness for children even in a non-filtering context, because it
would enable parents and other responsible adults to determine a siteÕsappropriateness at a glance.4.The benefits associated with a .kids domain would depend on the
association of a TLD with specific content.  This fact raises the question of

an institutional entity that might be established to promote such associa-
tion.   If the benefits associated with a purely voluntary use of either

domain are sufficient, then no such entity need exist.  But if the affected

public requires higher confidence in the association of TLD and content,
such an entity may be required, and that entity would be venturing into
difficult uncharted waters as it sought to determine whether certain con-
tent should or should not be contained within a given TLD.  In the case of

a .kids domain, the scope of its responsibility would be to ensure that the
material on Web sites in a .kids domain was in fact child-appropriate.13.3AGE VERIFICATION TECHNOLOGIES
Because much of the political debate centers on the access of childrento inappropriate sexually explicit material on the Internet, it is natural to
examine online methods that can be used to differentiate between adults
and children.  Age verification technologies seek to distinguish adults

from children and to grant access privileges only to adults.  Age verifica-

tion technologies seek to accomplish in cyberspace what a clerk checking
an ID card or driverÕs license accomplishes in an adult bookstore.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.340YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET13.3.1What Are Age Verification Technologies?
Age verification technologies (AVTs) seek to establish that a givenindividual is or is not an adult, and based on that determination, an
information provider (generally a commercial Web site host) allows/de-
nies access to certain material or allows/prevents a transaction to be com-
pleted.  The structure of a typical commercial adult Web site is a home

page (http://www.adult_site.com) on which are presented a number of
sexually explicit ÒteaserÓ images that are immediately available to anyone
arriving on that page.  Other content is accessible only after the user pays

for access or enters a special password to gain access.As a rule, the home page of an adult-oriented, sexually explicit Website has a number of other options that the user might subsequently
choose:¥A Òfree tourÓ in which additional teaser images are presented,
perhaps on a number of additional pages;¥A Òsign-up nowÓ button, which will take the user to a subscription
page where he is invited to provide a credit card number; and¥A Òprovide access codeÓ field, in which the user can enter an access
code that has been provided previously or through some other source.In other cases, the home page may not have any images at all, or haveonly obscured but suggestive images, with a warning that says, ÒIf youare under 18, please exit by clicking here.Ó  In addition, the site may
display boilerplate language that seeks to immunize the site owner against
charges that he has made sexually explicit adult content available to chil-
dren (Box 13.1 contains an example); in these cases, the user may enter the
site only by passing through this boilerplate language.  Clicking the 
Òen-terÓ button is taken to be the user
Õs assurance that he or she agrees withthe conditions of use, which include stipulations about age.As the structure of the canonical adult Web site indicates, the simplestage verification technology is a Web script that asks the userÕs age, and inmany cases, such a request suffices. A similar situation obtains with online
forms and profiles that users are often asked to fill out; such profiles often
include entries for age.  But because young people are sometimes willing
to lie about their age, stronger age verification is generally necessary.  In

general, systems for age verification are based on the technologies de-
scribed in Chapter 2.Age verification technologies are implemented by parties who wishto restrict the access of their online products or services to adults.  (In

addition to limiting access to adult-oriented, sexually explicit materials,
AVT infrastructure may also be useful to individuals who sell alcohol,Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.341TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS AVAILABLE TO NON-END USERStobacco, or other adult-only products over the Internet.)  However, the
deployment of an age verification technology may not indicate a desire to
verify ageÑin particular, consider credit cards that serve the dual func-tion of age verification and payment medium.  Because credit cards are

today the simplest medium for online exchange of funds, the use of credit
cards is just as likely (indeed, far more likely) to indicate a desire to be
paid as a desire to restrict adults-only products and services to adults
alone.13.3.2How Well Do Age Verification Technologies Work?
In general, AVTs protect against deliberate access to sexually explicitmaterial that is being sold.  However, they provide no protection against

non-commercial sexually explicit material (e.g., an exchange of sexually
explicit images between two friends), or against deliberate or inadvertent
access to ÒteasersÓ on adult Web sites.  AVTs also provide benefits both
for the owner of an adult Web site (who can operate with less fear ofBox 13.1Boilerplate DisclaimerThe following disclaimer indicates the conditions to which a potential visitor to aWeb site containing adult-oriented, sexually explicit material might be asked toagree.This Website contains sexually-oriented adult content which may include visualimages and verbal descriptions of nude adults, adults engaging in sexual acts, and
other audio and visual materials of a sexually-explicit nature.Permission to enter this Website and to view and download its contents is strictlylimited only to consenting adults who affirm that the following conditions apply:1. That you are at least 18 years of age or older, and that you are voluntarilychoosing to view and access such sexually-explicit images and content for your
own personal use.2. That you intend to view the sexually-explicit material in the privacy of yourhome, or in a place where there are no other persons viewing this material who are
either children, or who may be offended by viewing such material.3. That you are familiar with your local community standards and that the
sexually-explicit materials which you have chosen to view and/or download from
this Website are well within the contemporary community standards of acceptance
and tolerance of your community for sexually-explicit materials of that nature.If all of these conditions apply to you, you are given permission to ENTER. If any ofthese conditions do not apply to you, you are not given permission to enter and view
the contents of this Website and you should now EXIT.SOURCE: See <http://www.karasxxx.com>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.342YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETrunning afoul of the law) and for society (which can reduce the frequencyof children coming into contact with adult material or making transac-
tions reserved for adults only).AVTs protect primarily against deliberate access to sexually explicitmaterial for which adult Web site operators require payment.  To be

effective, age verification technologies must be deployed in front of any
content that is inappropriate for childrenÑin other words, a user musthave to pass through an adult verification screening (thus verifying that
he or she is an adult) before he or she has access to adults-only content.
Material behind an AVT screen is inaccessible to most search enginesÑand thus cannot be found inadvertently.  However, this simple-to-achieve

safeguardÑplacing a Òplain brown wrapperÓ around an Internet adult
Web siteÑis often not implemented even by those sites that require acredit card to get past the teaser pages.The effectiveness of AVTs is mixed, though they clearly do eliminatesome significant percentage of children who would otherwise gain access
to sexually explicit material.  Factors that reduce the effectiveness of credit

cards as AVTs include the placement of highly explicit material before
credit card numbers must be submitted, possession of credit cards by
children (but see Box 13.2), and the availability of parental credit cards
through the rifling of a parentÕs wallet or purse.  On the other hand, the
use of credit cards is convenient for both user and vendor, and access can
be granted in a matter of a few minutes.As noted in Chapter 2, AVTs that rely on public records indicatingage provide a higher level of assurance regarding age.  But the highest

level of assurance is provided by coupling these public records with the
use of the postal service to authenticate the userÕs identity, and thus thishighest level of assurance is incompatible with rapid initial access.  In

addition, because not everyone has a driverÕs license or is registered tovote, vendors that rely on AVTs based on public records have a smaller
audience than they would otherwise have.  (In other words, these AVTs

exclude individuals who would be entitled to gain access.)AVTs also presume that an adult has not left the access device with-out logging out.  If he or she does not log out, the next user
Ñwho may bea childÑwill automatically have access to all of the content that wasaccessible to the adult.Finally, the age of adulthood differs from state to state.  Because it is
technically difficult to make geographical distinctions among points to
which content is delivered, in practice most Web site owners choose 18 as
the threshold age above which they will allow access, even if in some
states 16 or 17 would be perfectly acceptable and legal.  In these cases,

those individuals are denied access for no legal reason.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.343TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS AVAILABLE TO NON-END USERS13.3.3Who Decides What Is Inappropriate?
The Web site owner is the primary decision maker about whether ornot the site contains material that is inappropriate for children.  If so, the

Web site owner deploys AVTs to prevent access by children.  However,

there have been legislative attempts to promote the use of AVTs, as de-
scribed in Chapter 4.Because it is the Web site owner that makes the decision to use AVTs,many sites containing what some people consider inappropriate material
would not see any need for age verification (e.g., VictoriaÕs Secret). As aBox 13.2Visa Buxx Prepaid Visa CardsVisa Buxx is a prepaid, reloadable Visa card that teens can use everywhere Visais accepted.   Spending is limited to the amount of money parents load onto the card.
When a teen makes a purchase with the Visa Buxx card, the purchase amount is
deducted from the card balance.  At their discretion, parents can add money to the
card or can set up a regularly scheduled automatic transfer to the card as they wouldin giving a child an allowance.A Visa Buxx card is used in exactly the same manner as a regular Visa card, andtransactions with the Visa Buxx card are processed as though it were a credit card.Recognizing that merchants may question a teenagerÕs use of a Visa Buxx card that
looks like a Visa card, Visa tells teens that if a merchant asks for identification, theyshould present their school ID if available; and that otherwise, the merchant shouldensure that the signature on the back of the card matches the signature on the sales
receipt.With respect to using the Visa Buxx card at inappropriate places that are online,Visa advises parents to discuss how and where the teen can use the card.  Parents are

also able to review teen spending online using the Visa Buxx Web site, and Visa cane-mail a parent whose teen uses the card at a merchant associated with a code thatindicates the merchant may sell products and services considered inappropriate for
teen use.  However, not all merchants listed in this designation fit the general de-
scription of the category, and so it is up to parents to address with the teen any issuesrelated to the use of the card.The Visa Buxx card is similar to prepaid telephone calling cards, except that itcan be used to pay for any item or service, rather than just telephone service.  Visa
Buxx purchases are not anonymous, but there is no reason that, in the future, anon-
ymous prepaid cards issued by Visa or Mastercard would not be as available asprepaid telephone calling cards.  Moreover, there is no reason for a vendor to dis-
criminate in the sale of these cards on the basis of age, and it will thus be harder to
use such cards as an indication of adult status.SOURCE: Adapted from information on the Visa Buxx card available online at <http://www.visabuxx.com/learnmore/faqs.cfm>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.344YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETpractical matter, AVTs will be used to differentiate adults and childrenonly when the site contains material that the site operator believes is
obscene with respect to minors.13.3.4How Flexible and Usable Are
Products for Verifying Age?More rigorous age verification procedures often, but not always, in-crease the Òhassle factorÓ that users face.  For example, the highest degree
of reliability is available when public records can be checked and an
access code sent to the postal address associated with those records.  How-

ever, such a requirement also prevents adults from gaining the immediate
access that is possible with certain other methods.13.3.5What Are the Costs and Infrastructure
Required for Age Verification?Financial CostsThe costs of using AVTs fall primarily on Web site owners and onadult users.Psychological and Emotional CostsAVTs may entail a loss of privacy for the adult user, both perceivedand real. In a face-to-face transaction with a clerk checking a driverÕslicense, there may be some embarrassment, but as a general rule, the clerk
does not make a record of the license and does not record the titles of the
material being purchased or rented.  As importantly, the user can see that

the clerk is not doing so.  When an online AVT is used, the reasonable

assumption would be that records are being kept (whether or not they are
in practice), and so the user has a plausible reason to be concerned that his
name is associated with certain types of material.The privacy problem is exacerbated by how some AVTs work.  For
example, an age verification system (AVS) often provides a code number
certifying age, which the user enters into the age verification field on an
adult Web site.  Usually, the Web site then contacts the AVS to check the

validity of this number (which will expire if the user does not maintain
his AVS membership).  Thus, the AVS has a complete record of all of the

adult sites visited using its age credential.Furthermore, AVTs that rely on public records generally have accessto the age information recorded therein.  Thus, the age of a user is made

availableÑeven though that provides more information than is needed tosatisfy statutory requirements.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.345TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS AVAILABLE TO NON-END USERSNote also that commercial trends are pointing increasingly towardthe customization of computer and device behavior and function to spe-
cific users (who may be one of many using a particular device).  To the

extent that this is true, age information may be associated with such
functionality.  At the same time, for many hosts, there are few incen-

tives and not much of a business case to go to the expense of deploying
AVTs.It should be noted that legislation such as the Child Online ProtectionAct (discussed in Chapter 4) does not require personal identificationÑtheAVTs specified in the legislation are intended as a way to screen out most
minor children, not to obtain the identity of users.  However, the transac-

tion between site operator and credit card company inevitably entails some
expense for the credit card company, and so the credit card company is not
likely to be willing to process such requests if no revenue results from itÑtherefore, the site operator will submit only transactions that are associated
with an actual purchase, rather than a simple age verification request, and
purchases are necessarily connected with personal identity.InfrastructureThe primary infrastructure issue is the deployment of AVTs amonghost sites.  AVTs can play a meaningful role in reducing the access of

children to adult-oriented material only to the extent that they are indeed
widely deployed.  (If they are not, they render only a small amount of

content unavailable, and the generic equivalent of that material is almost
certainly available elsewhere.)Depending on the kind of AVTs involved, other cooperating institu-tions or individuals are necessary.¥AVTs that rely on public records indicating age obviously depend onthe availability of those records from public agencies.  Given that there is some

controversy about the widespread commercial availability of such records,
their continued availability from public agencies cannot be taken for granted.¥AVTs are often built into parental controls, and parental controlsmust be deployed by the adults responsible for youth.  In practice, today
Õsinfrastructure for Internet access means that all access points (computers)
that a given youth might use must have the appropriate parental controls.13.3.6What Does the Future Hold For
 Age Verification Systems?
Improvements in AVSs depend primarily on the development anddeployment of an infrastructure to support age verification, rather than
the technologies themselves.  For most commercial online transactions,
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.346YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETthe age of the consumer is not particularly relevant, assuming that theconsumer has the ability to pay for the products or services being offered.
Thus, there appears to be no general-purpose need for a pervasive infra-
structure for age verification.This suggests that if improved AVSs are to be available for vendors ofadult-only services and products, the infrastructure required for verify-
ing age must either be (a) a subset of an infrastructure that can be used for
broader purposes, or (b) deployed by those vendors.In case (a), a number of scenarios are possible.  For example, smart-
card technology enables a higher degree of security in authentication than
do passwords, which are easily compromised.  A 
Òsmart cardÓ is a small
physical hardware device (typically the size of a credit card) containing
read-only non-volatile memory and a microprocessor that can be inserted
into a card reader attached to a computer.  In most scenarios, the indi-

vidual user carries the card and inserts it into an Internet access point that
requires such a device.  The memory provided on the device can store

information about the user, including his or her age, preferences for mate-
rial to be blocked, and so on.  Software installed on the computer, and on
Web sites visited, would check the smart card for dates of birth when
necessary, and if the user were underage for certain types of material,
would refuse to grant access to that material.  However, computing and

Internet access technology has not developed in this direction, and the
costs of converting to such an infrastructure specifically for this purpose
are entirely prohibitive.If, for other reasons, such technologies become common on personalcomputers and other devices that can be used to access the Internet, those
offering adult-only products or services would be able to require a smart
card-enabled age verification as a condition of access.  Even today, one firm

seeks to offer ÒsmartÓ library cards on which parents can indicate their
preference for their children to have filtered or unfiltered Internet access in
the library.12  Nevertheless, the effectiveness of such an approach depends
on the vendorÕs decision to deny access to those who are unable to presenta smart card, for whatever reason (including the lack of a card reader on an
Internet access point or a legitimate adult customer who lacks the smart
card).  Such a decision runs quite counter to business incentives to achieve

the maximum exposure of a product or service being sold.Another scenario is that a vendorÕs knowledge of a userÕs age maywell provide business benefits and more lucrative marketing opportuni-
ties.  Routine collection of age information may well occur in the future

with tools that provide automated policy preference negotiation (e.g.,12See <http://www.libraryguardian.com>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.347TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS AVAILABLE TO NON-END USERSPassport and similar products13).  However, age information collected in
this manner may well not be verified (as it is surely not when a child is
asked online to reveal his or her age).In case (b), the current Òadult checkÓ services available are an ex-
ample of a vendor-supported infrastructure.  However, for the most part,

the adult-check services used by those providing sexually explicit mate-
rial are based on credit cards.  (One might argue that credit cards are

themselves an infrastructure on which adult check services build.)   More

effective verification services that are dedicated to serving these vendors
are likely to entail additional expense.TodayÕs credit cards do not distinguish between minor and adultowners.  But it is technically feasible for credit cards issued to youth to be

tagged with an entry in the credit card companyÕs database saying Òdonot authorize payment for sexually explicit material.Ó  The downside of
such an approach is the processing burden that it imposes on the credit
card companyÕs systems.Given widespread concerns for privacy, it may also be possible todevelop AVTs that provide a greater degree of privacy for individual
users.  In particular, the legal requirement that age verification technolo-

gies are seeking to meet is not the age of the user but rather whether on a
given day he or she is over 18 (or whatever the age of majority is).Finally, despite the limitations of AVTs based on credit cards, theycould be much more effective if they were systematically coupled with
Òplain brown wrappersÓ around the content that is inappropriate for chil-
dren.   Chapter 9 described elements of a regulatory approach that can be

used to encourage the deployment of AVTs in front of all content that is
regarded as inappropriate for children.13.3.7What Are the Implications of Using
Age Verification Systems?Widespread AVTs may compromise the privacy of adult viewing.Also, some AVTs enableÑindeed requireÑsystematic tracking of all sites13Passport (specifically, Kids Passport) is a service offered by Microsoft that is intended toenable parents to decide whether their children can use services provided by participatingWeb sites that collect and/or disclose personally identifiable information.  These services can
include newsletters, discussion groups, pen-pal programs, wish lists, and contests.  Parents

can provide consent for three levels of accessÑno consent (child can use the Web site but notservices that collect or disclose personal information), limited (third party can collect personalinformation but is not allowed to share or display it), and full (third party can collect and/or
disclose personal information according to its privacy policy).  For more information, see
<http://kids.passport.com> and <http://www.microsoft.com/presspass/features/2000/02-08passport.asp>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.348YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETthat use a given age certification, thus allowing a dossier of visited adultsites to be compiled.   Thus, they may inhibit free flow of information and

create a chilling effect on the freedom of adults who wish to access lawful
though perhaps controversial material.Widespread requirements to present documents certifying oneÕs ageraise many of the same concerns that national ID cards raise.  In particu-

lar, while acknowledging that verification of oneÕs adult status is neces-sary from time to time, the concern is that a diversity of methods and
documents for certifying oneÕs adult status willÑin the name of simplic-ityÑlead easily to a single document indicating age, and perhaps otherpersonal information.  Once such a document exists, it becomes very easy

to insist on the use of this document as the necessary documentation for a
wide range of societal benefits, such as employment, health care, gun
ownership, and so on.  Much as the Social Security number has evolved

into a de facto universal identifier, such a document could well become
the basis for national databases that track all of the significant activities of
all those with this documentÑand all of the concerns about loss of pri-vacy and government/private sector abuse emerge in full force.13.3.8Findings on Age Verification Technologies
One approach to protecting children from inappropriate sexually ex-plicit material on the Internet is based on being able to differentiate be-
tween children and adults in an online environment, and AVTs are a tool
available for doing that.1.Those wishing to verify age with very high levels of confidence
require that a document with proof of age can be associated clearly and
unambiguously with the specific individual in question.14  Over the Inter-
net, there is no mechanism known to the committee that accomplishes
this task on a short time scale (seconds or minutes).152.As a practical matter, AVTs will be used to differentiate adults and
children only when the site contains material that the site operator be-
lieves is obscene with respect to minors.3.Mechanisms that prevent age verification on short time scales are
likely to have a significant negative impact on sales and would be an14Compared to credit cards, AVTs based on public record databases do provide a some-what higher level of assurance of an alleged adult status (see Finding #4 in this section).
But if these public record AVTs do not also use an offline method to verify identity, they aresubject to many of the same problems associated with the teenager use of credit cards thathave been pilfered from a parentÕs wallet.15This finding refers only to the first time the individual needs age verification.  In subse-quent interactions, the individual can generally use the certification that was previouslyprovided.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.349TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS AVAILABLE TO NON-END USERSimpediment for adults seeking commercial adult-oriented products andservices.4.AVTs based on credit cards do provide some significant obstacles
to children seeking deliberate access to inappropriate sexually explicit
material.  However, as credit cards (and prepaid cards usable as credit

cards) are increasingly marketed to adolescents as young as 13, such AVTs
will become less useful.  Furthermore, parents that have explicitly al-

lowed their children to have credit cards or prepaid cards may be more
likely to trust the viewing behavior of their children as well.5.The underlying technology to support widespread, high-confidence
age verification does exist, but its implementation could be very expensive,
and its use would raise a myriad of important privacy concerns.13.4TOOLS FOR PROTECTING INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
The widespread use of tools for protecting intellectual property mayhelp to reduce the exposure of children to inappropriate sexually explicit
materials that may have been taken from subscription adult-oriented Web
sites.13.4.1What Are Tools for Protecting Intellectual Property?
A variety of technologies have been developed to protect intellectualproperty.  For example, some rights management technologies enable an

image to be transmitted to a given user but increase quite substantially
the difficulty of printing, forwarding, or saving it.16  (Box 13.3 describes
some rights management technologies.)  Other tools compare an image or

text found on a Web site to a known and properly owned image or text
(presumably the property of its creator or subsequent rights holder), and
allow the flagging of near-matches that may indicate improperly derived
works.The primary users of rights management tools would be content pro-viders with proprietary content.13.4.2How Well Do Tools for Protecting
 Intellectual Property Work?
As noted in Chapter 3, the online adult industry is highly stratifiedÑandincludes a relatively small number of well-established firms and a much16It is of course true that one can always take a photograph of a screen, and then dealwith it as one would prefer.  But disabling system-provided capabilities for printing, for-
warding, and saving goes a long way to protecting content.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.350YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETlarger number of Òfly-by-nightÓ operators, many of whom illegally use copy-
righted content from established firms.  Wide use of rights management

technologies could significantly reduce the flow of new content to these firms.

There is some reason to believe that these smaller firms and operating entities
are also the parties that are least responsible about keeping children away
from their adult-oriented content.17  To the extent that this is true, drying up
the supply of new content for these firms will increase the likelihood of a
shakeout in the industry that will increase the prominence of the more estab-
lished firms at the expense of these smaller ones.Box 13.3Rights Management TechnologiesRights management technologies fall into two generic categories:  technologies
to prevent (or increase the difficulty of) an unauthorized use of an information object(e.g., an image, an audio file, a book, a movie), and technologies to facilitate after-
the-fact detection of unauthorized use.Technologies intended to prevent (or increase the difficulty of) an unauthorizeduse of an information object (prevention technologies) generally rely on encryption
techniques.  For practical purposes, an encrypted information object bears no re-
semblance to the original, useful, unencrypted information object.  Thus, such tech-
nologies rely on the authorized source of the object distributing the encrypted infor-
mation object to anyone who wants it, but restricting the decryption key (withoutwhich the encrypted object is useless) to authorized parties only.Once the encrypted object is decrypted, it is usableÑand if special precautionsare not taken, the receiver can distribute it freely.  Thus, prevention technologies rely
on decrypting the object as close as possible to the point of use, and/or restricting theability of the user to copy, e-mail, forward, or print the decrypted object.  For exam-

ple, an image viewer might allow the display of an image but disable the functional-ity of the operating system to copy that displayed image to temporary files.Technologies to facilitate after-the-fact detection of unauthorized use (detectiontechnologies) embed into the unencrypted information object additional informationthat allows its creator to be identified.  An example of such a technology is a digitalwatermarkÑa digital pattern that is inserted into an image that does not alter itsquality but is also not easy to remove.  Such transparent watermarks have obvious
advantages from the standpoint of providing images that lack visible copyright mark-ings and are as visually attractive as possible.More discussion of these technologies can be found in the CSTB report The Dig-ital Dilemma.11Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, 2000, TheDigital Dilemma: Intellectual Property in the Digital Age.17For example, the smaller ones are likely to derive some considerable fraction of incomefrom raw traffic, thus giving them little incentive to screen out children.  See Chapter 3 for
more details.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.351TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS AVAILABLE TO NON-END USERSA more mature adult industry (consisting of established firms ratherthan the Òfly-by-nightersÓ) is likely to have more concerns about the pro-tection of intellectual property as well as being more likely to take actions
to restrict the access of children to their products.  With a reduction in the

content available to fly-by-night firms that are less likely to take actions
restricting the access of children, certain types of adult content will be less
accessible to children.   The reduction is likely to mean a lower degree of

inadvertent access, but the ease of deliberate access to generic adult con-
tent is likely to be unaffected to a significant extent.Approaches based on tools to protect intellectual property of the adultentertainment industry are relevant only to content originating there, and
have no applicability to content for which no intellectual property rights
can be legally asserted.A second benefit of tools that detect possible thefts of intellectualproperty is in the prosecution of child pornography.   As noted in Chap-

ter 4, obscenity and child pornography differ in a number of key respects,
and one of the most important differences is that while a legal determina-
tion that an image is obscene depends on factors extraneous to the image
itself (i.e., on community standards), a legal determination that an image
constitutes child pornography does not.  Thus, once an image has been

determined to be child pornography, images that are substantially identi-
cal to it (e.g., cropped images, images with shading superimposed on top)
can also be determined to be child pornography.  Thus, images suspected

of being child pornography can be automatically compared (e.g., by a
Web-crawling ÒspiderÓ) to databases of known child pornography.18  Such
a technique will not identify new images of child pornography, but since
a substantial amount of child pornography is Òrecycled,Ó application of
this technique is still relevant.The impact of rights management tools (RMTs) on reducing access ofchildren to adult-oriented material depends on their widespread use, but
in any case is an indirect one.  The primary purpose of an RMT is to

protect intellectual propertyÑand the secondary effect may well be toreduce the volume of adult-oriented materials available to children.13.4.3Who Decides What Is Inappropriate?
This question is not applicable in this context.18See, for example, testimony of Mark Ishikawa, CEO of Bay TSP to the COPA Commis-sion, on August 4, 2000.  Available online at <http://www.copacommission.org/meet-
ings/hearing3/ishikawa.test.pdf>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.352YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET13.4.4How Flexible and Usable Are Products
for Protecting Intellectual Property?From the standpoint of the end user, the primary usability issue is theextent to which different content providers use the same RMTs.  If every

Web site uses a different Òhome-grownÓ RMT, the user interfaces for
viewing content are likely to be differentÑand thus the user will have touse different methods for viewing different Web sites.  This limiting case

represents the greatest degree of inconvenience for the user.13.4.5What Are the Costs and Infrastructure
Required for Protecting Intellectual Property?An approach based on the protection of intellectual property requiresclient-side software and hardware to perform rights management.  While

in principle any individual content provider could simply download

rights management software to a user to protect its intellectual property,
the effort required to do so is large. A widely deployed rights manage-
ment system would be something on which many content providers could
rely to protect intellectual propertyÑand some infrastructure software,such as Windows Media Player, is beginning to incorporate such features.
Alternatively, the content providers in the adult industry could develop
their own rights management system and require that their content be
displayed through it.An essential element of infrastructure for the use of tools to protectintellectual property is an enforcement mechanism.   The enforcement

mechanism is technical if the technology prevents content from being
improperly copied.  However, such systems sometimes affect the user
Õsexperience, making systems slower and less convenient to use and to
customize for his or her needs.  Content providers who insist on using

such systems then must deal with customer dissatisfaction that arises as a
result.  When the technology facilitates or enables the detection of pirated

materials, a procedural or organizational or legal mechanism is needed to
prevent further pirating and/or to deter others from doing the same.  For

example, if pirated materials are found on the bulletin board of an Inter-
net service provider, the ISP has to be willing to take down pirated mate-
rial if intellectual property rights are to be respected.13.4.6What Does the Future Hold for Tools
 for Protecting Intellectual Property?
As of this writing (May 2002), a variety of technology vendors are inthe early stages of developing rights management metadata systems, byYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.353TECHNOLOGY-BASED TOOLS AVAILABLE TO NON-END USERS19Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  2000.
The Digital Dilemma: Intellectual Property in the Digital Age.  National Academy Press, Wash-
ington, D.C.20Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, 2000,The Digital Dilemma: Intellectual Property in the Digital Age.themselves (e.g., XMCL from RealNetworks and others (http://
www.xmlcl.org)) and as part of broader content standards (e.g. MPEG-
21).  At the same time, peer-to-peer technologies such as Gnutella demon-

strate that if a single copy of content can be placed on the network with no
rights management wrapping or marked as Òunlimited and untrackeduse by anyone,Ó it can become widely distributed rapidly.
A more detailed discussion of the future of tools for protecting intel-lectual property is beyond the scope of this report.  A report by the Na-

tional Research CouncilÑThe Digital DilemmaÑaddresses this point ingreater detail.1913.4.7What Are the Implications of Tools for
Protecting Intellectual Property?Discussing the implications of tools for protecting intellectual prop-erty is beyond the scope of this report.  A CSTB study
ÑThe Digital Di-lemmaÑaddresses these implications in substantial detail.2013.4.8Findings on Tools for Protecting Intellectual Property
1.Purloined content accounts for a significant fraction of sexually
explicit material on the Internet, though reliable data on this point is hard
to obtain.  Tools for protecting such content as the intellectual property of

its creators thus have some potential to limit the number of Web sites and
channels through which such content might be obtained.2.To the extent that the rightful owners of this content are firms
sufficiently established to be willing to take steps to deny children access
to their material, it is in the interest of children that the intellectual prop-
erty rights of these parties are respected.  Owners and operators of adult

Web sites will have to take the initiative to enforce intellectual property
protection if this approach is to prove viable.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART III
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.356Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.35714.1FRAMING THE ISSUE
The Internet has enormous potential to contribute to public welfareand private well-being.  One dimension of that potential involves the use
of the Internet to enhance and transform education for the nationÕs youth,
and many public policy decisions have been taken to provide Internet
access for educational purposes.   Easy access to the Internet (and related

online services) has many advantages for childrenÑaccess to educational
materials; collaborative projects, publications, online friendships, and pen
pals; access to subject matter experts; recreation, hobby, and sports infor-
mation; and so on.While such potential for contributing to the nationÕs welfare in gen-eral and to the education of its children in particular is recognized, the
Internet also presents to the public a wide variety of concerns.  This fact in

itself should not be surprisingÑfew powerful and widely deployed tech-
nologies have been used solely for socially beneficial purposes.  But the

Internet poses many challenges for which there are no precedents, and
much of the controversy about inappropriate sexually explicit material on
the Internet arises because of these differences.14.1.1Social Dimensions
What is the issue to be addressed?  Although the nominal title of the
project was ÒTools and Strategies to Protect Kids from Pornography on14Findings, Conclusions,and Future Needs
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.358YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETthe Internet and Other Inappropriate Material,Ó a key fact is that 
Òpornog-raphyÓ is a term whose meaning is not well specified.  People neverthe-
less use the term as though it did have a well-specified meaning, and they
often fail to recognize that what one may consider pornographic, another
may not.  For this reason, the committee chose the term 
Òinappropriatesexually explicit materialÓ when in common parlance it might have used
the term Òpornography.Ó  Using the former term keeps in the foreground
the question of Òinappropriate according to whose standards?ÓInternet exposure of children to sexually explicit material is only onedimension of exposure, albeit important, because sexually explicit mate-
rial and other sexual content exist in a wide variety of other commonly
accessible media such as video cassettes, magazines, and cable television.
Further, concerns over obscenity may well be a proxy for the desire to
suppress access to other sexually explicit or sexually oriented content that
would not be judged legally obscene.Internet exposure of children to inappropriate sexually explicit mate-rial is also only one dimension of inappropriate or potentially dangerous
activities in which youth may engage.  The Internet is also a medium that

can facilitate face-to-face meetings between people who do not know each
other prior to their Internet contact, and when there is a great disparity of
experience and age between these parties, the younger less-experienced
person could be more subject to exploitation and physical danger.  Other

types of material may also be judged by various parties to be inappropri-
ate for children.  Some of the approaches to protection from sexually

explicit material may be applicable to such other material.The views of people about ÒpornographyÓ on the Internet and what todo about it reflect a broad range of values and moral commitments.  What

is pornographic to some people may be simply mainstream advertising to
others; what is morally wrong to some may be entirely acceptable to others;
what is legal to show to minors in one community may be regarded as
wholly inappropriate by those in another community; and what counts as
responsible choice according to one set of values may be irresponsible be-
havior according to a different set of values.  Approaches taken to protect

children should be flexible enough to honor that diversity.14.1.2Developmental Dimensions
Children from birth to the age of legal majority pass through a widerange of developmental stages as they mature into adults (and further-
more the age of legal majority is not statutorily uniform).  The impact of

any given piece of sexually explicit material is likely to vary widely with
age or, more importantly, level of maturity, and the approaches taken toYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.359FINDINGS, CONCLUSIONS, AND FUTURE NEEDSprotect children of a given maturity level should take into account thecharacteristics of their level of maturity.  Moreover, the experiences of

individuals can influence how sexual content affects them, especially con-
sidering that increasing numbers of adolescents, who are still legally mi-
nors, are sexually active.  Finally, age usually affects the extent to which

children can understand dangers and engage in safe behavior.The information needs of children that the Internet can and shouldmeet also change with the developmental stage of the child in question.
For example, juniors and seniors in high school have a much broader
range of information needs (i.e., for doing research related to their educa-
tion) than do those in the third grade or in junior high school.  This, in

turn, leads to the question of how to provide older children with access to
a broader range of material while preventing younger ones from access-
ing material that is not deemed appropriate given their developmental
level.14.1.3Legal Dimensions
As a matter of law, sexually explicit material that is Òobscene withrespect to minorsÓ must be made available to adults without restriction,
though it can be restricted for minors.  Certain other sexually explicit

materials (obscenity, child pornography) enjoy no First Amendment pro-
tection at all.  Material that is determined to be obscene or obscene with

respect to minors must pass certain tests, including tests related to com-
munity standards.  For both classes of material, the community standards

for making such determinations likely change over time, and in recent
years, mores about sex and consumption of sexually explicit material may
have changed in such a way as to reduce (but not to eliminate) the scope
of both categories.Thus, there is in practice considerable ambiguity about what shouldfall into these categories, and the fact that community standards are inte-
gral to the application of the law in this area means that material cannot
be determined to be obscene or obscene with respect to minors solely on
the basis of the material itself.  Over the past decade, the number of

federal obscenity prosecutions has been very small compared with those
in previous years, thus complicating to a significant degree the concept of
Òcommunity standards.Ó  The First Amendment is relevant regarding the
extent to which and circumstances under which public institutions of
various types can restrict access to particular types of information.Finally, in the public policy domain, U.S. regulation of sexually ex-plicit material is most likely to have an effect on commercial sources
inside the United States, and far less effect on sources located abroad.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.360YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET14.1.4Technical Dimensions
Making some material available to adults but not to children requiresthat providers have a reasonably reliable way of differentiating between
them.  In the physical world, such differentiation can often be accom-

plished with reasonable ease (e.g., by checking a driverÕs license or otheridentification).  But in the Internet context, rules based on age differentia-

tion are highly problematic and technically difficult to enforce.  Content

providers must also have a clear understanding of the difference between
material that is and is not inappropriate for children.Although many of the issues concerning Internet access to varioustypes of material that may be regarded as inappropriate arise for other
media as well, the Internet changes significantly the convenience and
anonymity of access, thus reducing certain constraints that may be opera-
tive in other media.  For example, online chat rooms and instant messages

(IMs) have few analogs in the physical world, and these are channels
through which a great deal of communication between strangers can oc-
cur.  For this reason, special attention to the Internet dimensions of the

issue may be warranted.The adult online industry notwithstanding, inappropriate sexuallyexplicit material is available from many non-commercial online sources.
Thus, approaches that focus primarily on access to inappropriate sexually
explicit material provided by the adult online industry (widely seen as
the crux of todayÕs problem) are likely to have limited relevance to prob-lems arising from non-commercial sources.For a great deal of inappropriate sexually explicit material (specifi-cally, material accessible through Web sites), a reduction of the number of
Web sites containing such material, in and of itself, is not likely to reduce
the exposure of children to such material.  The reason is that a primary

method for obtaining access to such material is through search engines,
and the likelihood that a search will find some inappropriate material for
a given set of search parameters is essentially independent of the number of
Web pages represented in that search.  That said, if the number of such Web

sites is small enough that no Web site operator can flout the rules of respon-
sible behavior with impunity,1 regulation of their behavior (through public
1In this context, responsible behavior refers to actions taken to reduce the likelihood thatchildren will obtain access to inappropriate sexually explicit material.  To illustrate, one

method of inducing Web site operators to act responsibly is to establish codes of behaviorto which they must adhere under pain of government enforcement actions (whether civil orcriminal).  By definition, such an approach requires government action, and with a plethora

of operators, the likelihood of being the target of government action is very smallÑhencethe number of operators must be reduced to a Òsufficiently smallÓ number.  A second
illustration of inducing Web site operators to act responsibly is to create disincentives forYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.361FINDINGS, CONCLUSIONS, AND FUTURE NEEDSpolicy and/or self-regulatory approaches) becomes significantly easier,and enforceable codes of responsible behavior can have a significant im-
pact on the extent to which operators of Web sites that contain adult-
oriented, sexually explicit material make their products and services ac-
cessible to children.14.1.5Economic Dimensions
The adult online industry is one of the primary sources of sexuallyexplicit images (e.g., on ÒteaserÓ home pages) that are accessible without
any attempt to differentiate between adults and children.  Such teaser

pages allow potential customers to sample what would be available with
payment, but children have easy access to the free content.  The sexually

explicit material provided by the adult online industry is available to
children through a variety of routes, including mistyped Web site ad-
dresses, links returned by search engines in response to search terms with
sexual connotations, and spam containing links to adult Web sites.The revenue models of the adult online industry suggest that broadexposure is needed to attract potential customers, and so the industry
engages in tactics that seek to generate the broadest possible audience.
Moreover, these tactics to gain exposure cannot be used at low cost if they
are to differentiate between adults and children.  The result is that chil-

dren can be Òswept upÓ in the industry
Õs reach for larger audiences ofpotentially paying customers.The adult online industry is only one component of supply.  The lowcost of creating and maintaining a Web site means that the production of
sexually explicit material is now within the financial reach of almost any-
one.  For example, Web cameras can be purchased for under $100, en-

abling anyone so inclined to produce a video stream of sexually explicit
material.In the Internet environment, an astronomically large volume of mate-rial is available for free, including art, literature, science, advertising, andirresponsible behavior.  In this method, the key is to associate disincentives with a large
number of parties so that irresponsible Web site operators will feel the pressure of thosedisincentives, for example, by establishing causes of action allowing those affected by irre-sponsible behavior to take action against such operators.  (One example in a different do-

main is the establishment of liability (and an associated bounty) for junk faxes, an actionthat dramatically reduced the number of such faxes.)  Whether or not these or other actionscan in fact reduce the number of Web sites to a Òsufficiently smallÓ number is an open
question, especially in a context in which U.S. actions are unlikely to affect Web sites oper-ated by foreigners.  Note that these illustrations are just that
ÑillustrationsÑand their inclu-sion in the report is not intended to signal endorsement or rejection by the committee.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.362YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETgovernment information, as well as sexually explicit material of every vari-ety.  Restricting what any individual may access (or protecting him or her

from certain kinds of material) will inevitably impose additional costs on
users.  Such costs may include denial of access to useful information and

loss of privacy for those wishing to access certain kinds of information.14.2ON THE IMPACT ON CHILDREN OF EXPOSURE TO
SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIAL AND EXPERIENCESAs described in Chapter 6, factors such as certain ethical and legalconsiderations, an increasing conservatism of university review boards
that approve research studies involving human subjects (institutional re-
view boards), and a lack of research funding have contributed to a pau-
city of research regarding the impact on children of exposure to sexually
explicit material.  Furthermore, the extant scientific literature does not

support a scientific consensus on a claim that exposure to sexually explicit
material doesÑor does notÑhave a negative impact on children, andthere is no adequate research base for understanding the impact of sexu-
ally explicit material of various kinds and how different approaches to
protection may vary in effectiveness and outcome.It is important to consider why many young people search for adult-oriented sexually explicit material in the first place.  Adolescents go to

these sites for many of the same reasons that adults do.  Human beings

are sexual.  Sexuality is a part of identity, and a facet of identity that is a

focus during adolescence when youth come of reproductive age.  It is not

surprising that many childrenÑespecially preadolescents and olderÑarecurious about sex, and adolescents who are sexually mature are looking
for information about sex and are making choices in this arena.  In other

earlier eras, they might well be married, but today in Western culture
marriage among those in their early and mid-teens is frowned upon.  To

the extent that adults (parents and families, schools, libraries) provide
accurate information and guidance about sexuality in its biological, psy-
chological, emotional, and social dimensionsÑand information and guid-ance that is responsive to the situations that their children are facingÑitcan be argued that young people will be less drawn to searching for adult-
oriented sexually explicit material.This is not to say that parents are wrong to be concerned about theirchildrenÕs exposure to sexually explicit material.  There is no reason to
suppose that all negative impacts from exposure are necessarily shown or
manifested in science-based research studies.  The moral and ethical val-

ues of parentsÑwhether or not religious in orientationÑand a desire tobe involved in providing context and guidance for a child exposed to such
material are important and understandable drivers of such concerns.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.363FINDINGS, CONCLUSIONS, AND FUTURE NEEDSThe committee believes that it would not be difficult to come to aconsensus on the undesirability of some set of sexually explicit material
involving depictions of extreme sexual behavior.  That is, such a set could

be developed by constructionÑimage after image could be shown to agroup of individuals drawn from a broad cross section of the community.
(In some ways, the committee consists of just such a group.)  Under this

procedure, the images that everyone on the committee deemed inappro-
priate for children would constitute the setÑand the set would be sub-stantial in size.  Such a consensus would not be based so much on scien-

tific grounds (as the committee knows of no reliable scientific studies that
address this point) as much on a sense that such exposure would offend
its collective moral and ethical sensibilities.  Furthermore, the committee

believes that a significant fraction of this set would likely be deemed
obscene if prosecuted.Yet, the fact that such a set could be defined by construction does notmean that it is possible to craft unambiguous rules that define this set
without capturing material that would either be protected speech under
existing First Amendment precedents or unobjectionable to some number
of group members.  And, in the absence of such rules, disagreement is

inevitable over what else other than ÒsimilarÓ material should be cap-
tured in any definition.The story is quite different for child pornography.  In contrast to the
diversity of views about what material must count as obscenity or ob-
scene with respect to minors (and hence a diversity of views on what
harm might result to children from being exposed to such material), there
is a much broader social consensus that child pornography results in
harm to the children depicted in such images and that child pornography
is morally wrong as well.2  Over the past decade, the incidence of child
pornography has risen as new communications channels such as the In-
ternet have facilitated the exchange of child pornography.A similar argument applies to sexual predation.  By design, the Inter-
net facilitates contact between people who do not know each other.  While

much that is good and valuable and safe can come from interactions with
strangers, parents rightly have some concern when their children talk to
strangers in an unsupervised manner.  These concerns arise in the physi-

cal world, and they are magnified in the online environmentÑwhere therange of personality types and intentions is both less known and less2The social consensus is strongest when children are used to create sexual imagery.  How-
ever, the breadth of the legal definition of child pornography has also led to the attempted
prosecution of works of art that involve children in various states of nudity (e.g., the worksof Jock Sturges), and it is fair to say that there is less of a social consensus around suchmaterial.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.364YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETcontrollable.  Further, the Internet has enabled potential predators to seek
out a wider range of vulnerable children.The committee believes that the issue of face-to-face meetings be-tween children and their Internet acquaintances is very different from
that of being exposed to inappropriate material on the Internet because
the potential dangers that face-to-face meetings entail are much greater.
Furthermore, while the majority of children report that they brush off
aggressive solicitation encounters or treat them as a relatively minor an-
noyance, a significant minority do report being upset or disturbed by
them (see Section 5.4.3).  In addition, even when children were distressed

 by such encounters, a large fraction of them did not report the incident to

parents or other authorities.Finally, the committee believes that there is a consensus regardinginvoluntary exposure to sexually explicit material.  Regardless of one
Õsviews on the impact of voluntary exposure to sexually explicit material,
the committee believes that there is a reasonably strong consensusÑin-deed, one reflected in its own deliberationsÑthat involuntary Internetexposure to sexually explicit material is inappropriate and undesirable
and should not be occurring, and it is particularly inappropriate and
undesirable in the context of minors being exposed to such material.314.3ON APPROACHES TO PROTECTION
Much of the debate about Òpornography on the InternetÓ focuses on
the advantages and disadvantages of technical and public policy solu-
tions.4  Technology solutions seem to offer quick and inexpensive fixes
that allow adult caregivers to believe that the problem has been addressed,
and it is tempting to believe that the use of technology can drastically
reduce or even eliminate the need for human supervision.  Public policy

approaches promise to eliminate sources of the problem.In the committeeÕs view, this focus is misguided:  neither technology
nor public policy alone can provide a completeÑor even a nearly com-pleteÑsolution.  As a rule, public policy aimed at eliminating sources of
sexually explicit material can affect only indigenous domestic sources,3Are there any circumstances under which involuntary exposure might be beneficial?Perhaps.  Consider a situation in which discussions about sex made a child uncomfortable.
It might still be a reasonable thing for a concerned parent to have a conversation about sex
with his or her child.  Needless to say, this kind of situation does not occur frequently in the
context of Internet media.4The discussion in this section (Section 14.3) is complementary to the findings and gen-eral observations in Chapters 8 through 13, but does not repeat them systematically.  Read-
ers are urged to consult those chapters for more specific findingsÑespecially about technol-ogy-based tools such as filters and monitoring programs.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.365FINDINGS, CONCLUSIONS, AND FUTURE NEEDSand a substantial fraction of such material originates overseas.  Nor is
technology a substitute for education, responsible adult supervision, and
ethical Internet use.For these reasons, the most important finding of the committee is thatdeveloping in children and youth an ethic of responsible choice and skills
for appropriate behavior is foundational for all efforts to protect themÑwith respect to inappropriate sexually explicit material on the Internet as
well as many other dangers on the Internet and in the physical world.
Social and educational strategies are central to such development, but
technology and public policy are important as wellÑand the three can acttogether to reinforce each otherÕs value.Social and educational strategies are a primary focus of the committeebecause most children are likely to be confronted, on occasion, with mate-
rial that theyÑor their parentsÑregard as inappropriate, or find them-selves in online situations that are potentially dangerous.  Parents must

balance their concerns about exposure to harmful things on the Internet
against the benefits gained from exposure to positive things on the Inter-
net, and the question of how children can learn to handle and defend
themselves becomes the primary issue.  Social and educational strategies

that promote and teach responsible decision making are at the core of
such defense.Social and educational strategies are also important for teaching chil-dren how to recognize and avoid situations that might expose them to
inappropriate material or experiences.  Though technology has a role to

play here as well, developing Òstreet smartsÓ about how to avoid trouble
is likely to be a far more reliable and robust approach to protection.In short, a child who responsibly chooses appropriate materials toaccess and appropriate things to do on the Internet and who knows what
do to about inappropriate materials and experiences should he or she
come across them is much safer than a child whose parents and school
teachers rely primarily on technology and public policy to solve the prob-
lem for them.  Moreover, social and educational strategies to promote and

teach responsible choice have applicability far beyond the limited ques-
tion of Òprotecting kids from porn on the Internet,Ó because they are
relevant to teaching children to think critically about media messages, to
conduct effective Internet searches for information and to navigate with
confidence, and to evaluate the credibility of the information they receive.Social and educational strategies are not quick or inexpensive, andthey require tending and implementation.  Adults must be trained to

teach children how to make good choices on the Internet.  They must be

willing to engage in sometimes-difficult conversations.  And, because

social and educational strategies place control in the hands of the youth
targeted, children may make mistakes as they learn to internalize theYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.366YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETobject of these lessons.  However, by understanding why certain actions
were mistakes, children will more effectively learn the lessons that par-
ents and other adults hope that they will learn.  Virtually all of the high

school students to whom the committee spoke said that their ÒInternetsavvyÓ came from experience, and they simply learned to cope with cer-
tain unpleasant Internet experiences.  They also spoke of passing their

newfound expertise down to younger siblings, hence becoming the
new de facto educators for younger kids in the Òsecond wave of digitalchildren.ÓTechnology-based tools, such as filters, can provide parents and otherresponsible adults with additional choices as to how best to fulfill their
responsibilities.  Though even the most enthusiastic technology vendors

acknowledge that their technologies are not perfect and that supervision
and education are necessary when technology fails, tools need not be
perfect to be helpfulÑand used properly (an important caveat), they canbe an important aspect of comprehensive programs for Internet safety.First, technology can help to create a child-rearing environment thatparents can moderate and shape according to their values and the matu-
rity of their children.  In an Internet context, a controlled and moderated

environment does not mean that a childÕs every keystroke and mouseclick are preprogrammed forever.  But it does mean that the child can

exercise choices within safe limits set by parents or other responsible
adultsÑand as a child learns more and develops greater maturity, thoselimits can be expanded in ways that allow greater freedom of choice and
that may at some point entail greater risk taking as well.An example of a technology-moderated environment for Internet ac-cess might call for the provision of Internet access in young childhood
that is explicitly limited to child-friendly content (i.e., access based on
Òwhite listsÓ), strongly filtered Internet access in middle childhood (i.e.,access based on extensive Òblack listsÓ), less filtered Internet access inpreadolescence and early adolescence (i.e., access based on a slow reduc-
tion in the number of categories deemed inappropriate), and monitored
Internet access in middle to late adolescence (i.e., unfettered Internet ac-
cess but accompanied by warnings about inappropriate material).  Par-

ents wishing to provide a more risk-free environment might delay the
introduction of less restrictive measures; those wishing to promote a more
free flow of information to their children might accelerate the introduc-
tion of less restrictive measures.Second, technology can help to keep parents and other responsibleadults informed about what their children are doing online.  Of course,

the circumstances of obtaining such information matter quite a bit.  An

intent to provide guidance that helps the child make informed and re-
sponsible choices relies on the presence of openness about the presence ofYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.367FINDINGS, CONCLUSIONS, AND FUTURE NEEDSmonitoring.  On the other hand, an intent to 
ÒcatchÓ the child in doing
something wrong is likely to result in behavior that simply reduces the
flow of information to the parent, such as the child obtaining Internet
access in a venue that is not monitored.Third, technology offers many desirable benefits:  speed, scalability,
standardization, and reduced cost. Because non-technical approaches take
valuable time from parents, teachers, and others that is badly needed to
address many other issues related to raising responsible young people, it
will often be the case that a mix of non-technical strategies and technol-
ogy-based tools provides the most cost-effective way to protect children
on the Internet.Choosing the right combination of social and educational strategiesand technology-based tools depends a great deal on the nature of the
problem that parents, teachers, and librarians are trying to solve.  For

example, recall from Chapter 8 that deliberate access and inadvertent
exposure to inappropriate sexually explicit materials pose different pro-
tection problems.  Recognizing that responsible adults have to deal with

both problems, the fact remains that certain tools and certain strategies
are more appropriate for the former than the latter, and vice versa.  Tools

that warn of impending exposure to inappropriate material rather than
blocking are better suited to dealing with the problem of inadvertent
exposure.One important point arising from the relative preponderance of malesrelative to females as consumers of adult-oriented sexually explicit material
(Chapter 3) is that adolescent males are probably much more likely to seek
out such material deliberately.  If so, social and educational strategies that

aim at reducing the desire of such individuals to seek out such material
may well be more relevant to male children than to female children.As for the role that public policy can play in protecting children,regulation may help to shape the environment in which these strategies
and tools are used by reducing at least to some extent the availability of
inappropriate sexually explicit material on the Internet.  Public policy can

help to influence the adult online industry to take actions that better deny
childrenÕs access to their material and/or influence others in the privatesector to support self-regulatory or self-help measures.  Furthermore,

through prosecution of violators of existing laws that prohibit the trans-
mission of obscene material, public policy can help to some extent to
reduce the number of providers of such materials.Successful law enforcement depends on many factors, including ap-propriately formulated statutes, adequate resources, and a willingness to
enforce existing law and regulation.  In the Internet safety arena, the

participation of citizens (e.g., reporting illegal activity) is also an essential
element of law enforcement.  Proper training of law enforcement person-Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.368YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETnelÑincluding those who take complaints, those who investigate com-plaints, and those who prosecute casesÑat federal, state, and local levelsremains critical to effective law enforcement.  Finally, public policy (or

the threat of regulation) can also encourage and promote self-regulatory
efforts that contribute to certain public policy goals, such as Internet ser-
vice providers taking down materials posted in violation of the terms of
service to which users agree as a condition of use.Coping with non-commercial sources presents different issues to lawenforcement authorities.  In order to attract customers, commercial sources

must draw attention to themselves, which means that their activities are
hard to conceal from law enforcement authorities.  But non-commercial

sources such as peer-to-peer file-sharing networks may present no easily
accessible target for legal action (and under many circumstances can oper-
ate invisibly to law enforcement).  To address non-commercial sources, law

enforcement officials must conduct what amount to ÒstingÓ operations.
5Such operations are controversial, are personnel-intensive, and may notoffer large leverage, as non-commercial sources are likely to have signifi-
cantly smaller audiences than commercial sources.Table 14.1 contains an illustration of how social and educational strat-egies, technology tools, and public policy can work together.14.4TRADE-OFFS AND COMPLEXITY
After more than a year of intensive study of the issue, the committeewas struck by its extraordinary complexity.  Such complexity manifests

itself in many ways, but nowhere more prominently than in understand-
ing the trade-offs involved in the development of any comprehensive
approach to protecting children on the Internet from inappropriate mate-
rials and experiences.5One example of a ÒstingÓ operation is an exercise in which a law enforcement official
assumes an online identity corresponding to that of a minor, and engages potential preda-tors seeking to entice a minor for the purpose of initiating a sexual encounter.  A second
example is the use of customer lists belonging to an online service that provided child
pornography, lists confiscated after the service itself was convicted of child pornographycharges.  In this latter case, known as Operation Avalanche, law enforcement officials con-
tinued to operate the online serviceÕs Web site and sent e-mail to subscribers offering themthe opportunity to purchase child pornography.  Those who responded received controlleddeliveries of child pornography made by investigators, and search warrants were executedon the residences of those customers immediately after the deliveries were made (see ABC
News, 2001, ÒAn Avalanche of Child Porn:  Investigators Use Subscription List to Track
Down Pedophiles,Ó November 14, available online at <http://abcnews.go.com/sections/
business/TechTV/TechTV_Avalanche_Porn_011114.html>).Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.369FINDINGS, CONCLUSIONS, AND FUTURE NEEDSThe nature of trade-offs is such that doing ÒbetterÓ with respect to one
goal implies doing less well with respect to some other goal or goals.  In

the present instance, any approach that improves protection for children
and youth from inappropriate Internet material or experiences is almost
certain to have a negative impact on other values or goals that most par-
ents or communities would generally find appropriate and desirable.
Note that these latter values and goals may also be associated with chil-
dren and the Internet.Two points must be made about the existence of trade-offs.  First, theexistence of such trade-offs is not an argument, per se, against attempts to
Òdo betterÓ at protecting children and youth from inappropriate Internet
material or experiences.   Second, the fact that trade-offs exist for any

given method suggests that a mix of methods may well be more effective
than exclusive or primary reliance on any one method.To illustrate these trade-offs, the next few sections discuss trade-offsthat decision makers must address in considering the use of social and
educational strategies, technology-based tools, and public policy actions.TABLE 14.1  An Illustration of Mutual Reinforcement
Impact on Suppliers ofImpact on Potential Consumers
Inappropriate Materialof Inappropriate Material
Business decisions and ethics(e.g., ISPs can choose to refrain
from carrying USENETnewsgroups with a largeamount  of child pornography)
Labeling material so thatparents and others can easilyascertain the appropriatenessof that material for their
childrenShape the environment byreducing deceptive practices(e.g., mousetrapping, spam,capturing of misspelled web
sites)Teach children to make choicesto stay away and to target
searches more precisely toreduce chances of inadvertentexposure;  teach parents how

to educate their children aboutthese strategies and to monitorwhat their children are doing
onlineHelp guide children toappropriate sites and help toprevent access to inappropriatesites, consistent with parental
values and preferencesProvide support for social andeducational strategies (e.g.,new standards of learning forK-12, outreach to parents to
educate them about theInternet)Social/educational
strategiesTechnology-based toolsPublic policyYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.370YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET14.4.1Social and Educational Trade-offs
The committee has identified social and educational strategies to teachchildren and youth how to make good decisions about using the Internet
as foundational for any approach to protection.  But socialization and

education are inherently processes that operate over a long time scaleÑthus, they cannot be expected to demonstrate immediate results.  Further-

more, they are not simple to implement, and they require forethought,
planning, and extensive follow-through.  They can be costly, both in terms

of dollars and in terms of time.Perhaps the most important trade-off associated with using socialand educational strategies is that they may conflict with other pressing
social and educational needs.  For example, most K-12 curricula are al-

ready overloaded, and information and media literacy curricula must
compete for time in the schedule with physical education, art, music, sex
education, consumer literacy, and a variety of other pressures on the
curriculum.  Education in these areas is also important, and passionate

advocates can be found for all of them.Because the amount of time in a curriculum is more or less fixed,there are only three possibilities.  One is that something must be removed

if something else is added, and the elimination of any given subject area is
always controversial, if only because the importance of one subject area
must be weighed against the importance of another.  A second possibility

is that by increasing the efficiency of education in the existing areas of
study (so that the same ground can be covered in shorter amounts of
time), time can be made available to add information and media literacy.
But increasing efficiency is an enormously difficult problem, and in prac-
tical terms, it is not clear how to do so.  The third logical possibility is to

obtain the needed time for information and media literacy by trimming
the instructional time devoted to existing subject areas.  The risk in this

approach is that coverage of those latter areas may become inadequate as
a result.The dilemma is no easier to resolve in the family context, where fam-ily time together is at a high premium in many families.  Parental efforts

to supervise children and youth using the Internet must compete with
making sure that children clean their rooms, do their homework, get to
the soccer or basketball game on time, avoid unhealthy use of drugs and
alcohol, work part-time jobs, and so on.  The difference in knowledge

about technology and its uses between many parents and their children
further inhibits informal candid discussion about issues related to the
Internet.  Siblings and friends charged with providing peer assistance

may also play tricks on children to get them into trouble.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.371FINDINGS, CONCLUSIONS, AND FUTURE NEEDSFinally, educational strategies to teach children and youth to refrainfrom seeking out inappropriate sexually explicit materials face a power-
ful challenge in that many adolescents, especially boys, are highly moti-
vated to seek out such materials.  Some children do let educational efforts

Òroll off their backsÓ and are not influenced by them, and although educa-
tion and socialization are the only approaches that have the chance of
reaching all or most children or that have any chance of reducing a childÕsdesire for such materials, the expectations for such education and social-
ization should not be unrealistic.14.4.2Technology Trade-offs
One technology trade-off is illustrated in the balance that users oftechnology-based tools must strike between two concernsÑshielding thechild from inappropriate material and experiences against enabling child-
centered control over the flow of information to him or her.  One can

increase shieldingÑbut only at the expense of reducing a childÕs discre-tionary control over and access to information.A related trade-off is the issue of false positives and false negatives.While false positives and false negatives in general trade off against each
other, even when human beings are actively involved in making judg-
ments about the appropriateness of material to be shown to children, the
trade-off is most stark when technology is used to assess appropriateness,
and a fundamental reality of technology is that it does not provide an
accurate and inexpensive way to assess content.  As a general rule, in-

creasing the probability that a device or system will identify inappropri-
ate sexually explicit material as such also increases the probability that
some not-inappropriate material will also be improperly identified as
inappropriate.  If false positives are generally tolerable (i.e., one is gener-

ally willing to pass up useful information as the price of protecting against

inappropriate material, as might be the case for many risk-averse par-
ents), then the automated assessment of content does have significant
utility.Still another technological trade-off arises because of tensions between
flexibility and ease of use.  Products that are flexible can be customized to

the needs of individual users, and most people say that they want flexible
products.  Yet, a highly customizable product involves many decisions

for a user to make, and many users find the actual exploitation of a
productÕs flexibility to be a chore.  As a result, the most common use of
any technology tool is in its default Òout of the boxÓ configuration.  Thus,
for practical purposes, it is fair that any assessment of a tool place great
weight on what the tool does out of the box.  Against that standard, many
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.372YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETtools for protecting children from inappropriate Internet material andexperiences place a far greater emphasis on labeling Internet material and
experiences as inappropriate than on carefully selecting whether appro-
priate material might be labeled as inappropriate.  That is, if it 
might be
inappropriate, it is labeled and flagged as such.  Filters thus favor over-

blocking rather than underblocking, while monitors are likely to flag more
material as questionable rather than less.This systematic bias in favor of overcaution provokes anxiety in manypeople.  For example, to the extent that technology-based tools are pre-

ferred instruments of government policy, concerns arise that government
may be implicitly endorsing a lesser degree of information flow to the
publicÑand to childrenÑthan would be the case in the absence of tech-nology-based tools.  It is also an empirical observation about many tools

on the market identifying certain kinds of information as inappropriate
for children that their supporters and advocates are perceived as support-
ing an underlying political agenda.  Finally, political pressures and man-

dates to deploy technology-based tools distort the market, in the sense
that they create artificial demand for solutions to problems that commu-
nities do not perceive to exist to a significant degree (if they did, they
would deploy these tools without such a mandate).Even the protection itself that technology offers with respect to pro-tecting children and youth from inappropriate material involves a poten-
tial trade-off.  To the extent that technology-imposed limits on choice

work as intended (i.e., to block rather than discourage access to material
that may be inappropriate), children and youth lose an opportunity to
exercise responsible choice, and hence an associated chance to learn how
to make responsible decisions.  For younger children
Ñwho tend to beless good at decision making than older childrenÑthe consequences ofbad choices may be more serious, because of their relative inexperience
about life and their greater impressionability; for such children, opportu-
nities for unconstrained decision making and choice are not appropriate
under most circumstances.On the other hand, children who develop internal standards of ap-propriateness can be safer in those situations in which theyÑor theirparents and guardiansÑcannot rely on technology to protect them.  This
is important given the increasing ubiquity of Internet access points in
many venues.  When responsible and respected adults and mentors talk

with these older children about responsible decision making and estab-
lish sanctions for inappropriate choices, they create an environment that
encourages and supports responsible choice, which in turn is likely to be
conducive to the development of positive habits.  Such habits are most

important as adolescents reach the age of majority, when they will haveYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.373FINDINGS, CONCLUSIONS, AND FUTURE NEEDSthe rights of adults and no constraints relative to Internet access. On thispoint, parents must decide how to proceed.14.4.3Public Policy Trade-offs
As noted in Chapter 9, the viability of many public policy proposalsdepends on how policy makers make certain trade-offs between the goal
of helping to shield children and youth from inappropriate sexually ex-
plicit material on the Internet and other desirable societal goals.  For

example, the committee believes that spam containing material that is
obscene for minors should not be sent to children.  But laws banning such

e-mail to minors are potentially problematic in an online environment in
which it is very difficult to differentiate between adults and minors.  (In-

deed, regulation that depends on regulating a certain type of content
(namely, sexually explicit speech) is inherently more suspect on First

Amendment grounds than are proposals that regulate speech indepen-
dent of content.)  On the other hand, a ban of all spam regardless of

content may be seen as too broad because it affects many other interestsÑfor example, those parties with a commercial interest in using e-mail
channels to advertise non-sexual goods and services.The committee also believes that it would be desirable for adult Website operators who exhibit material that is obscene for minors to use age
verification systems so that children would not be able to access such
material.  However, in an online environment in which it is very difficult
to differentiate between adults and minors, it is not clear whether deny-
ing access based on age can be achieved in a way that does not unduly
constrain the viewing rights of adults.  Thus, as one illustrative example

from Section 9.3.2, the government might offer a grant of immunity from
prosecution under obscenity laws to Web site operators that use age veri-
fication systems to prevent minors from accessing such material.6  In
this instance, the trade-off is helping to protect children from exposure
to certain kinds of inappropriate sexually explicit material (such a mea-
sure would help to reduce the inadvertent discovery of such material
from commercial Web sites) in return for limitations on possible obscen-
ity prosecutions.Aggressive enforcement of obscenity laws also presents trade-offs.Increased prosecution of obscenity would likely require increased re-6More specifically, immunity for adult Web site operators from prosecution under ob-scenity laws would be granted if (a) they take actions to prevent their content from being
indexed by search engines, and (b) they provide a plain-text front page that warns usersthat the site they are about to enter has adult-oriented content and an ÒexitÓ button to a
child-friendly site if the user acknowledges being under 18.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.374YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETsources, and those resources must be taken from some other activity.  If,
as is likely, the other activity represents prosecutions of other crimes,
policy makers must make the judgment that it would be wise to pursue
more obscenity prosecutions rather than other criminal prosecutions, or
that more prosecutions for obscenity would necessarily be the best use of
additional resourcesÑif such resources are available.  Such judgments are
complex and require a careful weighing of many competing factors well
beyond the scope of this report.14.5TAKE-AWAY MESSAGES FOR DIFFERENT PARTIES
In the committeeÕs judgment, the bottom line on reducing the expo-sure of children to inappropriate material and experiences on the Internet
is that those who rely exclusively, or even primarily, on technology and
public policy will find that the resulting protection will rest on uncertain
and shifting groundÑand is likely to fail their children when exposure toinappropriate material or dangerous situations occurs.  If one installs

tools and/or passes legislation in the hope that they will Òtake care of theproblem,Ó and that in doing so one
Õs responsibilities will thus be ad-equately discharged, children are highly likelyÑeventuallyÑto encoun-ter inappropriate material or experiences on the Internet in some venue,
whether by accident or on purpose.  And such an encounter will come as
a disturbing surprise to the parent, teacher, librarian, or public policy
maker who feels that he or she has done all that needed to be done.  In the

end, responsible choiceÑwhich is foundational for safe Internet use bychildrenÑis closely tied to the values that parents and communities wishto impart to their children, and that influence judgments about the proper
mix of education, technology, and public policy to adopt.Box 14.1 describes some of the behavioral aspects of Internet safetyfor children that families, schools, and libraries might wish to teach.14.5.1Parents
Parents have a primary responsibility for guiding children into matu-rity.  They have responsibilities to their children in the physical world,

and they have corresponding responsibilities in cyberspace.  With respect

to Internet usage, developing maturity implies the ability to make safe,
responsible, and morally appropriate choices about what to do and what
to see on the Internet and a facility for coping constructively with inap-
propriate or objectionable experiences.Box 14.2 describes one possible Òbest practicesÓ scenario focused on
the home.  In addition, parents might wish to keep the following points in

mind.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.375FINDINGS, CONCLUSIONS, AND FUTURE NEEDSBox 14.1Some Aspects of Internet Safety for ChildrenThere are a variety of sources of good advice for children about Internet safety.1The following points summarize some of the most important things to keep in mind.¥DonÕt give out personal information without parental permission to anyone
that you know only from the Internet.  That includes your real name, your address,
telephone number, parentsÕ work address and/or telephone number, or the name
and location of your school.  It also includes your picture, which is information that
is in fact about as personal as you can get.  If you need to give out a name, make one
up, or use your login or screen name.  DonÕt use your real name as a login or screen

name.¥Report to your parents, a responsible adult, or an older sibling anything that
makes you uneasy or uncomfortable.  DonÕt wait to look around or exploreÑreport
it immediately.  ThereÕs nothing wrong with seeking out help for an experience thatmakes you feel uncomfortable.¥Never meet anyone in person that you first met through the Internet without
parental permission and their accompanying you to a face-to-face meeting.  If you
do meet the person (even with parental permission and presence), do it in a publicplace.¥Realize that many people in real life are very different from how they seemonline.  Many people find it easier to lie in an online environment, are very good atit, and rely on the fact that you have no way to check on what they say.   Someone

who claims to be 5' 4", blond, and female and sends you a picture to ÒconfirmÓ that
could be a 6' 2" black-haired male who happened to have a picture of a girl that hefound online.¥Talk with your parents (or teachers) about their expectations and group rulesfor going online.  Establish mutually agreeable rules for when and how long you can
be online, and identify appropriate areas and helpful Web sites for you to visit.  If

you want to do something that is not covered by these rules, talk to your parents orteachers about it.¥DonÕt talk to or engage with people that you donÕt know.  If you get e-mail
from an address you donÕt recognize, delete it without opening it.  If you get an
instant message from someone whose name you donÕt recognize, cancel it.  Stay
away from chat rooms without having an adult present.¥Treat others respectfully in an online environment.  One good rule to follow
is that you should not say or do anything with someone that you would not wantyour parents to find out about.  Teasing, hurting, threatening, or being mean to

someone else is inappropriate and wrong, whether it is online or in personÑand iswrong even if you are anonymous to the other person.1See, for example, <http://disney.go.com/legal/internet_safety.html>, <http://www.safekids.com/kidsrules.htm>, and <http://www.getnetwise.org/safetyguide/>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.376YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET¥When children are young, a wider and more extensive range ofprecautions and a limited range of choices are appropriate.  However, as

children mature, precautions can generally be relaxed and the range of
choices expanded.  If technology is used to limit access, consider the age-
appropriateness of the limits you wish to impose.¥Interactive dialog (whether through e-mail, instant messages, voice
and/or video, chat rooms) with strangers is a much greater potential
threat to a childÕs well-being than other things that he or she is likely toencounter on the Internet.  Account for the fact that children often overes-

timate their ability to make good judgments about the intentions of people
whom they do not know.¥An environment in which your child will feel comfortable talkingto you is more likely to result in conversation about potentially seriousBox 14.2An Illustrative ÒBest PracticesÓ Scenario for the HomeIn a Òbest practicesÓ scenario focused on the home, parents provide instruction
and supervision about Internet use.  In particular, computers would be located in
public family areas rather than in rooms that are conducive to private use (e.g., a
childÕs bedroom).  Parents would have gone beyond their work experiences with the
Internet and learned about the materials and experiences to which their childrenmight plausibly be exposed, keeping in perspective a balance of the InternetÕs posi-tive and negative aspects.  For example, they would have spent some time sitting by
their childrenÕs sides surfing the Internet or exploring their online service with them.They would have educated themselves about appropriate and useful Web sites and
consulted their childrenÕs teachers about how Internet use could support their chil-drenÕs education.  They would also have spent time without children in attendance
surfing the Web so that they could experience firsthand some of the Ònot-so-desir-ableÓ content in instant messages and chat rooms and on Web sites.  They would
have talked with their children about both the benefits and the dangers of the Inter-net, and provided clear guidance about what material and activities were inappro-
priate and explanations for what made them inappropriate.  They would ask their
children to report any experiences that made them (the children) feel uncomfortableor in which they encountered an inappropriate experience or unsuitable material,
and promise to refrain from being upset with their children should such happen.They would also keep that promise, and when their children reported inappropriatematerial or experiences, they would counsel rather than punish them.  Parents would

also set time limits for how much time a child may spend online.  When time is
constrained, people are more likely to concentrate on the activities that they valuemost highly.  To the extent that children seek out inappropriate material out of idle

curiosity, these are the activities that are most likely to be curtailed in the presenceof time limits.  Parents would be willing to learn about technology from their chil-
dren and would not feel awkward about asking their children technology-related
questions.  Furthermore, older and more experienced siblings would be encouraged
to supervise, encourage, and guide younger siblings.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.377FINDINGS, CONCLUSIONS, AND FUTURE NEEDSissues.  If they are afraid of your reaction to what they tell you, they will
be less likely to tell you when they encounter things that might make you
uncomfortable.  Thus, think in advance about what you will say and do

when your child is exposed to material that you regard as inappropriate.¥For most people (children included), instant messages and chatdialogs are no different than telephone conversations, mail, or diary en-
tries.  Reading logs of chat room or IM dialogs is likely to be seen in the

same way as listening in on a childÕs telephone conversations or reading achildÕs diary.  For some parents, the cost of violating a child
Õs privacy isworth the gain of learning what is on a childÕs mind.  For others, the cost
of violating a childÕs privacy is too high a price to pay under most ordi-nary circumstances. A related question is that of the extent to which a
childÕs rights to information go beyond what a parent is willing to grant.Some parents are willing to state explicitly that their children should be
able to obtain information on certain subjects, even if it would make them
(the parents) uncomfortable, while others find such a notion to be unac-
ceptable.  Thus, consider your own philosophy regarding privacy and

information rights for your children.¥The policies of your childÕs school, library, and friendsÕ families
regarding Internet use and access have an effect on your childÕs Internetexperience.  Coordinate the Internet experiences available at home and at

school, the library, or at the homes of friends (if you approve of those
policies), or provide an alternative for your child (if you disapprove of
them).¥Children often copy what their parents say verbally and actuallydo behaviorally.  If you believe that the viewing of sexually explicit mate-

rial is inappropriate for your children, explain to your children why such
behavior is inappropriate for them and set a good example in your own
household.¥Illegal or inappropriate behavior or material can be reported to theresponsible authorities.  For example, the National Center for Missing

and Exploited Children provides one-stop reporting to law enforcement
authorities of child pornography found online by the general public
(http://www.cybertipline.com or 1-800-843-5678).  Local law enforcement

agencies (e.g., state or town police) are often recipients of complaints
related to online solicitations of children for sexual purposes, and the
Federal Bureau of Investigation and the U.S Customs Service have au-
thority in this matter as well.   Certain online services provide mecha-

nisms for reporting inappropriate activity.  For example, AOL provides a

way for users to notify AOLÕs ÒCommunity Action Team,Ó which has the
responsibility of enforcing AOLÕs terms of service.  Among other things,
AOLÕs terms of service forbid vulgar language and disruptive behavior inchat rooms or instant messages and e-mail and instant messages thatYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.378YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETcontain requests from strangers for passwords, credit card numbers, orother personal information.Finally, the committee believes that a parental lack of knowledgeabout Internet culture and the diversity of possible Internet experiences
has beenÑand continues to beÑa source of both complacency (becausesome do not know what on the Internet may be of concern to them and
their children) and excessive fear (because they do not know enough to be
able to place these dangers in proper perspective).  For this reason, paren-

tal education about the Internet continues to be an important part of a
comprehensive program of Internet safety education for children.14.5.2Teachers and Librarians
Teachers have a responsibility for educating students and for provid-ing a safe environment in which learning can occur.  Libraries have a

responsibility for providing the communities they serve with a broad
range of useful materials appropriate for their needs.  Box 14.3 and Box

14.4 describe possible Òbest practicesÓ scenarios for schools and libraries,
respectively.  In addition, teachers, school administrators, and libraries

might wish to keep the following points in mind.¥The educational and informational needs of young people at vari-ous agesÑfrom kindergarten to the seniors in high schoolÑvary enor-mously, and the Internet content that is made available to students atBox 14.3Illustrative ÒBest PracticesÓ Scenarios for Schools
In a Òbest practicesÓ scenario for schools, the Internet and information technol-
ogy are used to support learning and are integrated into the regular curriculum as
tools for learning.  Students
Ñand parentsÑwould actually read acceptable use pol-icies (AUPs).   Discussions about AUPs between students and parents would occur.
Some instructional time would be spent on teaching students what it meant to com-
ply with AUPs.  Enforcement of AUPs would be sufficiently flexible that inadvertentviolations would be seen as teaching opportunities rather than automatically beingconsidered occasions for punishment.  Internet safety instruction would be a prereq-

uisite for school-provided Internet access.  Some instruction in media literacy would
be integrated into the curriculum at all levels as an essential dimension of scholar-ship and learning.  Selected older students would serve as computer and Internet

tutors and guides for younger students.  Teachers would be offered professional
development opportunities by their school district to understand the importance ofmedia literacy on the Internet and how to teach it.  The PTA would offer programs to

parents or guardians wanting to know more about Internet safety and guidance onmaintaining open communication between parents and adolescents.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.379FINDINGS, CONCLUSIONS, AND FUTURE NEEDSthese various stages of development must be matched to their needs,skills, and maturity.  Furthermore, teachers and librarians have an impor-

tant role in educating parents about the InternetÑits benefits and its dan-gersÑand they are sources of advice about how to cope with the dangersthat the Internet may pose.¥Transparency is a virtue, both for adult supervisors and child In-ternet users.  Transparency can include an understanding of why a given
site is or is not regarded as inappropriate, access to detailed information
about what is deemed inappropriate, knowledge of instances when ac-
tions are being monitored or influenced, and the ability for on-site adult
supervisors to override non-local decisions about inappropriateness.¥The total cost of technology solutions, rather than just the initialdeployment costs, must be evaluated.  Specifically, technology generally

entails continuing costs of maintenance and upgrade, as well as human
staff members to ensure that the technology is being used appropriately
and is serving its intended functions.  For example, staff may be needed to

process requests for filtering overrides (if filtering is in place) or to pro-
cess parental complaints (if filtering is not in place).¥Efforts to provide educational outreach to parents must account forbusy family schedules as well as, perhaps, a certain resistance among some
to deal with technology-based issues with which they are unfamiliar.  For

example, outreach activities requiring parents to go far out of their wayBox 14.4Illustrative ÒBest PracticesÓ Scenarios for Libraries
In a Òbest practicesÓ scenario focused on the library, libraries offer Internet safety
instruction to both parents and children.  Software would be installed to 
ÒclearÓbrowser histories and caches so that a new user would not be able to view anything
seen by the previous user.  Libraries would also offer users a variety of choices
regarding filtered or unfiltered access.   Internet access points inside children
Õs areaswould ask the age of the childÑyoung children (e.g., those below 10, although thisage is arbitrary) would receive a notice that they were being given filtered access,while older children would be offered an unbiased choice of filtered and unfilteredInternet access.  (In this context, 
ÒunbiasedÓ means that neither filtered nor unfiltered
access is the default.  Instead, prior to Internet use, a user would specify
Ñin pri-vateÑan explicit choice of filtered or unfiltered access.  In this way, a user who
wishes to gain private and unrestricted access to information could do so without
having to be embarrassed or feel uncomfortable about having to ask for unfilteredaccess, and a user who wished to not be exposed to certain kinds of material coulddo so without having to acknowledge to someone that he or she might be uncom-
fortable with such material.)  In any event, information on the filtering policy would
be conspicuous and available so that users would have a general idea of what wasblocked.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.380YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETtend to be poorly attended; conversely, parents would be more inclined toattend programs that are conveniently located and scheduled consistently
with the communityÕs work hours.  One program described to the commit-
tee during the first workshop involved taking computers to venues that
had little to do with technology such as a gardening class or music festival.
By demonstrating how the technology could have useful applications even
in such venues, a context arises naturally in which it is possible to raise
issues related to young people, the Internet, and parenting.  Also, coordina-

tion with volunteer organizations outside schools and libraries may make
more resources available for these outreach efforts.   PTA organizations, for

example, are well suited to provide such outreach efforts.14.5.3Industry
Various components of industry can make a major contribution to theInternet safety of children.  The segments of industry relevant to the issue

include ISPs and online service providers, makers of access devices such
as personal computers, software vendors, content providers, and the adult
online industry.¥ISPs and online service providers could:ÑProvide easily understood and implemented parental controls.  As
noted in Chapter 11, flexibility is often not used because presenting a
range of options is confusing to the parent trying to configure a system.
On the other hand, a single Òone-size-fits-allÓ approach does not take into
account the needs of individual children.  One approach to simplifying

parental controls, implemented by some service providers, is to set de-
fault measures depending on the age of a child, while giving the parent
the ability to adjust these defaults appropriately.ÑDesign and provide educational and child-friendly areas.  Chapter
10 discusses a number of means to concentrate child-friendly and compel-
ling content that would attract childrenÕs online attention.  To achieve
critical mass, such content would be designed to be broadly appealing
over a wide variety of topics, including information on relationships,
sexual health, and other topics of interest to adolescents.ÑProvide a uniform channel for user complaints about child por-nography and/or obscene material.  Such a channel (which could be as

simple as a link to the CyberTipline) could easily be placed on the com-
plaints or customer service page of the service provider.ÑRefrain from carrying material that they believe to be illegal, suchas suspected child pornography.  (As discussed in Chapter 4, the 
ÒGoodSamaritanÓ provisions of the Communications Decency Act remain in
force and largely immunize providers exercising such control over con-Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.381FINDINGS, CONCLUSIONS, AND FUTURE NEEDStent from liability for failures in such control.)  For example, on their own
authority, ISPs could refrain from carrying Usenet newsgroups known to
carry large amounts of child pornography.¥Makers of access devices such as personal computers could:ÑProvide in-the-box Internet safety tips and best practices.   Many
such brochures published by reputable organizations are available for
free, and Òout-of-the-boxÓ information relevant to Internet safety could be
a valuable route to greater publicity for such efforts.ÑProvide configuration options for children in a household.  At
greater cost, the initial machine-setup configuration process could be
modified to ask the device owner or administrator if children are ex-
pected to use the device.  If so, the process could guide the owner or

administrator through a setup process for specifying parental controls for
the use of the device.  (For example, the setup process might specify

certain limits on Internet access if a child logs into the device.)¥Software vendors could:ÑDevelop software to prevent mousetrapping. Recall that mouse-trapping (discussed in Chapter 3) refers to the phenomenon in which a
user who tries to leave a sexually explicit site is automatically forwarded
to another such site.  Some programs are available today to block 
Òpop-upÓ advertisements, and these work to prevent mousetrapping as well.
However, these programs must be invoked before the pop-up ad or
mousetrapping occurs, and they also disable some useful features of Web
sites.   A Òpanic buttonÓ could be installed that is always available on theuserÕs screen, and if a user is mousetrapped, clicking on the Òpanic but-tonÓ should close all current browser windows.
ÑDevelop software to help configure computers to be child-friendly.Such software would operate in lieu of the child-oriented setup routines
described above.ÑIntegrate label-based filtering options into Web browsers (see below).ÑInclude in software regularly used by adults tips for their children
ÕsInternet safety.  For example, upon initial installation of a software prod-
uct, the software setup program could ask if the user wanted to view a
screen of Internet safety tips for children, and if so, could display such
tips or direct him or her to an appropriate Web site.ÑProvide content creation tools that have been adapted to speed theprocess of content developers creating labels that can be used by PICS-
based filtering schemes.¥Content providers could:ÑParticipate in labeling schemes.  As discussed in Chapter 12, the
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.382YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETsuccess of a labeling scheme depends primarily on its widespread adop-tion.  In October 2001, AOL Time Warner, Yahoo, and Microsoft Network

announced their adoption of the content labeling system of the Internet
Content Rating Association.ÑIntegrate educational and entertainment value into content devel-oped for children.  If children are to use content voluntarily, such integra-

tion is likely to enhance its appeal for both children and parents.ÑAdd links to age-appropriate sexual and emotional health contentto Web sites visited by older youth.  As noted in Section 14.2, many older
youth are interested in information that relates to their sexuality.  Given

this fact, it makes some sense to provide reliable and appropriate infor-
mation to meet this need, rather than leaving them on their own to find
unvetted information that may be of questionable value or to seek out
adult-oriented, sexually explicit content that depicts sexual behavior in
ways that are demeaning or disturbing.¥The adult online industry could:ÑTake more effective steps to keep children from accessing theirproducts.  For example, operators of adult Web sites could set up their

home pages without sexually explicit material (i.e., the cyber-equivalent
of a brown paper wrapper around an adult magazine), and use the
robot.txt protocol (described in Chapter 2, Box 2.3) to prevent indexing of
pages (even free teaser pages) that contain such material.  Thus, children

searching the Web would never find the sexually explicit material directly
(though they might be directed to an adult siteÕs home page).ÑStop the practice of involuntary mousetrapping.  For example, it
would be simple to offer a user seeking to leave a Web site a choice about
whether or not to be redirected.  Such a simple step could do much to

reduce the perception of irresponsible behavior on the part of the adult
online industry.ÑUse contracts to require more responsible behavior among affili-ates that use content provided by commercial sources of adult-oriented,
sexually explicit imagery.  For example, a contract between a content

provider and an affiliate might require that the affiliate would have to put
its content behind plain brown wrappers and so on, and the firms that
supply content would be in a position to penalize them if they did not (by
cutting off a content source).Finally, the information technology industry should not be discour-aged from undertaking serious technology-based efforts to help parents
and other responsible adults to improve and enhance the safety of their
childrenÕs Internet experiences and to reduce the amount of inappropri-ate material to which they may be exposed.  Indeed, as a primary benefi-
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.383FINDINGS, CONCLUSIONS, AND FUTURE NEEDSciary of the Internet age (as well as being instrumental in creating it), theinformation technology industry arguably has a special responsibility to
help safeguard children on the Internet.  Developing more discriminating

filters, enabling parental controls, supporting research of the type de-
scribed in Section 14.6, and adopting and promoting labeling schemes are
a few of the ways that the IT industry has sought to discharge its respon-
sibilities in this area, and a further enhancement and strengthening of
these types of effort can only expand the range of options that parents and
other responsible adults can exercise.14.5.4Makers of Public Policy
Public policyÑat the local, state, and federal levelsÑhelps to shapethe environment in which Internet access occurs.  But because the scope of

public policy actions areÑby definitionÑpervasive throughout the com-munity to which those actions are relevant, public policy makers must
proceed judiciously.Public policy actions are most effective when they are based on reli-able science rather than anecdote, and when they reflect a strong social,
ethical, and moral consensus.  For example, the sentiment that child por-

nography and sexual molestation of children are wrong is shared by
people among a very broad spectrum of political views.  Thus, it is rea-

sonable to say that these are serious national problems, and addressing
them continues to be an important task for the nation.  Furthermore, the

scale of these problemsÑalready largeÑis increasing, and in any eventoutstrips the resources available to deal with them.By contrast, public policy makers should tread lightly when it comesto other areas in which a consensus is not so apparent.  For example, the

committee heard from parents who did not trust the federal government
to take actions to reduce childrenÕs Internet exposure to inappropriatematerials.  The striking aspect of this sentiment was that it was expressed

by both conservative and liberal parents.Public policy makers should also be wary of cheap, easy, or quick solu-tions.  As the discussion in Chapter 12 on filtering demonstrates, such Òsolu-tionsÓ may not fix the problem that they seek to solve
Ñat least not to theextent that they would enable resources and attention to be turned else-
where.  It is true that the cost of social and educational strategies tends at first

blush to be considerably larger than the costs of protective technologiesÑbutthe benefits that accrue are also correspondingly higher.  Students will be

more able to avoid problematic experiences and material of their own voli-
tion, and will be better able to cope with them when they occur.Finally, it is necessary to underscore the fact that public policy can gofar beyond the creation of statutory punishment for violating some ap-Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.384YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETproved canon of behavior. Certainly, legal sanctions are one possible pub-lic policy option, and such sanctions act both to punish those who behave
in a way contrary to law and to deter others from conducting themselves
in a similar way.  Options such as more vigorous prosecution of existing

obscenity laws are discussed at length in Chapter 9.  But public policy can

be used much more broadly and can shape the Internet environment in
many ways.  For example, public policy can be used to:
¥Reduce uncertainty in the regulatory environment.  Uncertainty in
the regulatory environment is often inhibiting to business plans.  For

example, prior to the enactment of the ÒGood SamaritanÓ section of the
Communications Decency Act (discussed in Section 4.2.3), at least one
court case (Stratton Oakmont v. Prodigy) had suggested that an ISP exercis-ing editorial control over messages posted on its bulletin boards in accor-
dance with its acceptable use policy was subject to liability as a publisher
for content available through the ISP that was inconsistent with its accept-
able use policy.  This precedent gave ISPs incentives to refrain from exer-
cising editorial control, and the Good Samaritan provisions of the Com-
munications Decency ActÑnever overturned in the courtsÑeliminatesuch liability.¥Promote media literacy and Internet safety education.  Promotion
can include:ÑFunding the development of model curricula for media literacyand Internet safety.  There are political sensitivities related to the federal

governmentÕs role in education, which is a local responsibility, but devel-oping models and giving grants are both well-accepted federal practices
in the area of education.ÑEncouraging and supporting professional development for teach-ers on Internet safety and media literacy.  Professional development for

teachers seeking to use the Internet for pedagogical purposes is sparse
compared with the need,7 but Internet safety and media literacy do not
account for more than a very small fraction of the sparse support that is
available.ÑSupporting outreach to educate parents, teachers, librarians, andother responsible adults about Internet safety education issues.  Grants

could also be made available to non-profit and community organizations
to run Internet safety programs.  In addition, given the gap in knowledge

between adults and their children, a media-based educational outreach
campaign has some potential for reducing this gap.  For example, public
7U.S. Department of Education.  2001. 
TeachersÕ Tools for the 21st Century:  A Report on TeachersÕ
Use of Technology.  Available online at <http://nces.ed.gov/pubsearch/pubsinfo.asp?pubid=
2000102>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.385FINDINGS, CONCLUSIONS, AND FUTURE NEEDSservice announcement campaigns could help to inform parents of onlineissues related to their children (TV ads, enclosures in phone and/or
Internet bills).  Another part of media outreach might be the creation of a
national ÒchildrenÕs safety dayÓÑa day in which the media would high-light all that can be done to improve childrenÕs safety and well-being, andadults would take concrete steps to review safety issues with children.
Internet safety education could well be one aspect of such a day.¥Support the development of and access to high-quality Internetmaterial that is educational and attractive to children in an age-appropri-
ate manner.  Public support for the development of PBS programming

has a long tradition of providing such material in the TV medium, and
with the dearth of comparable material for children on the Internet, such
support could have a substantial impact.  In addition, educational portals

that organize existing safe and educationally appropriate content (see
comments under Section 14.5.3) would improve the accessibility of that
content to diverse audiences.¥Support self-regulatory efforts by private parties.  For example,
public policy can provide financial or legal incentives for ISPs and content
providers to behave in responsible ways.  It can also coordinate and facili-

tate private efforts to self-police the Internet environment (analogous to
the rating efforts of the music and game industry).  Such self-policing

relies on the public at large to report possibly illegal material or behavior,
ISPs to take actions consistent with their terms-of-service provisions, and
information exchange mechanisms to ensure that all parties have the in-
formation needed to take appropriate action.¥Support research in areas that are relevant to the issue of Internetsafety.  Some of the relevant areas are the impact of exposure to sexually

explicit material on children at various ages; the Internet use patterns of
children; and the in-practice effectiveness of various social and educa-
tional strategies, technology-based tools, and public policy at federal,
state, and local levels at increasing the safety of childrenÕs Internet experi-ences.  Of special interest is the possibility of research and development

into technologies specifically designed to accurately identify sexually ex-
plicit material and thereby enhance and improve the effectiveness of tools
that can help to reduce the exposure of children to inappropriate Internet
materials and experiences.8 As discussed in Chapter 2, the general infor-
mation-retrieval problem is a very difficult one to solve.  However, re-

search intended to focus on the identification of sexually explicit material
may progress more rapidly than work on the more general problem.  The
8Non-industrial support for such research may be justified on the grounds that, as dis-cussed in Chapter 12, there is little market incentive for more accurate methods for identify-ing sexually explicit materials (and hence for more accurate filtering).Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.386YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETreason is that in seeking to identify sexually explicit material (rather thanarbitrarily selected material), one might be able to make use of heuristic
methods and clues signaling the presence of sexually explicit content that
are not available for use in the general case.9¥Support efforts to enable families and other private parties to exer-cise greater latitude of choice in the Internet experiences of the children
for whom they are responsible.  For example, parents and others lack a

good evaluative guide to technology-based tools and must assess the
claims of vendors on their own.  This report helps to provide a framework

for understanding how to think about such tools but does not provide
specific product guidance.  Publicly available assessments of specific tools

rated multidimensionally according to common criteria could help par-
ents and others select tools that are appropriate for their own situations.Finally, makers of public policy must keep in mind the internationaldimensions of the Internet.  This does not mean that U.S. actions should

not be undertaken, or that they will be wholly ineffective, but expecta-
tions for the impact of such actions must necessarily be moderated com-
pared to the case in which the United States is the only significant actor.14.6RESEARCH NEEDS
As the length of this report suggests, the problem of protecting chil-dren from inappropriate material and experiences on the Internet is com-
plex.  Reliable information in a number of areas is needed.  Indeed,

throughout its work, the committee was concerned about the lack of reli-
able and valid science-based information for many dimensions of the
problem it was addressing.  Such information would have helped to

strengthen committee deliberations.¥The effectiveness of technology-based tools and social and educa-tional strategies in practice should be examined and characterized.  Chap-

ter 12 discusses one aspect of evaluating the performance of filters, based
on a Òhead-to-headÓ comparison of how filters performed in blocking
inappropriate materials.  But protection of children is a holistic enterprise

that must account for the totality of their Internet experienceÑwhich sug-gests the need for an examination of all of the tools in all of the venues in
which children use the Internet.  The same is true for understanding how

social and educational strategies affect the behavior of children Òon theground.Ó9Note that more effective technology in this area could be used for the benefit of thosewho want to block such material and of those who want to search more precisely for it.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.387FINDINGS, CONCLUSIONS, AND FUTURE NEEDS¥Given the inadequate scientific basis for understanding how mediaexposure to sexually explicit material affects children, more research in
this area is needed.  Systematic research on U.S. children may not be

possible, for all of the reasons described in Chapter 6, but cross-national
longitudinal studies in countries similar to the United States may shed
some light on these issues.  In addition, it may be possible to conduct

research to study exposure to such material that occurs in the course of
childrenÕs use of the Internet (which is likely to include both accidentaland deliberate exposure).  A further dimension of media research is the

impact of media exposure on the development of personal character in
youth.¥It seems reasonable that providing high-quality, age-appropriateinformation about sex and sexual health addressing the physical, emo-
tional, social, and psychological issues on the minds of children would
have a dampening effect on the urge of many adolescents to search for
inappropriate sexually explicit materials.  To test this proposition, longi-

tudinal studies of children and adolescents who receive such information
would be helpful.¥There is a need for research and development directed toward acomprehensive curriculum that provides in detail what parents need to
know in order to handle the issue of Internet safety with their children.
Such a curriculum would provide specifics on what a parent might do
operationally.¥A better understanding of the population of online sexual preda-tors might help government efforts to prevent sexual predation.  If, for

example, a large percentage of online sexual predators were already-
convicted child molesters, that fact might argue for longer prison terms
for such felons, closer supervision of their activities after release, and/or
prohibitions on their use of online resources.14.7CONCLUSION
The Internet offers enormous potential to enhance the intellectual,educational, social, and personal development of children. Those who
take actions to address the concerns described above must bear in mind
the potential benefits that the Internet offers.  Thus, any 
ÒappropriateÓmix of actions should be seen as balancing competing goals and values
rather than endorsing the absolute supremacy of any one goal or value.Furthermore, evolution with respect to technology and the e-businessenvironment, as well as possible changes in community standards gov-
erning obscenity, means that there are no foreseeable technological Òsil-ver bulletsÓ or single permanent solutions to be crafted.  Rather, any
approach adopted to protect children must adapt to changing circum-Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.388YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETstances.  While technology and public policy have important roles to play,
social and educational strategies that impart to children the character and
values to exercise responsible choices about Internet use and the knowl-
edge about how to cope with inappropriate material and experiences is
central to promoting childrenÕs safe Internet use.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIXESYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.390Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.391PLENARY MEETING OF JULY 17-19, 2000National Research Council2001 Wisconsin Avenue
Green Building
Washington, D.C.Monday, July 17
Presentation of ChargeDean Hoffman, U.S. Department of Justice
Linda Roberts, U.S. Department of EducationPanel: Considering the Extent of the ProblemDavid Finkelhor, University of New Hampshire
Michael Marshall, Microsoft (retired)
John Rabun, National Center for Missing and Exploited Children
Jeff Richards, Internet AlliancePrimer on the First AmendmentGeoffrey Stone, University of ChicagoPanel: First Amendment PerspectivesBruce Taylor, National Law Center for Children and Families
Robert Flores, National Law Center for Children and FamiliesAInformation-Gathering Sessionsof the CommitteeYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.392YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETElliot Mincberg, People for the American WayMarvin Johnson, American Civil Liberties Union
Paul McMasters, The Freedom ForumTuesday, July 18
Panel: Technological IssuesMilo Medin, Excite@Home
Paul Resnick, University of Michigan
Bhavani Thuraisingham, MITREPanel: Library PerspectivesMarilyn Mason, Independent Consultant
Carol Roddy, Ohio Public Library Information Network
Judith Krug, American Library Association
Walter Minkel, Cahners Business Information
Caroline Ward, Ferguson Library and outgoing president of Ameri-can Library Association Services for ChildrenPanel: School PerspectivesLynne Schrum, University of Georgia
Linda Braun, LEO: Librarians and Educators Online
Carrie Gardner, Milton Hershey School
Maribeth Luftglass, Fairfax County SchoolsPanel: Community PerspectiveRobin Raskin, Family PC
Parry Aftab, Cyberangels
Bruce Watson, Enough Is EnoughPLENARY MEETING OF OCTOBER 18-20, 2000Georgetown Holiday InnMirage Room II
2101 Wisconsin Avenue, N.W.
Washington, D.C.Wednesday, October 18
Panel:  Perspectives on Child Development
Jeff McIntyre, American Psychological Association
Mary Anne Layden, University of PennsylvaniaYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.393APPENDIX ADemonstrations: Sexually Explicit Material on the Internet (closed session)Panel: Understanding the Obscenity Statutes
Governmental PerspectivesTerry Lord, Child Exploitation and Obscenity Section, U.S. Depart-ment of JusticeKenneth Neu, Federal Bureau of Investigation
Daniel Armagh, National Center for Missing and Exploited ChildrenNongovernmental PerspectivesRob Showers, Gammon & Grange
Beth Farber, Federal Public Defender
Robert Peters, National Obscenity Law Center, Morality in Media
Jon Katz, Marks & Katz, LLCQuestions for the Panels¥Given a policy to prosecute obscenity cases, what factors deter-
mine whether or not to pursue a case?  How does the exposure of a minor

to obscene materials affect a decision to prosecute?¥How are community standards for determining obscenity set?

¥Would a case of Internet obscenity be prosecuted differently from
one associated with a neighborhood bookstore?  Why or why not?
¥How has policy regarding enforcement of obscenity laws changed
over the years at the local, state, and federal level?¥What approaches would be most effective in dealing with online
obscenity?  (to include but not be limited to any or all of the following:

technological tools such as filters, community practices, legislation or
regulation)Thursday, October 19
Panel: Perspective of ISPs (general purpose, family friendly)Steve Ensley, American Family Online
Mike Chilton, Dotsafe
Ginny Wydler, America OnlineQuestions for the Panel¥How do you decide what is appropriate material for minors to
access?  How does this differ by age?
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.394YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET¥Please comment on the exposure of minors to sexually explicitmaterial online by source, i.e., explicitly sought, inadvertently accessed,
or pushed actively by another party.¥How do you limit exposure for minors to sexually explicit materialonline?  What strategies or tools appear most successful?  What strategies

or tools have limited success?  Why?
¥Is there a ÒrangeÓ for access for minors?  How is it determined?
¥What approaches would be most effective in limiting the exposureof minors to sexually explicit material on the Internet?¥Unsolicited or bulk e-mails are sent to minorsÕ accounts but may
contain links to sexually explicit sites.  How might these mailings be

eliminated or better targeted to adults?Panel:  Perspectives of Education Associations
Julie Underwood, National School Boards Association
Arthur Sheekey, Council of Chief State School OfficersQuestions for the Panel¥What are your primary concerns about the exposure of minors tosexually explicit material online?¥How are your members responding to the issue?¥How should the risk of exposure to inappropriate sexual contentbe balanced against the risk of denying access to helpful or educational
material that might be inappropriately blocked?¥What approaches to limit the exposure of minors to online sexuallyexplicit material are appropriate for schools, communities, libraries, and
families?Panel: Perspective of TeenagersBrittany and Yves, Teenangels, New Jersey, with Parry Aftab, Cyber-angelsAlex, Thomas Jefferson High School for Science and Technology, Al-exandria, VirginiaQuestions for the Panel¥Do you think that adults (parents, teachers) understand enoughabout the Internet to provide supervision?¥How easy is it to circumvent actions intended to prevent someonefrom reaching sexually explicit material online?¥What do you think are the best ways to protect minors from inap-propriate Internet content?Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.395APPENDIX A¥Have you ever seen pornography online?  How did it happen?  For
instance, was it sent to you?  Did you accidentally access a message con-

taining a link?  Did you mistype a URL and get an adult site?
¥What have you done when you have gotten sexually explicit mate-rial online?  Have you told anyone?  Who?  What happened?
¥Do you think you get a lot of bulk or unrequested e-mails contain-ing sexually explicit material?¥Have you ever been made uncomfortable by someone in a chatroom or by an Instant Messenger message? What happened?  What did

you do?¥Do you know how to protect yourself when you go online?  Where
did you learn these rules?Discussion of COPA Commission Report (closed session)
Friday, October 20
Panel: Adult Entertainment Industry RepresentativesDanni Ashe, DanniÕs Hard DriveJ.T. Edmond, Flying Crocodile
Gloria Leonard, Free Speech Coalition
Larry Lux, Playboy Online
Gerard Van der Leun, Penthouse.comQuestions for the Panel¥What is your perception of the issue of minorsÕ exposure to sexu-
ally explicit material online?  How are your members/clients responding

to the issue?   How broad is your membership base compared to the

universe of providers of such material?¥What are the most appropriate means for distinguishing betweenadults and minors in an online context?¥How should/can the current regime of limiting the exposure ofminors to sexually explicit print and TV and movies be extended to the
Internet domain?¥What are the most appropriate approaches to limit the exposure ofminors to online sexually explicit material?  What strategies or tools ap-

pear most successful?  What strategies or tools have limited success? Why?
¥Unsolicited or bulk e-mails are sent to minorsÕ accounts but may
contain links to sexually explicit sites.  How might these mailings be

eliminated or better targeted to adults?¥What approaches would you like to see adopted or developed tolimit the exposure of minors to online sexually explicit material?Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.396YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET¥What technologies might better target likely audiences for adultentertainment?Overview of Bertelsmann Report, Protecting Our Children on the InternetJack Balkin, Yale UniversityPUBLIC WORKSHOP OF DECEMBER 13, 2000Georgetown University Conference CenterSalon H Meeting Room
3800 Reservoir Road, N.W.
Washington, D.C.Note: The proceedings of this workshop are summarized in an NRCreport entitled Nontechnical Strategies to Reduce ChildrenÕs Exposure to In-appropriate Material on the Internet: Summary of a Workshop (National Re-
search Council and Institute of Medicine, Board on Children, Youth, and
Families and Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, Joah G.Iannotta, ed., National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 2001).Non-Technical Strategies That Can Be Used to Protect Children on the Internet:What Are the Roles of Policies, Parents, Schools, Libraries, and Communities?Linda Roberts, Director, Office of Educational Technology and SeniorAdviser to the Secretary, U.S. Department of EducationAnne Thompson, Program Commissioner, National PTAQuestions for Discussion¥How does one define non-technical strategies for protecting kidsfrom inappropriate material on the Internet?¥What non-technical approaches are used in the home, classroom,and community settings?¥What is the role of parents in making non-technical strategies effec-tive, and what do parents need?¥How effective have current policies been in encouraging schoolsand communities to develop non-technical strategies?An Extended Panel on Bringing Developmental Considerations to Bear on theImpact of Inappropriate Material on the InternetPart I: Effects of Exposure to Pornographic and Other Inappropriate Mate-rial on the InternetJane Brown, Professor, School of Journalism and Mass Communica-tions, University of North Carolina at Chapel HillYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.397APPENDIX AJoanne Cantor, Professor, University of Wisconsin, MadisonEd Donnerstein, Dean and Professor, Department of Communication,University of California, Santa BarbaraModerator/Discussant:  Sandra Calvert, Committee Member and Pro-
fessor of Psychology, Georgetown UniversityIssues for Discussion¥What types of inappropriate material do young people encounter,and how do they come in contact with it?¥What is the potential impact on children of viewing sexually ex-plicit and other forms of inappropriate material in the media?¥Is impact dependent only on the type of material or also on thesource (e.g., static image on the Internet, picture from a magazine, active
images from television)?¥What are the limits of this research, and to what extent can wemake comparisons among the effects of viewing different types of inap-
propriate material (e.g., sexually explicit vs. violent vs. hate speech)?Part II: Developmental Considerations for Determining Appropriate Inter-net Use Guidelines for Children and AdolescentsPatricia Greenfield, Professor, Department of Psychology, Universityof California, Los AngelesJames Youniss, Professor, Life Cycle Institute, Catholic University ofAmericaDorothy Singer, Senior Research Scientist, Department of Psychol-ogy, Yale University, and Co-director, Yale University Family TelevisionResearch and Consultation CenterIssues for Discussion¥How are emotional, cognitive, social, and moral development af-fected by the media landscape created by childrenÕs access to and use ofthe Internet?¥What types of material may be harmful according to childrenÕsgrowth and developmental needs, and how may harmful effects change
with age and developmental milestone?¥How do parents and educators balance giving young people theresponsibility of exploring the Internet with protecting them from mate-
rial that may be disturbing?¥How should developmental issues shape non-technical strategiesto protect kids from inappropriate material, and what non-technical strat-
egies will most benefit childrenÕs development?Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.398YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETPush and Pull on the Internet: ChildrenÕs Use and ExperiencesDon Roberts, Thomas More Storke Professor, Department of Com-munication, Stanford UniversitySarah Keller, Assistant Professor, Health Communication, Depart-ment of Communication, Emerson CollegeModerator/Discussant: Janet Schofield, Committee Member, Profes-sor of Psychology and Senior Scientist at the Learning Research and De-
velopment Center, University of PittsburghQuestions for Discussion¥How are children using the Internet, in what settings are childrenlogging on, and are there differential patterns of use according to age,
gender, and ethnicity?¥What are childrenÕs experiences while online, both positive and negative?¥How are children pulled into material that they might not other-wise view, and what effect might this have?¥How are young people driving their experiences on the Internet,and how can young people be encouraged to stay in charge of their online
experiences?Innovative Approaches and Existing Efforts to Use Non-Technological Strate-gies to Protect Children on the InternetLaurie Lipper, Director, The ChildrenÕs PartnershipKathy Boguszewski, Instructional Technology Consultant, WisconsinDepartment of Public InstructionMary Dempsey, Commissioner, Chicago Public Library
Nancy Willard, Director, Responsible Netizen Research, Center forAdvanced Technology in Education, University of OregonEileen Faucette, Founder and Coordinator, PTA Live Online
Moderator/Discussant: Winnie Wechsler, Committee MemberQuestions for Discussion¥What are some of the non-technological strategies that might beused by educators, librarians, parents, and local communities to ensure
childrenÕs safe and appropriate use of the Internet?¥What types of inappropriate material do these strategies address, andhow do they protect against the potential harm this material might cause?¥Who has been responsible for implementing and monitoring theseapproaches?¥How can these approaches be tailored to different venues (e.g.,home, school, library)?Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.399APPENDIX ABridging Research, Policy, and PracticeEllen Wartella, Dean and Professor, College of Communication, Uni-versity of Texas, AustinLaura Gurak, Associate Professor, Rhetoric; Faculty Fellow, Law; andDirector, Internet Studies Center, University of MinnesotaBetty Chemers, Deputy Administrator, Office of Juvenile Justice andDelinquency PreventionQuestions for Discussion¥What research is needed to develop new non-technical strategiesfor protecting children from inappropriate material on the Internet?¥Are regulations needed to protect children on the Internet, andwhat policies might encourage children to use the Internet in safe and
appropriate ways?¥How should nonprofit organizations, educational institutions, gov-ernment agencies, and parents be working together to create a safe envi-
ronment for kids to use the Internet?¥How should we be thinking about linking research, policy, andpractice?PLENARY MEETING OF MARCH 7-9, 2001Excite@Home450 Broadway
Redwood City, CaliforniaWednesday, March 7
Basic Concepts in Information RetrievalNick Belkin
David D. Lewis
Hinrich Schutze, Center for the Study of Language and Information,Stanford UniversityDavid Forsyth, University of California, Berkeley
Ray Larson, University of California, Berkeley, School of InformationManagement and SystemsIssues for Discussion¥Stability of content categorization¥Automatic text categorization¥Machine-aided text understandingYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.400YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET¥Vision and image recognition¥Search engine technologyFiltersSusan Getgood, Surf Control Inc.
James Wang, Pennsylvania State University
Bennett Hazelton, PeacefireQuestions for Discussion¥What techniques can be used to identify sexually explicit material?¥How do filter vendors select the content they screen?¥What flexibility do their products offer?¥What is involved in circumventing the filtering provisions?¥How is the performance of a product measured? (rates of falsepositives, false negatives)Authentication and Age VerificationEddie Zeitler, Lambert and Associates
Fred Cotton, Search.org
Deirdre Mulligan, University of California, BerkeleyBusiness Models
Models for Kid-Friendly and Kid-Safe Internet BusinessesBrian Pass, MediaOne
Irv Shapiro, Edventions Inc.Questions for Discussion¥What are the primary challenges of building a business based onthe idea of attracting kids to safe and appropriate Internet content?¥What is the business case for firms operating in this space?¥What role do responsible adults (parents, teachers, librarians, andso on) play?¥How do you deal with the issue of inappropriate material?Business Models Based on Advertising and Ad TrackingChris Kelly, Excite@HomeYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.401APPENDIX AQuestions for Discussion¥How do business models based on the sale of Web advertising work?
¥What techniques are used to filter out those with a low probabilityof buying from those with higher probabilities of buying?¥What drives the cost structure of such businesses?Thursday, March 8
Rights Management TechnologyDavid Maher, Intertrust Inc.
John Blumenthal, @Stake Inc.Issues for Discussion¥The technology of digital rights management systems¥Infrastructure needed to support rights management systems¥Application of rights management systems to restricting distribu-tion of materialUsenet Newsgroups and the World Wide WebDan GeerDevelopmental Progression and SexualityJohn Gagnon, SUNY Stony Brook
Pepper Schwartz, University of Washington
Elizabeth Casparian, Independent ConsultantQuestions for Discussion¥How does developmental progression affect the appropriatenessof exposing a minor to sexually explicit material?¥What types of material may be harmful according to childrenÕsgrowth and developmental needs, and how may harmful effects change
with age and developmental milestone?¥How should developmental issues shape efforts to protect kidsfrom inappropriate sexually explicit material?Approaches to Regulating Sexually Explicit Material on the InternetLarry LessigYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.402YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNET.xxx domains (by videoconference)Donald Eastlake, MotorolaPublic Testimony from Birds of a Feather Session with the 2001 Conference onCompters, Freedom, and Privacy, by VideoconferenceSITE VISIT TO AUSTIN, TEXAS, APRIL 3-4, 2001Attendees from the National Research CouncilLinda Hodge
Marilyn Mason
Herb Lin (staff)
Daniel Llata (staff)Tuesday, April 3
Pflugerville:  John Connally High School
Session with teachers, administrators, school librarians, and technolo-gistsSession with studentsCepeda Branch LibrarySession with librarians and technical managers
Session with youth group leaders, teachers, and program directorsOpen Session at the Courtyard Marriott Hotel NorthParents and PTA members
School board members
Other adultsWednesday, April 4
Visit to Settlement HomePanel session with students
Panel session with teachers and school administratorsSITE VISIT TO GREENVILLE, SOUTH CAROLINA, APRIL 17-18, 2001Attendees from the National Research CouncilFather William J. Byron
Linda Hodge
Bob Schloss
Herb Lin (staff)
Daniel Llata (staff)Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.403APPENDIX ATuesday, April 17Mauldin Middle SchoolWilliam Harner, District Superintendent
Session with students
Session with teachers and school administratorsW. Jack Greer Library of MauldinBeverly James, Executive Director of Greenville County LibrarySystemSession with librarians and technical managersPhillis Wheatley AssociationSession with youth group leaders
Session with studentsOpen Session at W. Jack Greer Library of MauldinBoards of Trustees, Greenville County Library System
Representatives of School District of Greenville County
PTSA representativesWednesday, April 18
Greenville Senior High Academy of Academic ExcellenceGinger Stuart, Interim Principal
Session with students
Session with teachers and school administratorsSITE VISIT TO SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH, APRIL 26-27, 2001Attendees from the National Research CouncilDavid Forsyth
Geoffrey Stone
Gail Pritchard (staff)
Joah Iannotta (staff)Thursday, April 26
Utah Education Network (UEN)Sessions with UEN administrators and technologistsMeeting with Paula Houston, Complaints Ombudsman, Obscenity and Por-nography, Office of the Utah Attorney GeneralYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.404YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETSalt Lake City LibrarySession with librarians and technical managers
Session with Library Teen Advisory PanelOpen Session at Salt Lake City Library
Friday, April 27
Tooele High SchoolSessions with students
Session with teachers and school administratorsSITE VISIT TO SAN DIEGO, CALIFORNIA, MAY 2-3, 2001Attendees from the National Research CouncilLinda Hodge
Janet Schofield
Winnie Wechsler
Herb Lin (staff)
Gail Pritchard (staff)Wednesday, May 2
Rancho Bernardo High SchoolSession with students from the high school
Session with students from Bernardo Heights Middle School
Session with high school teachers, school administrators, and schoollibrariansCasa Familia Community ProgramSession with Casa Familia staff
Session with Casa Familia students
Session with Casa Familia youth group leaders, instructors, and tech-nical managersEl Cajon LibrarySession with librarians and  technical managers
Open Session in El Cajon Library Community Room
Thursday, May 3
Lincoln High SchoolSession with high school studentsYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.405APPENDIX ASITE VISIT TO BLACKSBURG, VIRGINIA, MAY 8-9, 2001Attendees from the National Research CouncilDick Thornburgh
Sandra Calvert
Linda Hodge
Robin Raskin
Herb Lin (staff)
Gail Pritchard (staff)Tuesday, May 8
Blacksburg Middle SchoolSession with students
Session with teachers and school administratorsChristiansburg High SchoolSession with librarians and technical managers
Session with instructional supervisors and teachers of technologycoursesBlacksburg Electronic VillageDiscussion with directorWednesday, May 9
Blacksburg High SchoolSession with teachers and school administrators
Session with studentsSITE VISIT TO CORAL GABLES, FLORIDA, MAY 31-JUNE 1, 2001Attendees from the National Research CouncilNick Belkin
Herb Lin (staff)
D.C. Drake (staff)Thursday, May 31
Coral Gables High SchoolSession with students (mostly juniors and sophomores)
Session with teachers and school administratorsYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.406YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETBoys and Girls Club, Kendall BranchSession with students
Session with administrators and instructorsOpen Session at Coral Reef Senior High SchoolPTA representatives
Other parentsSITE VISIT TO REDDING, SHELTON, BRISTOL, KENT, ANDHAMDEN, CONNECTICUT, JUNE 1-2, 2001Attendees from the National Research CouncilDan Geer
Linda HodgeFriday, June 1
Joel Barlow High School in Redding, ConnecticutPanel session with parents and community membersShelton Intermediate School in Shelton, ConnecticutSession with teachers, school administrators, librarians, technical man-
agers, and resource officers
Session with middle school studentsBristol Board of Education Offices in Bristol, ConnecticutSession with principals, teachers, public librarians, students, and tech-nical managersOpen Session at Kent Center School in Kent, ConnecticutSession with local education policy makers and parentsSaturday, June 2
Connecticut State PTA OfficeSession with parentsYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.407Acceptable use policy (AUP) is a set of guidelines and expectations about
how individuals will conduct themselves online.Adolescent is generally an individual older than 13 but younger than the
age of majority or 18, whichever is smaller.Adult is an individual who has attained the age of majority.  Note that
ÒadultÓ is a term with legal significance and also with social significance.
The age of majority varies by state and even by context (e.g., a 19-year-
old can vote but not drink alcohol in many states).Adult verification service is a service provided to businesses that validatesthe adult status of certain customers.  Often, but not always, a credit

card is used to provide assurance of oneÕs adult status.Algorithm is a step-by-step problem-solving procedure, especially an es-tablished computational procedure for solving a problem in a finite
number of steps.Authentication is the process of confirming an asserted identity with a
specified, or understood, level of confidence.  The mechanism can be

based on something the user knows, such as a password, something
the user possesses, such as a smart card, something intrinsic to the
person, such as a fingerprint, or a combination of two or more of
these.AVI is a format for online video.  A file named Òexample.aviÓ is likely to
be a full-motion video that can be played on a computer.Bandwidth refers to the amount of data that can be transmitted in a fixed
amount of time. For digital devices, bandwidth is usually expressedBGlossary and Acronyms
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.408YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETin bits per second (bps) or bytes per second.  A standard dial-up
connection to the Internet, for example, typically has a bandwidth of
around 56 k (or 56,000 bits per second).Binary refers to a number system that has just two unique digits.  Computers
operate on the binary numbering system (binary code), which consists of
just two unique numbers, 0 and 1 (or, as some like to think of it, ÒonÓ and
ÒoffÓ).Bit (or binary digit) is the smallest element of computer storage. It is a
single digit in a binary number (0 or 1).Black list, in Internet filtering technology, is a list of Web sites (or URLs)to which access from a given workstation or user has been specifically
forbidden.  Contrast with 
white list.Boolean logic refers to a system of logic based on operators such as AND,
OR, and NOT.  In many search engines, search terms are linked with

these Boolean operators to formulate more precise queries.Broadband is a term used commonly to refer to communications or Web
access that is faster than dial-up (56 k).  Such access would include

cable modems and digital subscriber lines.Browser software is the actual computer program used to view docu-
ments on the World Wide Web (e.g., NetscapeÕs Navigator or Micro-softÕs Internet Explorer).Bulletin board is a computer system used as an information source and
forum for a particular interest group.  The bulletin board typically

holds postings made by various participants and replies to those

postings from other participants.Byte is the common unit of computer storage.  It is made up of eight bits
(or binary digits).  A byte holds the equivalent of a single character,

such as the letter A, a dollar sign, or a decimal point.Cache refers to a place to store files locally for quicker access.  Caches are
used to speed up data transfer and may be either temporary or per-
manent.  Memory and disk caches are used in every computer to

speed up instruction execution and data retrieval.CERT is the Computer Emergency Response Team based at Carnegie
Mellon University.Chat is real-time conferencing between two or more users on the Internet.
Chatting is usually accomplished by typing on the keyboard, not
speaking, and each message is transmitted directly to the recipient.Chat room is a virtual room where a chat session takes place.  Technically,
a chat room is really a channel, but the term ÒroomÓ is used to pro-
mote the chat metaphor.Child is used in the report to denote a broad category of individuals whoare younger than adult.Click (or mouse click) is a way of making a selection online.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.409APPENDIX BClient is an application that runs on a personal computer or workstationand relies on a server to perform some operations.  For example, an e-

mail client is an application that enables one to send and receive e-mail.
Client-server model is a network architecture in which each computer or
process on the network is either a client or a server.  Servers are

powerful computers or processes dedicated to managing disk drives
(file servers), printers (print servers), or network traffic (network serv-

ers).  Clients are PCs or workstations on which users run applications.

Clients rely on servers for resources, such as files, devices, and even
processing power.Client-side refers to any operation that is performed at the client work-
station.  Contrast with server-side.
Content provider is an organization or individual that creates informa-tion, educational, or entertainment content for the Internet.  A content

provider may or may not provide the software or network infrastruc-
ture used to access the material.Cookie is a message given to a Web browser by a Web server. The browserstores the message in a file (generally called cookie.txt). The message
is then sent back to the server each time the browser requests a page
from the server.  Cookies are often used by Web sites to track users

and their preferences.Cost per acquisition (CPA) refers to an advertising model in which an
advertiser pays a Web site operator for displaying an ad based on the
number of new subscriptions the ad generates.Cost per click (CPC) refers to an advertising model in which an adver-
tiser pays a Web site operator a certain amount (e.g., $0.05) each time
a user clicks on one of the advertiserÕs ads on the operatorÕs Web site.Cost per mille [thousand] (CPM) refers to an advertising model in which
an advertiser pays a Web site operator each time the advertiserÕs ad isdisplayed (e.g., $3 per 1,000 displays).CrawlerÑsee spider or 
Web crawler.Cybersex referes to online real-time dialog with someone (usually text-
based) that interactively describes sexual behavior and actions with
oneÕs online partner for erotic purposes and expression.Cyberspace is a term
Ñcoined by William Gibson in his 1984 novel Neuro-mancerÑthat refers to the Internet or to the online or digital world ingeneral.CyberTipline is the program operated by the National Center for Missing
and Exploited Children for reporting child abuse and child pornogra-
phy.Database is a collection of information organized in such a way that users
(often both people and  computer programs) can quickly select de-

sired pieces of data.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.410YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETDial-up is the most common method for accessing the Internet.  It in-
volves making a connection from a userÕs computer (by using a mo-dem) over a standard phone line to an Internet service provider.  Con-

trast with Òalways-onÓ access methods such as cable modems or DSL
lines.Digital subscriber line (DSL) is a term used to denote a class of technolo-
gies that use copper phone lines to establish high-speed Internet con-
nections between telephone switching stations and homes or busi-
nesses (a so-called Òlast-mileÓ technology).
Domain name service (DNS) is an Internet service that translates domain
names into IP addresses.  For example, the domain name 
Òwww.nationalacademies.orgÓ might translate to 
Ò198.105.232.4.ÓDownload refers to the act of copying data (usually an entire file) from a
main source to a peripheral device. The term is often used to describe
the process of copying a file from an online service to oneÕs owncomputer.E-mail is short for 
Òelectronic mail,Ó the transmission of messages over
networks.Encryption is any procedure used in cryptography to convert plain text
into cyphertext to prevent anyone but the intended recipient from
reading the data.File attachment is a method by which users of e-mail can attach files to
messages (e.g., one might send a relative a digital picture of a new-
born in an e-mail announcing his or her birth).Filter (or filtering) is a type of technology that allows Internet material or
activities that are deemed inappropriate to be blocked, so that the
individual using that filtered computer cannot gain access to that
material or participate in those activities.Gnutella is file sharing system on the Internet that lets users search for
software and documents on the GnutellaNet, a loose federation of
users and organizations that make a wide variety of information avail-
able to the world at large.  Gnutella is also an example of peer-to-peer

networking.Graphics file is a file that holds an image.  JPEG and GIF are two popular
formats for image files.Hard disk is a computer
Õs primary storage medium, and it is usually afixed component within the computer itself.   Contrast with ÒfloppyÓdisks, which are temporary, disposable, and removable.Harvester is an automated program that is designed to collect e-mail
addresses by scanning Web sites, bulletin boards, and chat rooms
(among other things).History file refers to the list most Web browsers maintain of downloaded
pages in a session so that users can quickly review everything thatYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.411APPENDIX Bhas been retrieved.  However, history files can be cleared or altered
easily.Hypertext markup language (HTML) is the authoring language used to
create documents on the Web.  Web pages are built with HTML codes

(usually called ÒtagsÓ) embedded in the text; these tags define pagelayout, fonts, and graphic elements, as well as hypertext links to other
documents on the Web.Hypertext transfer protocol (HTTP) is a communications protocol used
to connect clients and servers on the Web.  HTTP
Õs primary functionis to establish a connection with a Web server and transmit HTML
pages to the client browser.ICQ (ÒI Seek YouÓ) is a conferencing program for the Internet.  Much like
AOLÕs Instant Messenger service, ICQ provides interactive chat andfile transfer, and can alert users when someone on their predefined
list has come online.ICRA is the Internet Content Rating Association (www.icra.org).
Image recognition/analysis (or ÒrecognitionÓ) is the process through
which a computer can identify an image (e.g., this graphics file con-
tains an image of a naked woman).Information retrieval refers to the processes, methods, and procedures
used to selectively recall recorded data from a database.Instant message (IM) is a two-way, real-time, private dialog between two
users.  A user initiating an IM sends an invitation to talk to another

(specific) user who is online at the same time.  Instant messaging is

very popular today, because unlike participation in chat rooms, one
tends to talk to people whom one already knows.  Note also that IMs
are often used in conjunction with chat roomsÑa user in a chat roomcan send an IM to someone else in the chat room (because he or she
sees the other partyÕs screen name or ÒhandleÓ), thus establishing aprivate communication.Intellectual property refers to the ownership of ideas and control over
the tangible or virtual representation of those ideas.Internet is a decentralized global communications network connecting
millions of individual users and machines.Internet protocol (IP) is a part of the TCP/IP suite of protocols that al-
lows the various machines that make up the Internet to communicate
with each other.Internet relay chat (IRC) is another conferencing system used on the
Internet.  However, unlike in instant messaging, users do not commu-

nicate directly with each other; rather, the server broadcasts all mes-
sages to all current users of a particular channel.Internet service provider (ISP) is an organization or company that
provides access to the Internet.  Examples of national-level ISPs
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.412YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETinclude America Online (AOL), Earthlink, and Microsoft Network(MSN).Internet telephony refers to two-way transmission of audio over the In-
ternet.  Internet telephony allows users to employ the Internet as the

transmission medium for telephone calls.  It is also commonly re-

ferred to as voice-over-IP (VoIP).IP address is an identifier for a computer or device on a TCP/IP network.
Networks using the TCP/IP protocol route messages based on the IP
address of the destination. The format of an IP address is a 32-bit nu-
meric address written as four numbers separated by periods. Each
number can be zero to 255 (e.g., Ò1.160.10.240Ó could be an IP address).
Keystroke log is a method for recording each keystroke made by a user
on a given computer.Link (or hyperlink) is a reference or pointer to another document.  Click-
ing on (or selecting) a link on a Web page generally takes one to the
document being referenced (e.g., clicking on a link to the NRCÕs homepage will open the NRCÕs home page document in the userÕs browser).Local area network (LAN) is a computer network that spans a relatively
small area.  Most LANs are confined to a single building or group of

buildings.  However, one LAN can be connected to other LANs over

any distance via telephone lines and radio waves.Log is a file that lists actions that have occurred.  For example, Web
servers maintain log files listing every request made to the server.  See

also keystroke log.Login refers to the way that computers recognize users.  Logins are also
commonly referred to as user names.  Generally, the combination of a

correct login (or user name) and password is required to gain access
to networked computers.Megabyte (MB) is the term used to denote 1 million bytes (or, more
precisely, 1,048,576 bytes).Meta tags are elements within HTML code that allow page creators to
describe the content of Web pages.  Meta tags are often read and

indexed by search engines.Metadata is a component of data which describes the data.  It describes the
content, quality, condition, or other characteristics of data.  For instance,

in the HEAD section of most HTML documents, many Web page creators
encode information about the title, author, date of creation or update, and
keywords relating to or descriptions of the documentÕs content.Minor is a term generally used in a legal context to denote individualswho are younger than adults.Modem is a device that enables a computer to transmit digital data over
analog telephone lines.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.413APPENDIX BModerated newsgroup is a mailing list in which all postings are 
Òmoder-atedÓ by a specific individual with the authority and power to reject
individual postings that he or she deems inappropriate.Mousetrapping is a technique that forces a user to remain on a specific
Web site by not allowing the user to leave the site. Whenever the user
tries to leave the site by closing the browser window or going to a
new URL, the site that is mousetrapping will automatically open a
new browser window with its URL or not allow the browser to go to
the new URL.MPEG is a term that refers to the family of digital video compressionstandards and file formats developed by the Motion Picture Encoding
Group (hence, MPEG).  The term is also often used to refer to the files

of digital video and audio data available on the Internet.Multimedia refers to applications that combine text, graphics, full-mo-
tion video, and/or sound into an integrated package.Napster was initially an application that gave individuals access to oneanotherÕs music (MP3) files by creating a unique file-sharing systemover the Internet.Net is a short term for Internet.
Newsgroup is an online discussion group.  On the Internet, there are
literally thousands of newsgroups covering every conceivable inter-
est (e.g., see <http://groups.google.com>).Offline refers to the time that a user is not connected to the Internet.
Contrast with online.Online refers to the time that a user is connected to the Internet.  Contrast
with offline.Overblocking refers to a situation where Internet filtering software blocks
access to resources that authorities did not intend to block.  Contrast

with underblocking.Password is a secret series of characters that enables a user to access a file,
computer, or program.  On multiuser systems, each user must enter

his or her correct user-name/password combination before the com-
puter will respond to commands.Peer-to-peer network is a communications network that allows all com-
puters in the network to act as servers and share their files with all
other users on the network.  Gnutella is one example of peer-to-peer

networking on the Internet.  Contrast with 
client-server.Pixel is the smallest discrete element of an image or picture on a computer
monitor (usually a single-colored dot).Platform for Internet content selection (PICS) is a system for rating the
content of Web sites that has been endorsed by the World Wide Web
Consortium.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.414YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETPlug-in is an auxiliary program that works with Internet browser soft-
ware to enhance its capability (e.g., RealNetwork
Õs RealPlayer or
MicrosoftÕs Media Player).Portal is a Web site or service that offers a broad array of resources and
services, such as e-mail, search engines, subject directories, and fo-
rums.  Yahoo! is an example of a portal.
Precision is a measure of the effectiveness of information retrieval and is
often expressed as the ratio of relevant documents to the total number
of documents retrieved in response to a specific search.  For example,

using a Web search engine, if a search retrieves 100 documents, but
only 30 of them are truly relevant to the search, the precision would
be 30 percent.  Contrast with 
recall.Probabilistic algorithm is an algorithm that works for all practical pur-
poses but has a theoretical chance of being wrong.Proxy server is a server that sits between a client application, such as a
Web browser, and a real server.  It intercepts all requests to the real

server to see if it can fulfill the requests itself.  If not, it forwards the

request to the real server.  Proxy servers can also be used to filter

requests to prevent users from accessing specific Web sites.Push transfer refers to a form of data delivery in which data is automati-cally delivered to the userÕs computer without the userÕs having tomake a request for the data.Real-time audio/video refers to communication of either sound of images
over the Internet that occurs without delay in real time, much like a
telephone conversation.Recall is a measure of the effectiveness of document retrieval expressed
as a ratio of the total number of relevant documents in a given data-
base (or on the Web) to the number of relevant entries or documents
retrieved in response to a specific search.  However, determining a

searchÕs recall can be problematic because it is often very difficult todetermine the total number of relevant entries in all but very small
databases.  Contrast with 
precision.Remote viewing is the capability of system administrators (whether they
be information technology ÒhelpdeskÓ personnel or teachers in a class-
room) to view what is being displayed on a given workstation or
computer from their own location.Scanner is a device that can copy text or illustrations printed on paper
and translate that information into a form a computer can use.Screen name is an alias (or short nickname) chosen by a computer user to
employ when accessing his or her online service or network account.
See also login.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.415APPENDIX BSearch engine is program that searches documents (or indexes of docu-
ments) for specified words or phrases and returns a list of the docu-
ments where those items were found.Server is a computer (as well as the software that is running on that
computer) that delivers (or serves up) Web pages.Server-side refers to any operation that is performed at the server.  Con-
trast with client-side.Smart card is a small physical hardware device (typically the size of a
credit card) containing read-only non-volatile memory and a micro-
processor that can be inserted into a card reader attached to a com-
puter.  In most scenarios, the individual user carries the card and

inserts it into an Internet access point that requires such a device.  The

memory on-board the device can store information about the user,
including his or her age, preferences for material to be blocked, and
so on.  Software installed on the computer, and on Web sites visited,

would check the smart card for dates of birth when necessary, and if
the user were underage for certain types of material, would refuse to
grant access to that material.Spam generally refers to unsolicited e-mail, particularly unsolicited e-
mail of a commercial nature.Spider is a computer program that automatically retrieves Web docu-
ments.  They are often used to feed pages to search engines for index-

ing.  Another term for these programs is 
Web crawler.Streaming media refers to a technique for transferring data in such a way
that it can be processed as a steady and continuous stream (as op-
posed to the userÕs needing to download the entire file before beingable to view or listen to it).Surfing (or Web surfing) is a metaphor for browsing the contents of the
Web.TCP/IP (or Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol) is the suite
of communications protocols used to connect machines on the Inter-
net.  TCP/IP allows different hosts on the Internet to establish a con-

nection with each other and exchange streams of data.Teaser refers to Web pages or portions of Web sites that are intended to
entice users to spend more time at a given Web site or become paying
customers.Thumbnail is a miniature display of a page or image.  Thumbnails enable
users to see the layout of many items on the screen at once.Top-level domains are the major subdivisions within the Internet
Õs do-main name service (DNS).  Examples of top level domains include
Ñamong othersÑ.com, .gov, and .edu.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.416YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETTraffic refers to the load on a given Web site or resource.  A high-traffic
Web site, for instance, receives many visitors or requests for data.Traffic forwarding is the practice whereby one Web site forwards traffic
to another Web site and may receive a fee for doing so.Underblocking refers to a situation whereby Internet filtering software
does not block access to resources that authorities intended to block.
Contrast with overblocking.Uniform resource locator (URL) is the address of documents and other
resources on the World Wide Web.  The first part of a URL indicates

what protocol to use to access the document (e.g., ÒhttpÓ or 
ÒftpÓ),while the second part specifies the domain name where the resource
is located (e.g., www.example.com) as well as the directory and the
name of the requested document.Usenet is a worldwide bulletin board system that can be accessed through
the Internet or through many online services. It contains more than
14,000 forums, called newsgroups, that cover almost every imagin-
able interest group.V-chip is an electronic circuit or mechanism in a television that parents
can use to block programs they consider inappropriate for their chil-
dren.  V-chips can be configured to block all programs of a given

rating.Virtual hosting refers to the ability of Internet service providers or Web siteoperators to ÒhostÓ Web sites or other services for different entities on
one computer while giving the appearence that they exist on separate
servers.  For instance, with virtual hosting, one might have Web sites

from two separate, distinct organizations residing on and being served
from one particular server (with one particular IP address).Web is a shortened form of World Wide Web (WWW).
Web crawler is a computer program that automatically retrieves Web
documents.  They are often used to feed pages to search engines for

indexing.  Another term for these programs is 
spider.Web page hosting refers to the ability of Internet service providers, com-panies, or other organizations to act as a server of Web pages.Webcam is a video camera that is used to capture periodic images or
continuous frames to a Web site for display.WebTV is a service that makes a connection to the Internet via a user
Õstelephone service and then converts the downloaded Web pages to a
format that can be displayed on a television.White list, in Internet filtering technology, is a list of Web sites (or URLs)to which access from a given workstation or user has been specifically
approved.  Contrast with 
black list.Workstation refers to a computer connected to a network (often the
Internet).Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.417APPENDIX BWorld Wide Web (WWW) refers to the set of all the information re-
sources that can be accessed via HTTP.World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) is one of the main standards bodies
for the World Wide Web. The W3C works with the global community
to help establish international standards for client and server proto-
cols that enable communications on the Internet.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.418C.1INFORMATION RETRIEVAL TECHNOLOGIES
Information retrieval, a function that supports people who are ac-tively seeking or searching for information, typically assumes a static or
relatively static database of digital objects against which people search.
These digital objects may be documents, images, sound recordings, and
so on.The general information retrieval problem is one of making a decisionabout which objects in the database to show to the user.  Systems for

information retrieval seek to maximize the material that a person sees that
is likely to be relevant to his or her information problem, and to minimize
the material that is not relevant to the problem.An information retrieval system works by representing the objects ina database in some well-specified manner, and then representing the
userÕs information problem (Òinformation needÓ) in a similar fashion.
The retrieval techniques then compare needs with objects.A key aspect of object representation is the language used to describethe objects in question.  Typically, this language (more precisely, a Òmeta-

languageÓ) consists of a vocabulary (and sometimes precise grammar)
that can characterize the objects in a form suitable for automated compari-
son to the userÕs needs.The representation of information objects also requires interpreta-tions by a human indexer, machine algorithm, or other entity.  When

people are involved, the interpretation of a particular text by one personCSelected Technology Issues
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.419APPENDIX Cis likely to be different from that of someone else, and may even be differ-ent for one person at different times.  As a person
Õs state of knowledgechanges, his or her understanding of a text changes.  Everyone has expe-

rienced the situation of finding a document not relevant at some point,
but quite relevant later on, perhaps for a different problem or perhaps
because we, ourselves, are different.  Such subjectivity means that deci-

sions about representation will be inconsistent.  An extensive literature on

interindexer consistency indicates that when people are asked to repre-
sent an information object, even if they are highly trained in using the
same meta-language (indexing language), they might achieve 60 to 70
percent consistency at most in tasks like assigning descriptors.1Machine-executable algorithms for representing information objectsor information problems do give consistent representations.  But any

one such algorithm gives only one interpretation of the object, out of a
great variety of possible representations, depending on the interpreter.
The most typical way to accomplish such representations is through
statistically based automatic indexing.  Techniques of this sort index

(represent) documents by the words that appear in them, deleting the
most common (articles, prepositions, and other function words), con-

flating different forms of a word into one (e.g., making plural and singu-
lar forms the same), and weighting the resulting terms according to
some function of how often they appear in the document (term fre-
quencyÑthe more occurrences, the greater the weight) and how manydocuments they appear in (document frequencyÑthe more documents,the lower the weight).A consistent result in information retrieval experimentation is thatautomatic indexing of the sort just described gives results that are at least
as good as human indexing, and usually better.  Performance is evaluated

by a pair of measures, recall and 
precision.2  This result is often stated as
meaning that automatic indexing is better than manual indexing, because
manual indexing is so much more expensive than automatic.  But it is

important to keep in mind another consistent information retrieval result,
that the sets (or lists) of documents that are retrieved using one technique1L.E. Lawrence, 1977, Inter-indexer Consistency Studies 1954-1975: A Review of the Literatureand summary of study results, University of Illinois, Graduate School of Library Science,Urbana-Champaign; K. Markey, 1984, ÒInterindexer Consistency Tests: A Literature Re-view and Report of a Test of Consistency in Indexing Visual Materials,Ó Library and Informa-tion Research, 6(2): 155-177; L. Mai-Chan, 1989, ÒInter-indexer consistency in subject catalog-ing,Ó Information Technology and Libraries 8(4): 349-357.
2ÒRecallÓ measures how complete the search results are, and is the proportion of relevantdocuments in the whole collection that have actually been retrieved. ÒPrecisionÓ measures
how precise the search results are, and is the proportion of retrieved documents that arerelevant.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.420YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETare different from those retrieved by another technique (both relevantand non-relevant documents).Having constructed representations of both the information objectsand the personÕs information problem, the information retrieval system isin a position to compare these representations to one another, in order to
identify those objects that match the information problem description.
Technologies for accomplishing this are called search or 
retrieval techniques.Because people in general cannot specify precisely what it is that they do
not know (that for which they are searching), because people cannot rep-
resent accurately and completely what an information object is about, andbecause relevance judgments are inherently subjective, it is clear that such
techniques must be probabilistic, rather than deterministic.  That is, any

decision as to whether to retrieve (or block) an information object is al-
ways a guess, more or less well informed.  Thus, in information retrieval,
we cannot ever say with confidence that an information object is (or is
not) relevant to an information need, but can only make judgments of
probability (or belief) of (non)relevance.It can be easily seen that many of the problems that information re-trieval faces are also problems that information filtering must face.  Al-

though filtering aims to not retrieve certain information objects, it still
must do so on the basis of some representation of those objects, and some
representation of the person for whom the filtering is done.  Filtering

works by prespecifying some information object descriptions that are to
be excluded from viewing by some person or class of persons.  Thus, it

depends crucially on having an accurate and complete representation of
what is to be excluded (this is analogous to the query or information
problem representation), and also accurate and complete representations
of the information objects that are to be tested for exclusion.  Just as in

information retrieval, making the exclusion decision in information filter-
ing is an inherently uncertain process.C.1.1Text Categorization and Representation
Automatic text categorization is the primary language retrieval tech-nology in content screening.  Text categorization is the sorting of text into

groups, such as pornography, hate speech, and violence.  A text cate-

gorizer looks at a text-based information object and decides the proper
categorization for this object.  Applications of text categorization are fil-

tering of electronic e-mail, chats, or Web access; and indexing and data
mining.The principal problem with text categorization is that text is ambigu-ous in many ways:  polysemy, synonymy, and so on.  For example, a bank
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.421APPENDIX Ccan be either a financial institution or something on the side of a river(polysemy).  The context matters a lot in the interpretation.
Efficient automatic text categorization requires an automated catego-rization decision that identifies, on the basis of some categorization rules,
the category into which an object falls.  (Note that if the rules are sepa-

rated from the decision maker, the behavior of the decision maker can be
changed merely by changing the rules, rather than requiring the rewriting
every time of the software underlying the decision maker.)   The decision-

making software examines the text in the information object, and on the
basis of these rules, categorizes the object.  The simplest decision rules

might base the decision on the mere presence of certain words (e.g., if the
word ÒbreastÓ appears, the object is pornographic).  More sophisticated
rules might search for combinations of words (e.g., if the word ÒbreastÓappears without the word Òcancer,Ó the object is pornographic), or even
weighted combinations of different words.Decision rules are developed by modeling the kinds of decisions thatresponsible human beings make.   Thus, the first step in automated rule

writing (also known as Òsupervised learningÓ) is to ask a responsibleindividual to identify, for example, which of 500 digital text objects con-
stitute pornography and which do not.  The resulting categorization thus
provides a training set of 500 sample decisions to be mimicked by the
decision rules.Of course, the selection of the persons who provide the samples iscrucial, because whatever they do becomes the gold standard, which the
decision rules then mimic.  Everything depends on the particular persons

and their judgments, but the technology does not provide guidance on
how to define the community or whom to select as representatives of that
community.Research indicates that supervised learning is at least as good as ex-pert human rule writing.3  The effectiveness of these methods is far from
perfectÑthere is always a high error rateÑbut sometimes it is near agree-ment with human performance levels.  Still, the results differ from cat-

egory to category, and it is not clear how directly it applies to, for ex-
ample, pornography.  As discussed below, there is an inevitable trade-off

between false positives and false negatives (i.e., attributing an item to a
category when it should not be; not attributing an item to a category when
it should be), and categories vary widely in difficulty.  Substantially im-

proved methods are not expected in the next 10 to 20 years.3Fabrizio Sebastiani.  2002.  
ÒMachine Learning in Automated Text Categorization,Ó ACMComputing Surveys 34(1): 1-47.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.422YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETIt is not clear which text categorization techniques are most effective.The best techniques are not yet used commercially, so there may be incre-
mental improvements.  Nor is it clear how effective semiautomated cat-

egorization is, or whether the categories that are difficult for automated
methods are the same as those that most perplex people.The simplest machine representation of text is what is known as theÒbag-of-wordsÓ model, in which all of the words in an object are treated
as an unstructured list.  If the object
Õs text is, ÒDick Armey chooses BobShaffer to lead committee,Ó then a representative list would be:  Armey,
Bob, chooses, committee, Dick, lead, Shaffer.  (A slightly more sophisti-

cated version associates a count of the number of times each word occurs
with the word itself.)  Note that in such a representation, the structure and

context of the text are completely lost.Thus, one weakness in the representation is due to the ambiguity oflanguage, which is resolved in human discourse through context.  For

example, the word ÒbeaverÓ has a hunter
Õs meaning and a pornographicmeaning.  Other words, such as 
ÒbreastÓ and 
Òblow,Ó may be less am-
biguous but can be used pornographically or otherwise.  When context

is important in determining meaning, the bag-of-words representation
is inadequate.The bag-of-words representation is most useful when two conditionsare met:  when there are unambiguous words indicating relevant content,

and when there are relatively few of these indicators.  Pornographic text

has these properties; probably about 40 or 50 words, most of them unam-
biguous, indicate pornography.   Thus, the bag-of-words representation is

reasonably well suited for this application, especially if a high rate of false
positives is acceptable.  However, in many other areas, such as violence

and hate speech, the bag-of-words representation is less useful.  (For

example, while a pornographic text such as the text on an adult Web page
often can be identified by viewing the first few words, one must often
read four or five sentences of a text before identifying it as hate speech.)When fidelity of representation becomes important, a number of tech-niques can go beyond the bag-of-words model:  morphological analysis,

part-of-speech tagging, translation, disambiguation, genre analysis, infor-
mation extraction, syntactic analysis, and parsing.  For example, a tech-

nique more robust than the bag-of-words approach is to consider adjacent
words, as search engines do when they give higher weight to information
objects that match the query and have certain words in the same sentence.
However, even with these technologies, true machine-aided text under-
standing will not be available in the near term, and there always will be a
significant error rate with any automated method.  Approaches that go

beyond the bag-of-words representation improve accuracy, which may
be important in contexts apart from pornography.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.423APPENDIX CC.1.2Image Representation and Retrieval
Images can be ambiguous in at least as many ways as text can be.Furthermore, there is no universal meta-language for describing images.
People who are interested in images for advertising purposes have differ-
ent ways to talk and think about them than do art historians, even though
they may be searching for the same images.  The lack of a common meta-
language for images means that special meta-languages must be devel-
oped for images for use in different problem domains.The process of determining whether a given image is pornographicinvolves object recognition, which is very difficult for a number of rea-
sons.  First, it is difficult to know what an object is; things look different

from different angles and in different lights.  When color and texture

change, things look different.  People can change their appearance by

moving their heads around.  We do not look different to one another

when we do this, but we certainly look different in pictures.Today, it is difficult for computer programs to find people, thoughfinding faces can be done with reasonably high confidence.  It is often

possible to tell whether a picture has nearly naked people in it, but there
is no program that reliably determines whether there are people wearing
clothing in a picture.To find naked people, image recognition programs exploit the factthat virtually everyoneÕs skin looks about the same in a picture, as long asone is careful about intensity issues.  Skin is very easy to detect reliably in

pictures, so an image recognition program searching for naked people
first searches for skin.  So, one might simply assume that any big blob of

skin must be a naked person.However, images of the California desert, apple pies, and all sorts ofother things are rendered in approximately the same way as skin.  A more

refined algorithm would then examine how the skin/desert/pie coloring
is arranged in an image.  For example, if the coloring is arranged in

patterns that are long and thin, that pattern might represent an arm, a leg,
or a torso.  Then, because the general arrangement of body parts is known,

the location of an arm, for example, provides some guidance about where
to search for a leg.  Assembling enough of such pieces together can pro-

vide enough information for recognizing a person.A number of factors help to identify certain pornographic pictures,such as those that one might find on an adult Web site.  For example, in

such pictures, the people tend to be big, and there is not much other than
people in these pictures.  Exploiting other information, such as the source

of the image or the words and links on the Web page from which the
image is drawn, can increase the probability of reliable identification of
such an image.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.424YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETBut it is essentially impossible for current computer programs to dis-tinguish between hard-core and soft-core pornography, because what con-
stitutes Òhard-coreÓ versus 
Òsoft-coreÓ pornography is in the eyes of the
viewer rather than the image itself.  Consider also whether the photo-

graphs of Jock Sturges, many of which depict naked children, constitute
pornography.  Furthermore, in the absence of additional information, it is

quite impossible for computer programs to distinguish between images
that contain naked people in what might be pornographic poses, which
are considered Òhigh artÓ (e.g., paintings by Rubens), and what someone
might consider a truly pornographic image.What computer programs can do with reasonable reliability today(and higher reliability in the future) is to determine whether there might
be naked people in a picture.  But any of the contextual issues raised

above will remain beyond the purview of automated recognition for the
foreseeable future.C.2SEARCH ENGINES AND OTHER OPERATIONAL
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SYSTEMSInformation retrieval systems consist of a database of informationobjects, techniques for representing those objects and queries put to the
database, and techniques for comparing query representations to infor-
mation object representations. The typical technique for representing in-
formation objects is indexing them, according to words that appear in the
documents, or words that are assigned to the documents by humans or by
automatic techniques. An information retrieval system then takes the
words that represent the userÕs query (or filter), and compares them to theÒinverted indexÓ of the system, in which all of the words used to index
the objects in the collection are listed and linked to the documents that are
indexed by them. Surrogates (e.g., titles) for those objects that most closely
(or exactly) match (i.e., are indexed by) the words in the query are then
retrieved and displayed to the user of the system.  It is then up to the user

to decide whether one or more of the retrieved objects is relevant, or
worth looking at.From the above description, it is easy to see that Òsearch enginesÓ are
a type of information retrieval system, in which the database is some
collection of pages from the World Wide Web, which have been indexed
by the system, and in which the retrieved results are links to the pages
that have been indexed by the words in the userÕs query.The basic algorithm in search engines is based on the Òbag-of-wordsÓmodel for handling data described above.  However, they also use some

kind of recognition of document structure to improve the effectiveness of
a search.  For example, search engines often treat titles differently from
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.425APPENDIX Cthe body of a Web page; titles can often indicate the topic of a page.  If the
system can extract structure from documents, then this often can be used
as an indicator for refining the retrieval process.Many search engines also normalize the data, a process that involvesstripping out capitalization and most of the other orthographic differ-
ences that distinguish words.  Some systems do not throw this informa-

tion away automatically, but rather attempt to identify things such as
sequences of capitalized words possibly indicating a place name or per-
sonÕs name.  The search engine often removes stop words, a list of wordsthat it chooses not to indexÑtypically quite common words like ÒandÓand Òthe.Ó4  In addition, the search engine may apply natural language
processing to identify known phrases or chunks of text that properly
belong together and indicate certain types of content.What remains after such processing is a collection of words that needto be matched against documents represented in the database.   The sim-

plest strategy is the Boolean operator model.  Simple Boolean logic says

either Òthis word AND that word occur,Ó or 
Òthis word OR that wordoccurs,Ó and, therefore, the documents that have those words should be
retrieved.  Boolean matching is simple and easy to implement. Because of

the volume of data on the Internet, almost all search engines today in-
clude an automatic default setting that, in effect, uses the AND operator
with all terms provided to the search engine.All Boolean combinations of words in a query can be characterized ina simple logic model that says, either this word occurs in the document,
or it does not.  If it does occur, then you have certain matches; if not, then

you have other matches.  Any combination of three words, for example,

can be specified, such that the document has this word and not the other
two, or all three together, or one and not the other of two.  However, if the

user does not specify the word exactly as it is stored in the index, then it
will not be processed appropriately, and in particular the word cannot be
a synonym (unless you supply that synonym), an alternate phrasing, or a
euphemism.Another strategy is the vector space model.  A document is repre-
sented as an N-dimensional vector, in which N is the number of differentwords in the text, and the component of the vector in any given direction
is simply the number of times the word appears in the text.  The measure
of similarity between two documents (or, more importantly, between a
document and the search query similarly represented) is then given by
the cosine of the angle between the two vectors.  The value of this param-
4Note that the stop list is a likely place to put a filter.  For example, if 
ÒbitchÓ was
included in the stop list, no Web site, including that of the American Kennel Club Web site,would be found in searches that included the word Òbitch.ÓYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.426YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETeter ranges from zero to 1.0, and the closer the value is to 1.0, the moresimilar the document is to the query or to the other document.  In this

model, a perfect match (i.e., one with all the words present) is not nec-
essary for a document to be retrieved.  Instead, what is retrieved is a

Òbest matchÓ for the query (and of course, less good matches can also be
displayed).Most Web search engines use versions of the vector space model andalso offer some sort of Boolean search.  Some use natural language pro-

cessing to improve search outcomes.  Other engines (e.g., Google) use

methods that weight pages depending on things like the number of links
to a page.  If there is only one link to a given page, then that page receives

a lower ranking than a page with the same words but many links to it.The preceding discussion assumes that the documents in question aretext documents.  Searching for images is much more difficult, because a

similarity metric of images is very difficult to compute or even to concep-
tualize.  For example, consider the contrast between the meaning of a

picture of the Pope kissing a baby versus a picture of a politician kissing a
baby.  These pictures are the same in some ways, and very different in

other ways.More typically, image searches are performed by looking for text thatis associated with images.  A search engine will search for an image link

tag within the HTML and the sentences that surround the image on either
sideÑan approach with clear limitations. For example, the words, ÒOh,look at the cute bunnies,Ó mean one thing on a children
Õs Web site andsomething entirely different on PlayboyÕs site.  Thus, the words alone
may not indicate what those images are about.C.3LOCATION VERIFICATION
Today, the Internet is designed and structured in such a way that thephysical location of a user has no significance for the functionality he or
she expects from the Internet or any resources to which he or she is con-
nected.  This fact raises the question of the extent to which an Internet

userÕs location can in fact be established through technical means alone.Every individual using the Internet at a given moment in time isassociated with what is known as an IP address, and that IP address is
usually associated with some fixed geographical location.  However, be-

cause IP addresses are allocated hierarchically by a number of different
administrative entities, knowing the geographical location of one of these
entities does not automatically provide information about the locations
associated with IP addresses that it allocates.  For example, the National

Academy of Sciences is based in Washington, D.C., and it allocates IP
addresses to computers tied to its network.  However, the Academy has
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.427APPENDIX Cemployees in California, and also computers that are tied to the Academynetwork.  The Academy knows which IP addresses are in California and

in Washington, D.C., but someone who knew only that an IP address was
one associated with the Academy would not know where that IP address
was located.5Under some circumstances, it can be virtually impossible to deter-mine the precise physical location of an Internet user.  Consider, for ex-

ample, the case of an individual connecting to the Internet through a dial-
up modem.  It is not an unreasonable assumption that the user is most

likely in the region in which calls to the dial-up number are local, simply
because it would be unnecessary for most people to incur long-distance
calling costs for such connections.  Furthermore, the exchange serving

dial-up modem access numbers can, in principle, employ caller-ID tech-
nology.  However, the exchange associated with the telephone from which

the dial-up call originates may not be technologically capable of provid-
ing caller-ID information; this would be the case in some areas in the
United States and in much of the world.  Or the user might simply sup-

press caller-ID information before making the dial-up modem call.  In

these instances, the number through which the individual connects to the
Internet does not necessarily say anything about his location at that time.Internet access routed through satellites can be difficult to localize aswell.  The reason is that a satellite
Õs transmission footprint can be quitelarge (hundreds of square miles?), and more importantly is moving quite
rapidly.  Localization (but only within the footprint) can be accomplished

only by working with a detailed knowledge of the orbital movements of
an entire constellation of satellites.However, those connecting to the Internet through a broadband con-nection can be localized much more effectively, though with some effort.
For example, while a cable Internet ISP may assign IP addresses to users
dynamically, any given address must be mappable to a specific cable
modem that can be identified with its media access control address.  While

such mapping is usually done for billing and customer care reasons, it
provides a ready guide to geographical addresses at the end userÕs level.Those who gain access through DSL connections can be located because
the virtual circuit from the digital subscriber line access multiplexer is5While location information is not provided automatically from the IP addresses an ad-ministrative entity allocates, under some circumstances, some location information can be
inferred.  For example, if the administrative entity is an ISP, and the ISP is, for example, a
French ISP, it is likelyÑthough not certainÑthat most of the subscribers to a French ISP arelocated in France.  Of course, a large French company using this ISP might well have branch

offices in London, so the geographical correspondence between French ISP and FrenchInternet user will not be valid for this case, though as a rule of thumb, it may not be a badworking assumption.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.428YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETmapped to a specific twisted pair of copper wires going into an indi-vidualÕs residence.  Also, wireless connections made through cell phones
(and their data-oriented equivalents) are now subject to a regulation that
requires the network client to provide location information for E-911 (en-
hanced emergency 911) reasons.  This information is passed through the

signaling network and would be available to a wireless ISP as well.In principle, the information needed to ascertain the location of any IPaddress is known collectively by a number of administrative entities, and
could be aggregated automatically.  But there is no protocol in place to

pass this information to relevant parties, and thus such aggregation is not
done today.  The result is that in practice, recovering location information

is a complex and time-consuming process.To bypass these difficulties, technical proposals have been made forlocation-based authentication.6  However, the implementation of such
proposals generally requires the installation of additional hardware at the
location of each access point, and thus cannot be regarded as a general-
purpose solution that can localize all (or even a large fraction of) Internet
users.The bottom line is that determining the physical location of mostInternet users is a challenging task today, though this task will become
easier as broadband connections become more common.C.4USER INTERFACES
The history of information technology suggests that increasingly real-istic and human-like forms of human-computer interaction will develop.
The immediately obvious trends in the near-term future call for greater
fidelity and ÒrealismÓ in presentation.  For example, faster graphics pro-
cessors will enable more realistic portrayals of moving images, which
soon will approach the quality of broadcast television.  Larger screens in

which the displayed image subtends a larger angle in the eye will increase
the sense of being immersed in or surrounded by the image portrayed.
Goggles with built-in displays do the same, but also offer the opportunity
for three-dimensional images to be seen by the user.  Virtual reality

displays carry this a step further, in that the view seen by the user is
adjusted for changes in perspective (e.g., as one turns oneÕs head, theview changes).6See, for example, Dorothy E. Denning and Peter F. MacDoran, 1996,Ó Location-Based
Authentication: Grounding Cyberspace for Better Security,Ó in Computer Fraud and Security,Elsevier Science Ltd., February.  A commercial enterprise now sells authentication systems
that draw heavily on the technology described in this paper.  See <http://www.
cyberlocator.com/works.html>.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.429APPENDIX CSpeech and audio input/output are growing more common. Today,computers can provide output in the form of sound or speech that is
either a reproduction of human speech or speech that is computer-synthe-
sized.  The latter kind of speech is not particularly realistic today but is

expected to become more realistic with more research and over time.
Speech recognition is still in its infancy as a useful tool for practical appli-
cations, even after many years of research, but it, too, is expected to
improve in quality (e.g., the ability to recognize larger vocabularies, a
broader range of voices, a lower error rate) over time.Another dimension of user interface is touch and feel.  The 
ÒjoystickÓoften used in some computer-based video games provides the user with a
kinesthetic channel for input.  Some joysticks also feature a force feedback

that, for example, increases the resistance felt by the user when the stick is
moved farther to one side or another.  Such 
ÒhapticÓ interfaces can also
Ñin principleÑbe built into gloves and suits that could apply pressure invarying amounts to different parts of the body in contact with them.Finally, gesture recognition is an active field of research.  Humans
often specify things by pointing with their hands.  Computer-based efforts

to recognize gestures can rely on visual processing in which a humanÕsgestures are viewed optically through cameras connected to the com-
puter, and the motions analyzed.  A second approach is based on what is
known as a dataglove, which can sense finger and wrist motion and trans-
mit information on these motions to a computer.7Product vendors of these technologies promise a user experience ofextraordinarily high fidelity.  For example, it is easy to see how these

technologies could be used to enhance perceived awareness of othersÑone might be alone at home, but through oneÕs goggles and headphones,hear and see others sharing the same ÒvirtualÓ space.  (In one of the
simplest cases, one might just see others with goggles and headphones as
well, but the digital retouching technologies that allow images to be modi-
fied might allow a more natural (though perhaps less realistic) depiction.)7See, for example, <http://www.ireality.com/Wireless_announce.html> for a 1997 prod-uct announcement by the General Reality Company.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.430D.1BACKGROUND
The committee conducted site visits in a number of places, includingAustin, Texas (April 3-4, 2001), Greenville, South Carolna (April 17-18,
2001), San Diego, California (May 2-3, 2001), Blacksburg, Virginia (May 8-
9, 2001), Coral Gables, Florida (May 31, 2001), and various towns in Con-
necticut (Redding, Shelton, Bristol, Kent, and Hamden in the period June
1-2, 2001).  During these site visits, members of the committee spoke with

students in junior and senior high school, as well as school teachers, ad-
ministrators, librarians, and technologists.  In addition, the committee

spoke with public librarians (branch managers, childrenÕs librarians, ref-
erence librarians) and technical managers from library systems.  When

possible, the committee also visited after-school programs and other ven-
ues in which young people had Internet access, and spoke with both
children and responsible adults.  Finally, the committee held a number of

open sessions in which parents and other interested parties could talk to
the committee.D.2RECURRING THEMES
Though the individuals to whom the committee spoke cannot be takenas being drawn from a representative population, a number of themes did
occur repeatedly during the various site visits.¥Pornography was a concern of many students and school person-
DSite Visit Synthesis
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.431APPENDIX Dnel, but only one of many.  Teachers were more concerned about inaccu-
rate and misleading information on the Internet, and with keeping stu-
dents in school Òon task.Ó  Both students and responsible adults were
quite concerned about violence (especially Òhow-toÓ sites) and hate.
¥Meeting people face-to-face that one had encountered first onlinein a chat room or through instant messaging was a standard practice.
While only a small a number of students acknowledged having done so,
all thought it was an unremarkable, commonplace occurrence.  In gen-

eral, they recognized in an abstract manner the dangers of doing so, but
thought that they could tell if they were dealing with an untrustworthy
individualÑand said that they would never provide personal informa-tion to an individual they regarded as untrustworthy.¥High school students expressed a number of common sentiments,including the following:ÑThey often needed for research purposes information on Web sitesthat were blocked by the school filter (Òimproper blockingÓ).ÑThey rarely or never complained to teachers about such blockingbecause they could get information anyway through home access.ÑMany of the sites improperly blocked by the school were neededfor senior high school purposes, but may have been appropriately blocked
at the junior high school and elementary school levels.ÑThey had been exposed to Internet pornography, especially throughspam mail, but had no interest in receiving such mail and deleted it as fast
as they could get it.ÑThey were not particularly affected by Internet pornography be-cause the entire media environment in which they live is highly sexual-
ized.  However, a number of students noted that what was upsetting

about pornography was not so much the material itself as the likelihood
that their parents would Òfreak out.ÓÑThey were frustrated by losing control of their computers, men-tioning especially spam mail and mousetrapping.¥Most of the schools that the committee visited had installed filters,and many libraries had done so as well.  However, when asked what

benefit filters offered their schools and libraries, teachers and librarians
invariably pointed to the political and management benefitsÑnot a singleteacher or librarian said that his or her students or patrons were better off
with filters in place.  The primary political benefit of filters was that they

eliminated parental complaints, while the primary management benefit
was that they eliminated the need for teachers and students to constantly
monitor student and patron usage.In schools, acceptable use policies (AUPs) were also common.  How-
ever, students received little or no instruction in how to comply withYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.432YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETthem.  Students signed AUPs (sometimes with parental signatures re-
quired as well), but they noted that the AUPs were just one more form to
be filled out at the beginning of the year, and they were not given much
attention, were often not even read carefully, and generally were not
internalized in any meaningful way.  In practice, AUPs seemed to be a

tool with which a school could discipline a student for some behavior that
was not explicitly forbidden but that nevertheless was inconsistent with
school policy.In no school were media literacy and Internet safety part of the formalcurriculum.  Librarians did note that they spent some time teaching stu-

dents how to evaluate sources and credibility, but they were unable to
spend more than a class period on this subject in the course of a year.¥Most libraries with filters noted that the filters solved problemscaused by adults accessing pornography on the Internet on public access
terminals and making a nuisance of themselves.  Furthermore, they made

staff more comfortable, because staff were no longer forced to confront
patrons about violations of posted AUPs.  Librarians were also concerned

with staff having to make value judgments about what is and is not por-
nography, particularly when it comes to deciding what a customer can
print and receive; they donÕt want to be ÒpolicemenÓ in the library; they
believe the library should be used for educational purposes; and, they
donÕt want to formally monitor what people are doing online.¥Both parents and students commented on the gap in knowledgebetween them.  For example, many students reported that they can change

their parentsÕ parental preferences (on AOL) for themselves and have
access to their parentsÕ accounts, or that their parents don
Õt know whatprivileges are associated with their screen names.  In general, those stu-

dents with home access have the most expertise, and hence the most
knowledge about how to circumvent adults, know what is available on
the net, and know where to find what they should not see.  Parents ac-

knowledged the knowledge gap as well, pointing out that they were un-
comfortable working in an area in which they could not presume superior
knowledge and experience and thus did not know how to properly in-
struct their children in this area.  Moreover, many did not know much

about the nature of the issues their children face on the Internet (appar-
ently because of the significant differences between using the Internet as a
social medium (the experience of their kids) and using it as a business
medium (their own experience).In general, the parents to whom the committee spoke understood theresponsibility they had as parents to provide supervision.  However, they

were also aware to some extent that providing supervision does not nec-Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.433APPENDIX Dessarily mean that a child will absorb the lessons that such supervision isintended to impart.  They understood the time-intensive nature of appro-

priate supervision and knew that they (and especially other parents) were
unable or unwilling to provide supervision; nevertheless, they generally
expressed considerable hesitation to involve the government in this prob-
lem (a view that was expressed by both liberal and conservative parents).Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.434EBiographiesE.1COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Dick Thornburgh, chair, served as governor of Pennsylvania, attor-ney general of the United States, and undersecretary-general of the United

Nations during a public career that spanned more than 25 years.  He is

currently counsel to the national law firm of Kirkpatrick & Lockhart LLP,
resident in its Washington, D.C., office.  Elected governor of Pennsylvania

in 1978 and reelected in 1982, Thornburgh was the first Republican ever to
serve two successive terms in that office and was named by his fellow
governors as one of the nationÕs most effective big-state governors in a
1986 Newsweek poll.  After his unanimous confirmation by the U.S. Senate,
Thornburgh served 3 years as attorney general of the United States (1988-
1991) under Presidents Reagan and Bush.  Thornburgh took vigorous

action against racial, religious, and ethnic hate crimes, and his office

mounted a renewed effort to enforce the nationÕs antitrust and environ-
mental laws.  During his tenure as attorney general, Thornburgh twice

personally argued and won cases before the U.S. Supreme Court.  All

told, Thornburgh served in the Justice Department under five presidents,
beginning as a United States Attorney in Pittsburgh (1969-1975) and As-
sistant Attorney General in charge of the Criminal Division (1975-1977),
emphasizing efforts against major drug traffickers, organized crime, and
corrupt public officials.  Thornburgh was educated at Yale University,

where he obtained an engineering degree, and at the University of Pitts-
burgh School of Law, where he served as an editor of the Law Review.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.435APPENDIX EThornburgh served as director of the Institute of Politics at HarvardÕsJohn F. Kennedy School of Government (1987-1988) and was a visiting
lecturer at the George Washington University Law School (1995).  Thorn-
burgh is a member of the board of directors of Elan Corporation, plc and
serves on the boards of the Urban Institute, the National Museum of
Industrial History, the DeWitt Wallace Fund for Colonial Williamsburg,
and the National Academy of Public Administration.  He is chairman of

the State Science and Technology Institute and vice-chairman of the World
Committee on Disability.  He also chairs the Legal Policy Advisory Board

of the Washington Legal Foundation.  He is a member of the American

Bar Foundation, the American Judicature Society, and the Council on For-
eign Relations.Nicholas J. Belkin is a professor at the Rutgers University School ofLibrary and Information Science.  His research involves the development
of theory, design principles, and systems that will lead to effective and
humane information support for human problem management.  Such a

program entails understanding people
Õs problem situations, and how theyattempt to resolve them, in a variety of contexts; the nature and functions
of information support communication; and information representation,
retrieval, and presentation appropriate to such contexts.  These factors

lead to specific research goals, which currently include characterization
and classification of human information-related problems; description
and an analysis of human-human information interaction and design of
human-computer information interaction; and classification of human

information-seeking strategies and interactions with texts.The Reverend William J. Byron, S.J. teaches ÒSocial Responsibilitiesof BusinessÓ in the McDonough School of Business at Georgetown Uni-
versity, where he holds an appointment as Distinguished Professor of the
Practice of Ethics and serves as rector of the Georgetown Jesuit commu-
nity.  From 1982 to 1992, he was president of the Catholic University of

America.  Prior assignments include service as president of the University

of Scranton (1975 to 1982), dean of arts and sciences at Loyola University
of New Orleans (1973 to 1975), and various teaching positions in his field
of economics and social ethics.  Father Byron is the author of several

books, including Quadrangle Considerations
 (Loyola, 1989; winner of the
Catholic Press AssociationÕs 1990 Best Book Award in Education), andAnswers from Within: Spiritual Guidelines for Managing Setbacks in Work and
Life (Macmillan, 1998); he also edited 
The Causes of World Hunger (Paulist,
1982) and Take Courage: Psalms of Support and Encouragement
 (Sheed &
Ward, 1995).  He is a trustee of CareFirst Blue Cross Blue Shield, Loyola

College in Maryland, and the University of San Francisco; he was a found-Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.436YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETing director and past chairman of Bread for the World, a public memberof the board of commissioners of the Joint Commission for the Accredita-
tion of Healthcare Organizations, and an original member of the board of
directors of the Federal Commission on National and Community Service
(now the Council of Independent CollegesÕ Academic Leadership Award).
Father Byron grew up in Philadelphia, where he attended St. JosephÕsPreparatory School.  After service in the Army
Õs 508th Parachute InfantryRegiment in 1945 to 1946, he attended Saint JosephÕs University in Phila-delphia for 3 years before entering the Jesuit order in 1950.  He was

ordained a priest in 1961.Sandra L. Calvert is director of the Children and Media Project atGeorgetown University.  She received her Ph.D. in developmental and

child psychology from the University of Kansas in 1982.  Dr. Calvert is a

professor of psychology, an associate member of the linguistics depart-
ment, and a core member of the communication, culture, and technology
program at Georgetown University.  Her research involves how informa-

tion technologies, such as television and computers, influence childrenÕsattention, memory, and comprehension.  She is particularly interested in

how the forms of media (i.e., features such as action, sound effects, and
language) interface with how children think (e.g., visually or verbally) at
different points in their development.  Her recently published book
,ChildrenÕs Journeys Through the Information Age (McGraw Hill, 1999), pro-
vides a critical synthesis of the research on childrenÕs social and cognitivedevelopment in relation to information technologies.David Forsyth is associate professor of computer science at the Uni-versity of California, Berkeley.  He is a renowned researcher in the area of

object recognition; several of his papers describe systems for identifying
humans and their activities in single images.  He holds a B.Sc. and M.Sc.

in electrical engineering from the University of the Witwatersrand,
Johannesburg, and a D.Phil. from Balliol College, Oxford.  He has pub-

lished more than 60 papers in computer vision and computer graphics.
He is currently co-authoring Computer VisionÑA Modern Approach, agraduate textbook in computer vision; some 20 chapters are currently
available on the Web.  He has served as a referee for all the main profes-

sional journals in the area, and he is currently program co-chair for the
IEEE Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition conference and a member
of the program committee for the European Conference on Computer
Vision.Daniel Geer is chief technologist officer for @Stake Inc., a privatelyheld confidential e-commerce consulting firm.  Dr. Geer previously served
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.437APPENDIX Eas vice president and senior strategist for CertCo, as director of engineer-ing at Open Market Inc., and as chief scientist, vice president of technol-
ogy, and managing director for OpenVision Technologies.  He has served

as a technical director within Digital Equipment CorporationÕs researchdivision and was for a number of years the manager of systems develop-
ment for MITÕs Project Athena, where he was the responsible manager forall technical development, including the X Window System, Kerberos,
and others.  He holds a B.S. in electrical engineering and computer science

from MIT and a Sc.D. in biostatistics from Harvard University.Linda Hodge of Colchester, Connecticut, is National PTA president-elect, 2000-2003.  Prior to becoming president-elect, Hodge was National

PTA Vice President for Programs, 1999-2001.  She is a former National

PTA Region 7 director, which included representing the states of Alaska,
Hawaii, Idaho, Montana, Oregon, Washington, and Wyoming.  She has

also chaired the National PTA Bylaws, Technology/Safety, and Mem-
bership Committees and is a former member of the Executive, Budget,
and Leadership Committees, and the IOD Cultural Arts Subcommittee.
Hodge is a past president of Hawaii State PTA.  Hodge is a National PTA

honorary life member as well as an honorary life member of  fourteen

state PTAs.  Included among her awards are the California PTA Honorary

Service Award, the California PTA Continuing Service Award, and the
Vallejo School District Award Recognizing Outstanding Parent Volun-
teers.  Outside of the PTA, Hodge serves on the board of directors of the

Flock Theatre, a regional theater group serving Connecticut, New York,
and Massachusetts.  Her volunteer activities have included serving on the

boards of local Girl Scouts, Boy Scouts, Little League, and youth center
organizations.  Hodge holds an A.S. degree in computer science and is

currently taking courses at Eastern Connecticut State University in busi-
ness administration.Marilyn Gell Mason has more than 25 years of management experi-ence with 20 years as a chief executive in complex and highly political
organizations.  She has served as director of two major urban library

systems (Cleveland Public Library and Atlanta Public Library) and of the
1979 White House Conference on Library and Information Services.  She

has a demonstrated track record of providing the leadership and manage-
ment expertise needed to bring about institutional innovation and change
in short periods of time.  She serves on the board of trustees of the Council

on Library and Information Resources and the board of directors of Data
Research Associates Inc., and has served on numerous national and inter-
national advisory committees.  She has also directed research and man-

agement consulting projects and has published widely, most recently inYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.438YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETthe areas of strategic management and the integration of print and elec-tronic information.  She received her M.P.A. from Harvard University
ÕsKennedy School of Government in 1978.Milo Medin is senior vice president of engineering and chief technol-ogy officer of Excite@Home.  Mr. Medin oversees the development of

Excite@HomeÕs high-speed backbone. @HomeÕs performance-engineeredscalable network removes Internet Òtraffic jamsÓ and enables true end-to-
end management.  In addition, the network employs replication and cach-

ing technologies that dramatically improve network efficiency.  Prior to

joining Excite@Home, Medin served as project manager at NASA Ames
Research Center.  During his tenure, he directed the NASA National Re-

search and Education Network project that, in combination with partners
at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, deployed a high-speed
national ATM infrastructure connecting major supercomputing and data
archiving centers.  He also supervised the primary West Coast Internet

interconnect network.  In addition, he pioneered the global NASA Science

Internet project, providing network infrastructure for science at more than
200 sites in 16 countries and 5 continents, including Antarctica, and ini-
tially helped establish the TCP/IP protocol as an industry standard.  Be-

fore working at NASA, Medin held various positions at Science Applica-
tions Inc., programming supercomputers for defense program activities
at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and Los Alamos Na-
tional Laboratory, under contract to the Defense Nuclear Agency.  Medin

has a B.S. in computer science from the University of California, Berkeley.John B. Rabun was a founder and has been the vice president andchief operating officer of the National Center for Missing and Exploited
Children since April 1984.  He administers the national clearinghouse, a

nonprofit organization in Alexandria, Virginia, with five branches
throughout the United States, a staff of 154, and an annual budget of $38.5
million, two-thirds of which comes from Congress via the Department of
Justice.  Mr. Rabun received a B.A. from Mercer University in 1967, an

M.S.W. from the University of Louisville in 1971, and membership in the
Academy of Certified Social Workers in 1973.  From 1973 to 1984, he was

a sworn juvenile officer, founded and managed the Louisville-Jefferson
Co. Kentucky Exploited and Missing Child Unit as the first police/social
work special investigations team on child sexual exploitation.  Immedi-

ately before that, he was the executive director for the Kentucky affiliate
of the American Civil Liberties Union.  Mr. Rabun has provided consulta-

tion and technical assistance as a member of the international Expert
Network on Self-Regulation of Internet Content for child protection for
the Bertelsmann Foundation, Gutersloh, Germany, and INCORE (Internet
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.439APPENDIX EContent Rating for Europe), Munich, Germany, over the last 2 years.  Mr.Rabun has authored numerous publications and frequently makes guest
appearances on national TV and radio specials and news programs.Robin Raskin is a technology consultant with Ziff Davis Media spe-
cializing in consumer technologies.  She is regarded as one of the leading
authorities on todayÕs family and how they cope (or not) with technology.The former editor in chief and founder of FamilyPC magazine, Raskin hasbeen writing, lecturing, and consulting in the consumer technology arena
for the past 20 years.  Prior to launching 
FamilyPC, Raskin was the editor
of PC Magazine.  Her work as a freelance writer appeared in such maga-
zines as PC World, PC Week, InfoWorld, Working Mother, Working Woman,Child, and 
Newsday.  Raskin has authored six books about parenting in the
digital age and is a frequent guest on many of the morning news shows.
Raskin writes a syndicated column for USAToday.com and for the
Gannett News Services, which appears in more than 150 newspapers
around the country.  She is also the on-air host for a 
Òconnected familyÓTV broadcast that is distributed nationally, reaching 4 million to 6 million
viewers monthly.  Raskin resides in New York City and Hudson Valley

with her husband, three children, and a pile of ever-changing computer
equipment.Robert J. Schloss is research senior software engineer at IBMÕs Tho-mas J. Watson Research Center.   He holds an A.B. from Yale University in

Mathematics and Computer Science.  His work on digital endorsement,

annotation, and reputation data as strategies for on-the-fly information
quality assessment, on personalization strategies for Web content, and on
modular data interchange vocabularies began in the early 1990s. Mr.
Schloss was a major contributor to the World Wide Web ConsortiumÕsPICS (Platform for Internet Content Selection) recommendation (now

implemented in major browsers, proxies, and Web servers), including the
ability to filter using metadata provided by third-party rating/labeling
agencies instead of, or in conjunction with, the metadata provided by the
content owner. (PICS was one technology considered by the courts in
ruling that the Communications Decency Act section of the telecommuni-
cations reform bill was unnecessary.) Mr. Schloss co-chaired the W3CÕsfollow-on effort on metadata interchange frameworks, the Resource De-
scription Framework Data Model and Syntax (RDF), which became a

recommendation in 1999. His work includes content sharing strategies
across broadband, Web, and wireless systems. His work (with others) on
XML Schema Language is a base for the Data Description Language

adopted for the MPEG-7 standard for description of multimedia content.
He has been on the program committee of the WWW conferences, teachesYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.440YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETtutorials on metadata strategies at WebNet and XML conferences, and isan IEEE senior member and a member of Computer Professionals for
Social Responsibility and ACM.  Schloss resides in Westchester County,

New York, with his wife and teenage son.Janet Ward Schofield is a professor of psychology and a senior scien-tist at the Learning Research and Development Center at the University of
Pittsburgh.  She is a social psychologist whose research during the last 25

years has explored the impact of social and technological change in edu-
cational settings.  This work has led to the publication of over 50 papers

and three books, the most recent of which is Bringing the Internet to School:Lessons from an Urban District (Jossey-Bass, New York, 2002).  Professor
Schofield received a B.A. from Harvard University, where she was elected
to Phi Beta Kappa, in 1968.  She received her M.A. and Ph.D. degrees in

social psychology from Harvard University as well.  She currently serves
as a member of the Board on International Comparative Studies in Edu-
cation of the National Research Council.  She recently also served as a

member of the governing body of the American Psychological Associa-
tion, the Council of Representatives.Geoffrey R. Stone is University of Chicago Provost and Harry Kalven,Jr. Distinguished Service Professor of Law.  Professor Stone received his

undergraduate degree in 1968 from the Wharton School of Finance and
Commerce of the University of Pennsylvania.  He then attended the Uni-

versity of Chicago Law School, where he served as editor-in-chief of the
Law Review, was awarded his degree cum laude, and was elected to
membership in the Order of the Coif.  Following graduation in 1971, Mr.

Stone served as law clerk to Judge J. Skelly Wright of the U.S. Court of
Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit.  He spent the next year as

law clerk to Justice William J. Brennan, Jr. of the Supreme Court of the
United States.  Mr. Stone was admitted to the New York Bar in 1972 and

has been a member of the faculty since 1973.  From 1987 to 1993, Mr. Stone

served as dean of the Law School.  Mr. Stone has served on the board

of governors of the Chicago Council of Lawyers, on the board of directors
of the American Civil Liberties Union, Illinois Division, as a fellow of
the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, an ex-officio member of the
American Law Institute, a member of the Executive Committee of the
Association of American Law Schools, a member of the Board of Advisers
of the National Association of Public Interest LawÑThe Public ServiceChallenge, a member of the Advisory Board of the Legal Aid Society, and
a member of the Advisory Board of the Chicago Volunteer Legal Services
Foundation.  Mr. Stone has taught courses in constitutional law, civil

procedure, evidence, criminal procedure, contracts, and regulation of theYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.441APPENDIX Ecompetitive process.  Mr. Stone has written a casebook with Mr. Sunstein
in the area of constitutional law.  He has also written numerous articles

concerning such matters as the freedom of speech and press, freedom of
religion, the constitutionality of police use of secret agents and infor-
mants, the privilege against self-incrimination, the Supreme Court, and
the FBI. Mr. Stone is the editor, with David Strauss and Dennis Hutch-
inson, of the Supreme Court Review.Winifred B. Wechsler has been operating Internet businesses tar-geted to children and families since 1995.  Most recently, she was execu-

tive vice president and general manager of Internet and broadband ser-
vices for Lightspan Inc., an educational software and Internet services
company.  Prior to that, she was with the Walt Disney Company for 14

years, where she held various management positions.  In 1995, she was

one of the founders of Disney Online and was responsible for the launch
and growth of Disney.com, which is currently the most visited destina-
tion for children and families on the Web.  She was also senior vice presi-

dent of Buena Vista Internet Group (now Walt Disney Internet Group),
where she set strategic direction, both internationally and domestically,
for all of DisneyÕs Internet properties.  Throughout, she has been con-
cerned with the ways that commercial enterprises can create responsible
methods for advertising and marketing to children on the Web.  Prior to

working in the Internet industry, she was a senior executive with the
Disney Channel for 10 years.  She holds an M.B.A. from the Wharton

School of the University of Pennsylvania and a B.A. from Wellesley Col-
lege.E.2PROJECT STAFF
Herbert S. Lin is senior scientist and senior staff officer at the Com-puter Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council
of the National Academies, where he has been the study director for
major projects on public policy and information technology.  These stud-

ies include a 1996 study on national cryptography policy (CryptographyÕsRole in Securing the Information Society), a 1991 study on the future ofcomputer science (Computing the Future), a 1999 study of Defense Depart-ment systems for command, control, communications, computing, and
intelligence (Realizing the Potential of C4I: Fundamental Challenges), and a2000 study on workforce issues in high-technology (Building a Workforcefor the Information Economy).  Prior to his NRC service, he was a profes-
sional staff member and staff scientist for the House Armed Services Com-
mittee (1986 to 1990), where his portfolio included defense policy and
arms control issues.  He also has significant expertise in math and science
Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.442YOUTH, PORNOGRAPHY, AND THE INTERNETeducation.  He received his Ph.D. in physics from MIT in 1979.
Avocationally, he is a long-time folk and swing dancer, and a poor magi-
cian.  Apart from his CSTB work, a list of publications in cognitive sci-

ence, science education, biophysics, and arms control and defense policy
is available on request.Gail Pritchard was a program officer at the Computer Science andTelecommunications Board, where she contributed research and adminis-
trative skills to help produce such reports as Cryptography
Õs Role in Secur-ing the Information Society, Being Fluent with Information Technology, andBuilding a Workforce for the Information Economy.  Within the Center for
Education, Ms. Pritchard has contributed to the reports Developing a Digi-tal National Library for Science, Mathematics, and Engineering Education and
Transforming Undergraduate Education in Science, Mathematics, and Engi-
neering Education.  She also served as study director of two committees
charged with reviewing drafts of the most recent K-12 mathematics and
technology standards, and is currently a program officer with the Com-
mittee on Undergraduate Science Education and the Committee on Sci-
ence Education K-12.  Prior to joining the NRC, Ms. Pritchard was a

program specialist in the offices of the Secretary and the University and
Science Education Programs at the U.S. Department of Energy.  Ms.

Pritchard received a B.A. in liberal arts from St. JohnÕs College and anM.Ed. from the University of Virginia.Joah G. Iannotta is a Ph.D. candidate at the University of Minnesotaand a research assistant for the Board on Children, Youth, and Families of
the Institute of Medicine and the National Research Council of the Na-
tional Academies.  Since joining the board, Ms. Iannotta has been in-

volved in the development of a wide range of projects on topics including
adolescent risk and vulnerability, childrenÕs development and computertechnology, and the social and economic benefits and losses of family
leave.  She edited a report entitled
 Nontechnical Strategies to Reduce
ChildrenÕs Exposure to Inappropriate Material on the Internet and is a co-
editor of Adolescent Risk and Vulnerability: Approaches to Setting Priorities to
Reduce Their Burden, published by the National Academy Press.  Prior to
her position on the board, Ms. Iannotta was a research fellow at the Uni-
versity of MinnesotaÕs Tucker Center for Research on Girls and Women inSport. In addition to conducting analyses of the social and cultural impact
of sport on issues of equity, Ms. Iannotta coordinated the Tucker CenterÕsÒImage Is EverythingÓ program.  This educational workshop introduced
high school female athletes to a critique of the mediaÕs often highly sexu-alized portrayal of female athletes and encouraged them to develop their
own action plans for addressing issues of equity in sports within theirYouth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.443APPENDIX Eschools and communities.  Ms. Iannotta is finishing her doctoral work at
the University of Minnesota in the Department of Kinesiology with a
concentration in sport sociology and a minor in feminist studies.  Her

dissertation work uses qualitative research methodologies to uncover
strategies collegiate coaches use to address issues of equity (e.g., racism,
sexism, and homophobia) within womenÕs athletics in order to createtolerant and cohesive climates on their teams in which all athletes can
thrive and develop.Janice M. Sabuda joined the Computer Science and Telecommunica-tions Board in August 2001.  Currently, she is focusing on two projects,

Privacy in the Information Age, and Tools and Strategies for Protecting
Kids from Pornography on the Internet and Their Applicability to Other
Inappropriate Content.  She began her term with work on the Global

Networks and Local Values project (2001).  Prior to joining the National

Academies, Ms. Sabuda worked as a customer service representative at
eContributor.com, an online fundraising company, and as a product
trainer and research associate at a Fairfax, Virginia, prospect research
firm.  She received her B.S. in business administration from the State

University of New York College at Fredonia.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.445IndexAAcceptable use policies, 222-223, 235-240,282-283, 378Access control, 69, 110, 194. See also Filters/
filteringAdult online entertainment industryfuture products and services, 68-70, 81-82mousetrapping, 74, 75, 78-79, 80, 109,212-213possible safe harbors for, 107, 208-209,342practices, 71 n.1, 74-79, 382-383
regulation, 79-81size and structure, 72-73, 79subscriber retention, 72-73, 76-77
targeting children, 78-79, 80, 82-83, 104-105verification services, 63-65, 78-79, 102,206-209, 340-349, 360Advertising of sexually explicit material,38, 74-76, 96, 109-110, 129, 133 n.39,
136. See also SpamAge verification, 62-65, 78-79, 102, 206-209,216, 328-329, 339-349, 360AltaVista, 273Ambiguities in language as related tofiltering, 54-55, 138-140, 278, 420-421,
422American Family Online, 167-168American Civil Liberties Union, 104American Family Association, 168
American Social Health Association, 126,173Anonymizers, 66, 67, 164
AOL parental controls, 162, 272, 275, 276,284Authentication technologies, 59, 62-64, 346
Automated policy preference negotiation,346-347BBag-of-words model for matchingdocuments, 422Bandwidth, 37, 73Beaver College, 278 n.15
Best practices for homes, schools, libraries,374-386Biometric signatures, 62, 64-65
Black lists of inappropriate material, 52, 54Blocking inappropriate material, 51-61, 100,103-104, 162, 194, 273-274, 279-280Bulletin boards, 130, 272, 284CChain letters, 109-110Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.446INDEXChat rooms and online conversations, 40,44, 45, 119, 130, 138, 141-142, 162 n.4,170-171, 173, 272, 276, 284Child pornography, 66, 71 n.1, 93-94, 97-99,113, 129, 132, 137, 205, 213, 214-215,424Childrenage/developmental considerations, 116-118, 155, 157-158, 193, 206, 229-230,
290-291, 342, 358-359First Amendment protections, 89-92Internet usage, 117, 119-120, 128, 136-142, 163media usage, 115-120monitoring online activities, 103 n.42,268-269, 272, 284, 286, 291, 304-317parental knowledge of, 118, 120, 164-165rights, 92-93sexual information from media, 123-127special-needs populations, 159
targeting of advertising for sexuallyexplicit material, 78-79, 80, 82-83,104-105technological sophistication, 49, 162-163, 165venues for Internet access, 36-38, 127-128, 280, 360Content providers for adult Web sites, 78,381-382Coping strategies for exposure toinappropriate material orexperiences, 135, 195Counters for Web traffic, 77Credit cards as age verification technology,63, 64, 73, 74, 78, 110, 138, 271, 341,
342, 343, 345, 349Crimes Against Children Research Center,132, 134, 135, 138, 140-142Cultivation theory, 148Cybersex, 129, 170-171CyberTipline, 214-215DDepartment of Education, 103Deterrence as a form of protection, 195Dial-a-porn services, 110
Digital convergence, 45Disclosure of personal information, 104n.46Domain names, 38-39, 54-55, 74, 109, 139-140.kids top-level, 328-329, 335-339
.xxx top-level, 327-334, 354EE-mail, 40, 42, 74, 108-109, 119, 138, 142,272, 274, 276, 281, 286E-rate program, 103Education strategies. See Social and
education strategiesEncryption, 65, 67Executable dialer programs, 108Exposure to inappropriate material andexperiencesage/developmental considerations, 135,157-158deliberate, 137, 138, 139, 141-142, 160,195-196, 268-269, 275, 341, 342dimensions of, 159-160, 357-358
empirical research, 149-157extent of, 132-135First Amendment protections, 89-92
gender and, 117-118, 141, 158-159impacts of sexually explicit materials,133, 135, 143-180, 362-364inadvertent, 133, 135, 137, 138-141, 160,268-269, 275, 341on Internet, 133, 136-142
parental challenges, 161-165passive vs. interactive, 25, 139, 328-329routes to, 40, 128-142, 281
theoretical perspectives, 117, 143-149types of materials and experiences, 128-129, 136-137, 159warnings, 194, 300, 340, 341FFBI Sex Offender Database, 114
Federal Communications Commission, 103,110-112Federal Trade Commission, 80, 106, 107-110File sharing (peer-to-peer), 40, 42, 129, 131,132, 271, 274, 281.  See also Peer-to-peer networks.Filters/filteringclient-side, 271, 302Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.447INDEXcombinations of methods, 52, 58, 300content-limited ISPs, 37, 52, 131, 268-269, 270-272, 277, 280-281, 282, 284,
286-288, 293, 301, 302defeating/circumventing, 280-281, 282defined, 271
by domain names and IP addresses, 54-55, 279effectiveness, 51, 53, 56, 58, 60-61, 275-286, 303-304flexibility and usability, 289-292functions, 267-275
future prospects, 298-301identifying sites to be blocked, 51-59,286-289information retrieval technologies and,54, 55-56, 58, 274, 298-299, 420labeling of content, 56-58, 59, 209, 268-269, 282, 288-289, 295-298liability issues, 100at libraries, 271, 273, 274-275, 280, 282-284, 379placement of, 56, 59, 103-104,270-273at schools, 273, 274, 280, 282-284, 285search engine, 56, 59, 271, 273selective degradation of service,299-300server-side, 59, 272-273, 281 n.21,302statutes, 103-104technologies, 51-59, 267-304trade-offs in, 58-59, 268-269, 292-298,301-304V-chip, 57, 61, 110, 111, 196, 197Financial transaction mechanisms, 63, 68-69, 73, 74, 78First Amendment issues, 84-96, 98, 100,102-103, 293, 359Flying Crocodile Inc. (FCI), 72 n.3, 77Flynt Digital Media, 81GGetNetWise, 228, 267, 270Gnutella, 281Good Samaritan provisions ofCommunications Decency Act, 100Google, 273Grunwald Associates, 120HHaptic (touch-sensitive) content, 81-82
Harassment, 66, 129, 137, 142, 162 n.4, 164,166Hate speech and overt racism, 22-23, 53Holmes, Oliver Wendell, 85IInappropriate material and experienceschild as decision maker, 193, 194-195,218-221community standards, 192-193
differing views of, 175, 192identification of, 51-59, 183-188types of, 22-25, 83, 137, 290Indexing services (for adult Web sites), 77Information processing theory, 148Information retrieval (and filtering)image analysis, 55-56, 58, 274, 298-299,423-424location verification, 66-68, 426-428
search engines, 39, 41, 56, 74, 108, 342,422, 424-426technologies, 49-51, 418-424
textual analysis, 54, 55, 58, 274, 418-422user interfaces, 428-429INHOPE Hotlines, 215
Instant help, 268-269, 322-326Instant messaging, 40, 44-45, 130-131, 140,141-142, 272, 274 n.6, 276, 286Institute of Museum and Library Sciences,103Intel Corporation, 61
Intellectual property protection tools, 328-329, 349-353Internetaccess devices, 35-36, 381anonymity, 33, 35, 66applications running on, 45-46
benefits, 32, 294child predation, 24, 113, 141-142, 166and communication, 33
comparison to other media types, 32-35,124-125connectivity, 31-32, 36-38
deliberate exposure, 137, 138, 139, 141-142, 195-196, 268-269, 275, 341, 342digital information characteristics, 31-32
economic issues, 35, 47, 72, 73, 361-362Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.448INDEXfunctionality, 39-47inadvertent exposure, 133, 135, 137, 138-141, 268-269, 275, 341interactivity, 33, 34international nature of, 33, 47-48, 112location verification, 66-68, 426-428
nature, 32-35passive vs. interactive exposure, 25peer-to-peer networks, 40, 42, 69, 131,132, 271, 274 n.6publishing, 35, 67, 102safety education, 222-223, 230, 233, 240,242-245, 301, 375, 379searching, 39, 41, 49-51telephony, 45Internet Content Rating Association, 296,297Internet Explorer, 59, 282
Internet service providersbest practices, 380-381content-limited, 37, 59, 131, 268-269,270, 277, 280-281, 284, 301, 302liability, 100terms of service and self-regulation, 36-38, 127, 215-216IP addresses, 38-39, 54-55, 67, 139, 279IP-based virtual hosting, 54-55, 279KKaiser Family Foundation, 118-119, 120,135, 197, 284Kids Passport, 347 n.13LLabeling of content, 56-58, 187, 209, 268-269, 282, 297Law enforcement, training, and education,107-109, 112-113, 201-205Legal and regulatory issues. See FirstAmendment issues; Regulatory
efforts; Statutes and common lawLibraries and librarians, 37, 94-95, 100, 103-104, 127-128, 140, 191-192, 193, 271,
273, 274-275, 280, 346, 378-380Live Entertainment Group, 81Location verification, 66-68, 426-428
Login names, 272Lycos, 273MMedia Access Control (MAC) address, 61
Meeting Internet contacts face-to-face.  Seechild predationMonitoringand development of self-discipline, 308-309, 313and punishment, 308, 311and trust, 312defined, 305
privacy implications, 312-314techniques of, 305-306Mousetrapping, 74, 75, 78-79, 80, 108, 212-213Movies, 57-58, 81, 121, 133 n.39NNational Center for Missing and ExploitedChildren, 114, 214-215National Crime Information Center, 114National Law EnforcementTelecommunications Center, 114National Telecommunications andInformation Administration, 119-120Netscape, 59, 282Network interface card, 61Network Solutions Inc., 109
Nielsen/Net Ratings, 78OObscene for minorsdefinition, 107, 113-114, 137, 294, 359
labeling, 209prohibitions against spam andmousetrapping, 209-213Obscenitycivil liability for, 205community standards, 66, 97, 98, 99,107, 136 n.42, 137, 184, 203-204, 206-207, 359federal statutes, 96-97
First Amendment issues, 87-89, 96-97,98, 137prosecution for, 112-113, 201-205, 216-217
record keeping on performers, 99, 213Offensive material, 137Overblocking, 58-59, 275, 277, 278-279, 284Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.449INDEXPPage-jacking, 108Parental consent, 105-107, 347 n.13Parental controls, 162, 272, 275, 276, 284,345Parental responsibility and involvement,110, 123, 161-165, 184, 222-223, 225-
233, 271, 374-378, 379Pay-per-call industry, 67, 110Peer assistance, 222-223, 233-234
Peer-to-peer networks, 40, 42, 69, 131, 132,271, 274 n.6, 281.  See also
 File
sharingPeripheral devices, 46-47Personal digital assistants, 81Personal information, 104-107, 129
Pew Internet and American Life Project, 24,120Plain brown wrappers, 208-209, 216, 342
Planned Parenthood, 126Platform for Internet Content Selection(PICS), 57, 282Playboy, 81, 125Pornography and sexually explicitmaterial. See also Child pornography
and community standards, 97, 98, 99,102-103definitions, 20-22, 86-87, 97, 101-102, 110,112, 133 n.39, 167-168, 176, 357-358differing views and perspectives, 25-28,94, 166-172, 176, 289and encryption, 65hard-core vs. soft-core, 25-26, 424identifying, 51-59
impacts of viewing, 143-160, 166-172obscene for minors, 107, 137, 209-213,359and obscenity, 66, 86-89, 96-97, 98, 99,107, 136 n.42, 137, 201-205, 359as proxy in political debate, 172-180,282-283, 373-374range, 21-22, 71, 128-129, 136, 160sources, 136-142Privacy, 66, 93, 104-107, 268-269, 344Protection. See also Regulatory efforts;
Social and education strategies;
Statutes and common law;Technology-based toolsapproaches, 196-200, 218-221, 364-368
dimensions, 188-190First Amendment and, 89-92identification of inappropriate material,51-59, 183-188institutional mission and, 191-192politics of inappropriate material, 25-28,192-194, 202-203techniques, 194-196, 206-209time line of actions, 190-191trade-offs in, 368-374Proxy servers, 281 n.21Psychoanalytic theory, 117, 146Public policy, 202-203, 373-374, 383-386
Public records, 63-64, 342, 344, 345Public terminals, 36, 37, 127-128Publius, 67RRegulatory efforts, 80, 107-112Research needs, 386-387Restore AmericaÕs Moral Pride, 168SSafe harbors for adult industry, 107, 208-209, 342School environments, 37, 95-96, 100, 103-104, 124, 140, 162, 191-192, 273, 274,280, 285, 378-380Screen names, 272
Search engines, 39, 41, 56, 74, 108, 138, 141,208, 271, 342, 422, 424-426.  See alsoAltaVista, Google, YahooSelf-regulation of Internet content, 37-38,81, 215-216Sex education, 122, 123-127, 162, 172-173
Sexual assaults, 141Sexual orientation issues, 173-174Sexual solicitation, 132-135, 137, 141-142
Sexuality in culture and media, 22-24, 120-122, 123-124, 126-127, 157, 161Smart cards, 62, 346
Social and education strategies, 110, 195.See also Parental involvement
acceptable use policies, 222-223, 235-240, 282-283, 378after-the-fact, 240-242collateral issues, 249-250
compelling and safe content, 222-223,250-254Youth, Pornography, and the InternetCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.450INDEXcontextual issues, 357-358, 222-225definition, 221-223findings and observations about, 256-257information and media literacy, 222-223, 245-249Internet safety education, 222-223, 242-245, 301, 375, 379peer assistance, 222-223, 233-234
public service announcements andmedia campaigns, 222-223, 254-256responsible decision making, 193, 194-195, 218-221trade-offs in, 370-371Social learning theory, 117, 147, 151, 153
Software vendors, 381Spam, 74, 109-110, 130, 140, 209-212, 268-269, 317-322Stalking, 66Statutes and common lawChild Online Protection Act, 101-103,206, 207, 209-210, 345child pornography, 97-99, 112, 205ChildrenÕs Internet Protection Act, 103-104, 112, 284ChildrenÕs Online Privacy ProtectionAct, 104-107Child Pornography Prevention Act of1996, 97-98, 204, 205Child Protection and ObscenityEnforcement Act of 1988, 99Child Protection Restoration andPenalties Enhancement Act of 1990,
99Communications Decency Act, 90-91,99-100, 101, 102, 206Federal Trade Commission Act, 107Sex Crimes Against ChildrenPrevention Act, 97 n.27state, 107Telecommunications Act of 1996, 99,103 n.41Streaming media, video, and audio, 45, 62n.24, 81Supervised learning, 421
Surgeon GeneralÕs report on sexual health,126Surveillance.  See MonitoringSwimming pool analogy for protectingchildren, 224TTechnology-based tools, 258-260. See alsoFilters/filtering, Monitoring, andChapters 12 and 13 more generallycontextual issues, 261-265for non-end users, 327-353questions to be asked about, 265-266
trade-offs in, 371-373for users, 267-326Text classification or categorization, 55,420-421Third-party billing processors, 77Thornburgh, Dick (chair), personalstatement, xv-xviiiTime limits for Internet use, 195UUnderblocking, 58-59, 276-277, 284Unfair and deceptive trade practices, 81,107-110University of Pennsylvania Center for theStudy of Youth Policy, 141Usenet newsgroups, 40, 42-43, 100, 129,130, 131-132, 271, 276User interfaces, 428-429User profiles, 130VV-chip, 57, 61, 110, 111, 196, 197Video games, 36, 57-58, 119Videoconferencing, 45, 274 n.6Violent speech and imagery, 23, 121-122,149-153Virtual reality, 69, 98Voice interaction, 69WWhite lists for appropriate content, 52, 272,273World Wide Web, 39, 40, 45-46, 72-73, 101-103Consortium on Metadata, 57YYahoo, 273Youth Internet Safety Survey, 134