DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/10355Information Technology Research, Innovation, andE-Government168 pages | 6 x 9 | HARDBACKISBN 978-0-309-38352-3 | DOI 10.17226/10355Committee on Computing and Communications Research to Enable Better Use ofInformation Technology in Government, National Research CouncilInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee on Computing and Communications Research toEnable Better Use of Information Technology in GovernmentComputer Science and Telecommunications BoardDivision on Engineering and Physical SciencesNational Research CouncilNATIONAL ACADEMY PRESSWashington, D.C.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESS   2101 Constitution Avenue, N.W. Washington DC 20418
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Gov-erning Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn fromthe councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engi-
neering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsiblefor the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard forappropriate balance.Support for this project was provided by the National Science Foundation underGrant No. EIA-9809120 and by the National Aeronautics and Space Administra-
tion. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in thispublication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of thesponsors.Cover:  Photo courtesy of the U.S. Department of Agriculture Photo Library.
International Standard Book Number 0-309-08401-6Library of Congress Control Number: 2002105188
Additional copies of this report are available from:National Academy Press2101 Constitution Ave., N.W.Box 285
Washington, DC 20418800-624-6242202-334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area)
http://www.nap.eduCopyright 2002 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of AmericaInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating soci-
ety of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedi-cated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general
welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863,the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government onscientific and technical matters. Dr. Bruce M. Alberts is president of the National
Academy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter
of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstandingengineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its mem-bers, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advis-
ing the federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also sponsorsengineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages educationand research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Wm. A.
Wulf is president of the National Academy of Engineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions inthe examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. TheInstitute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences
by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, uponits own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education.Dr. Kenneth I. Shine is president of the Institute of Medicine.The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sci-
ences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with
the AcademyÕs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal gov-ernment. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the Acad-
emy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the National
Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in providingservices to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering commu-nities. The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of
Medicine. Dr. Bruce M. Alberts and Dr. Wm. A. Wulf are chairman and vicechairman, respectively, of the National Research Council.National Academy of SciencesNational Academy of Engineering
Institute of Medicine
National Research Council
Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMITTEE ON COMPUTING AND COMMUNICATIONSRESEARCH TO ENABLE BETTER USE OF INFORMATIONTECHNOLOGY IN GOVERNMENTWILLIAM L. SCHERLIS, Carnegie Mellon University, ChairW. BRUCE CROFT, University of Massachusetts at Amherst
DAVID DeWITT, University of Wisconsin at Madison
SUSAN DUMAIS, Microsoft Research
WILLIAM EDDY, Carnegie Mellon University
EVE GRUNTFEST, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
DAVID KEHRLEIN, GovernorÕs Office of Emergency Services, State ofCaliforniaSALLIE KELLER-McNULTY, Los Alamos National Laboratory
MICHAEL R. NELSON, IBM Corporation
CLIFFORD NEUMAN, Information Sciences Institute, University ofSouthern CaliforniaStaffJON EISENBERG, Senior Program Officer and Study DirectorMARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL, Director, CSTB
JANE GRIFFITH, Acting Director, CSTB (January 1998 throughJanuary 1999)DAVID PADGHAM, Research Associate
JANET BRISCOE, Administrative OfficerivInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARDDAVID D. CLARK, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, ChairDAVID BORTH, Motorola Labs
JAMES CHIDDIX, AOL Time Warner
JOHN M. CIOFFI, Stanford University
ELAINE COHEN, University of Utah
W. BRUCE CROFT, University of Massachusetts at Amherst
THOMAS E. DARCIE, AT&T Labs Research
JOSEPH FARRELL, University of California at Berkeley
JEFFREY M. JAFFE, Bell Laboratories, Lucent Technologies
ANNA KARLIN, University of Washington
BUTLER W. LAMPSON, Microsoft Corporation
EDWARD D. LAZOWSKA, University of Washington
DAVID LIDDLE, U.S. Venture Partners
TOM M. MITCHELL, Carnegie Mellon University
DONALD NORMAN, Nielsen Norman Group
DAVID A. PATTERSON, University of California at Berkeley
HENRY (HANK) PERRITT, Chicago-Kent College of Law
BURTON SMITH, Cray Inc.
TERRY SMITH, University of California at Santa Barbara
LEE SPROULL, New York University
JEANNETTE M. WING, Carnegie Mellon UniversityMARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL, DirectorHERBERT S. LIN, Senior Scientist
ALAN S. INOUYE, Senior Program Officer
JON EISENBERG, Senior Program Officer
LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Program Officer
CYNTHIA PATTERSON, Program Officer
STEVEN WOO, Program Officer
JANET BRISCOE, Administrative Officer
DAVID PADGHAM, Research Associate
MARGARET HUYNH, Senior Project Assistant
DAVID DRAKE, Senior Project Assistant
JANICE SABUDA, Senior Project Assistant
JENNIFER BISHOP, Senior Project Assistant
BRANDYE WILLIAMS, Staff AssistantvInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Preface
The emergence of the Internet and other electronic-commerce tech-nologies has fundamentally altered the environment in which govern-
ment delivers services to citizens, businesses, and other government enti-
ties. New expectationsÑthat government will match the private sector inoffering direct, rapid, round-the-clock access to information and ser-
vicesÑare cultivating the growth of Òe-governmentÓ: the application ofinformation technology (IT) and associated changes in agency practices to
develop more responsive, efficient, and accountable government opera-
tions while fostering a more informed and engaged citizenry.The role of government with respect to IT research, development, anduse has also been shifting. The private sector has eclipsed government
leadership in many areas of IT adoption and use, even as government
continues in its critical role as the principal agent for long-term IT basic
research and innovation. Much like their counterparts in the private sec-
tor, many in government are actively experimenting with exploiting the
new technologies to improve operations and the delivery of services. A
wide range of ideas is emerging from these experiments, contributing to
technology development, the improvement of business practices, a more
streamlined government, and a more sophisticated public.  Following

September 11, 2001, a new mission, homeland defense, is placing new
demands on IT capabilities and is heightening interest in such related
areas as critical infrastructure protection.viiInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiiPREFACEAs part of its Digital Government research program, the NationalScience Foundation (NSF) requested that the Computer Science and Tele-
communications Board (CSTB) undertake a study of how IT research
could contribute more effectively to the activities and operations of gov-
ernment. CSTB established the Committee on Computing and Communi-
cations Research to Enable Better Use of Information Technology in Gov-
ernment to explore promising research opportunities and to identify ways
to foster the exchange of ideas among computing and communications
researchers and federal managers, including mechanisms for technology
transition from the laboratory to government agencies and ultimately to
operational government systems.The first phase of the committeeÕs work focused on two illustrativeapplication areasÑcrisis management and federal statistics.  In each case,
the study committee convened a workshop to facilitate interaction be-
tween stakeholders from the individual domains and researchers in com-
puting and communications systems and to explore research topics that
might be of relevance throughout the government. The initial workshop
in the series, held in December 1998, convened IT researchers and crisis
management professionals from all levels of government and the private
sector.  The second workshop, held in February 1999, explored how IT

research could contribute to more effective collection, processing, and
dissemination of federal statistical data.  This second workshop was con-

ducted in cooperation with the National Research CouncilÕs Committeeon National Statistics (CNSTAT).The second phase of the study, culminating in the preparation of thisreport, combined what was learned in the two workshops with the results
of previous CSTB reports and other efforts to examine IT research and e-
government.1  To supplement what was learned in the workshops, the
committee held two other meetings that included data-gathering sessions.

Staff and individual committee members augmented the information ob-
tained from these meetings by interviewing government officials work-
ing on e-government initiatives.  In July 2001, the committee issued a

letter report to the National Science Foundation laying out the rationale1This information included three workshop reports commissioned by the National Sci-ence FoundationÕs Digital Government program:  Sharon Dawes, Peter Bloniarz, Kristine L.Kelly, and Patricia D. Fletcher, 1999, Some Assembly Required: Building a Digital Governmentfor the 21st Century, Center for Technology in Government, State University of New York atAlbany, March; Herbert Schorr and Salvatore J. Stolfo, 1997, Towards the Digital Governmentof the 21st Century (a report from the Workshop on Research and Development Opportuni-
ties in Federal Information Services), June 24; and National Center for SupercomputingApplications (NCSA), University of Illinois,  1999, 
Toward Improved Geographic InformationServices Within a Digital Government, NCSA, Urbana-Champaign, Ill., June.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACEixfor involving computer science researchers in e-government work (seeAppendix B in this report).  In completing the second phase of the study,

the committee was mindful of the increased emphasis in 2002 on critical
infrastructure protection (both within and outside government) as well as
a variety of initiatives to harness or develop IT capabilities for homeland
defense and counterterrorism.While a number of other reports have addressed the significant chal-lenges in better deploying todayÕs technologies in government, thiscommitteeÕs final report distinguishes itself by focusing primarily on therelationships between IT research and government IT applications.  Its

recommendations are intended to foster connections between IT research
and e-government innovation and to help catalyze the involvement of IT
researchers in defining and realizing e-government programs.  The

committeeÕs findings and recommendations are presented in the ÒSum-mary and RecommendationsÓ chapter of this report; subsequent chapters
provide supporting material.The committee appreciates the encouragement and support of LarryBrandt and Valerie Gregg of the National Science Foundation. They pro-
vided vision and a wealth of information, and they gracefully accommo-
dated a long schedule.The committee thanks Karen Sollins for her contributions to the earlystages of the work, prior to her accepting an assignment at the National
Science Foundation.  She contributed valuable ideas, energy, and organi-

zational skill.The committee also thanks the participants in the two major work-shops, as well as the many individuals who responded to its requests for
briefings and discussions.  The committee expresses its appreciation to

Andrew A. White, director of the National Research CouncilÕs Committeeon National Statistics, which cosponsored the second workshop convened
for this project, for his support and assistance.The committee also acknowledges the effective support provided bythe Computer Science and Telecommunications Board and staff.  In par-

ticular, the committee appreciates the valuable suggestions offered by
Board members during the review process.  The study was supported by

several CSTB staff members, in capacities ranging from organizing com-
mittee meetings and the major workshops to assisting in researching and
editing of the several reports.  In particular, the committee thanks Jane

Griffith, for getting the project off to an excellent start and making many
substantive contributions to the effort, and Marjory Blumenthal for guid-
ance and encouragement.  David Padgham provided significant research

support to this project.  Finally, the committee thanks study director JonInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xPREFACEEisenberg for his perseverance and professionalism in seeing the projectthrough to completion.  He provided careful facilitation of the process,

and he made fundamental intellectual contributions to the product.William L. Scherlis, ChairCommittee on Computing and Communications Research toEnable Better Use of Information Technology in GovernmentInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Acknowledgment of ReviewersThis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen fortheir diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with pro-
cedures approved by the National Research CouncilÕs Report ReviewCommittee.  The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid

and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its pub-
lished report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets
institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to
the study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript remain
confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. We wish
to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:Renny DiPentima, SRA International,Kenneth L. Kraemer, University of California at Irvine,
Bruce W. McConnell, McConnell International,
John Ousterhout, Interwoven Inc., and
Robert Sproull, Sun Microsystems Laboratories.Although the reviewers listed above provided many constructivecomments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclu-
sions or recommendations, nor did they see the final draft of the report
before its release.  The review of this report was overseen by Sam Fuller,

Analog Devices Inc.  Appointed by the National Research Council, he was

responsible for making certain that an independent examination of this
report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and
that all review comments were carefully considered.  Responsibility for

the final content of this report rests entirely with the authoring committee
and the institution.xiInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ContentsSUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS1
1VISION FOR IT-ENABLED ENHANCEMENT OF
GOVERNMENT21

Elements of the Vision, 29Satisfying Expectations for Customer Service, 30
Increasing the Efficiency and Effectiveness of GovernmentOperations, 33Providing Effective Access to Information, 33
Providing Access to a Full Range of Transactions Online, 34
Increasing Participation in Government, 35
Meeting Expectations for Trustworthiness, 35
Meeting Special Challenges in Government-Unique Areas, 36Technical and Process Challenges to Advancing E-GovernmentPrograms, 36Why Now?, 38Technology Foundations for E-Government in Place, 38
Growing Awareness and Demand, 40
E-Government Policy Initiatives, 41Government IT Research for Electronic Government, 43xiiiInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xivCONTENTS2SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS IN E-GOVERNMENT:
WHY GOVERNMENT LEADS IN DEMAND FOR CERTAIN
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES45

Ubiquity, 45Access for Everyone, 46
Access Everywhere, Anytime, 48Trustworthiness, 48
Access and Confidentiality, 52
Structural Constraints, 53
IT in Support of Government Functions, 54Crisis Management and Homeland Defense, 54
Federal Statistics, 55
Military Applications, 58
Archiving, 583TECHNOLOGY LEVERS61
The Role of Research in Meeting IT Needs, 61
Some E-Government Research Areas, 64Information Management, 65
Human-Computer Interface, 70
Network Infrastructure, 73
Information Systems Security, 75
E-Commerce and Related Infrastructure Services, 79
Models and Simulation for Decision Making, 81
Software Technologies, 82
Large-Scale Systems, 84
Middleware, 85
Organizational and Social Issues, 864TECHNOLOGY TRANSITION AND PROGRAM
MANAGEMENT: BRIDGING THE GAP BETWEEN
RESEARCH AND IMPACT88

Strategies and Models for Program Management, 94
Leverage in the Supply Chain Model, 97
Will Industry Do It?, 100
Dimensions of Risk, 103Evaluation Risk, 105
Solution-Concept Risk, 107
Problem-Concept Risk, 108
Integration and Adoption Risk, 109
MooreÕs Law Risk, 112Reliability and Usability Risks, 113
Planning Risks, 114Summary, 115Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSxvAPPENDIXESAE-Government Scenarios119
BJuly 2001 Letter Report to the National Science Foundation125

CWorkshops Convened for This Project: Agendas and
Participants138
Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Summary and RecommendationsIn response to a request from the National Science Foundation (NSF)for advice on planning for e-government innovation programs, the Com-
puter Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB) convened the Com-
mittee on Computing and Communications Research to Enable Better
Use of Information Technology in Government.  The committee was

charged with examining how information technology (IT) research can
improve existing government services, operations, and interactions with
citizensÑas well as create new ones. The first phase of the committeeÕs
study featured workshops examining two illustrative application areasÑ
crisis management and federal statisticsÑand concluded with the publi-
cation of two summary reports in 1999 and 2000.1  The second phase of
the project synthesized the results of the two workshops, information
gleaned from other published work on IT research and e-government,
and material obtained in the course of two data-gathering meetings and
supplemental individual interviews. Preliminary results of the second
phase were described in a letter report to the National Science Foundation1Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council(NRC). 1999. Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis Manage-ment. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.; and CSTB, NRC. 2000. Summary of aWorkshop on Information Technology Research for Federal Statistics. National Academy Press,Washington, D.C.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTin 2001 (see Appendix B).  In this 
ÒSummary and RecommendationsÓchapter, the committee presents the final results of its study and offers
recommendations intended to foster increased and more effective col-
laboration between IT researchers and government agencies.  Chapters 1

through 4 provide supporting discussion and analysis.Government has done much to leverage IT to deploy e-governmentservices, but much work remains before the vision of e-government can
be fully realized (see Finding 1.1, below), whether through adoption of
already-existing commercial technologies and practices (Finding 2.1) or
through targeted research efforts directed at helping government and its
suppliers address challenging new requirements (Finding 2.2).  This re-

port identifies research challenges related to e-government and looks at
these challenges in the wider context of government IT practice and the
transition of innovative information technologies from the laboratory to
operational systems.The conceptualization, design, development, testing, delivery, andsupport of operational government IT systems for agency end users in-
volve an extensive Òsupply chainÓ that includes system integrators, verti-
cal suppliers, major vendors, smaller technology companies, consultants,
architects, and researchers.  Government end users and IT researchers

are, in some sense, at opposite ends of this supply chain and so may seem
to be unlikely allies. But both in fact have a natural shared interest in
innovation and in meeting future needs (Findings 3.1 and 3.2).  Indeed, by

working together, they can conceptualize new technology opportunitiesÑand with lower overall risk than if they had been working independently
of each other.  In collaborative efforts, researchers can gain understanding

of the real problems that users face, and so can reduce the risks associated
with the process of selecting research problems to address.  Working in a
government setting also provides researchers with access to artifactsÑcomputer systems, software, and data setsÑto support experimentationand study.  Government end users gain understanding of emerging tech-

nologies and of the feasibility of implementing new operational concepts.
In addition, there is mutual reinforcement of the dual roles of government
as a farsighted customer working with its suppliers to ensure that future
mission needs can be met and as an investor in long-term research with
broad socioeconomic impact (Findings 3.1 and 3.3).The establishment of ties between IT researchers and governmentagencies does not mean, however, that researchers and end users should
somehow short-circuit the supply chain in developing new systems, or
that the government will incur risks of early adoption as a result of enter-
ing into this kind of collaboration.  The consequence, rather, is 
less risk for
the governmentÑbecause it is better informed in doing its job of definingrequirements for its interactions throughout its supply chain.  Indeed,
Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS3success in this overall model requires care and thought regarding technol-ogy transition at all stages of the supply chain (Findings 2.3 and 4.2).THE OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES OF E-GOVERNMENTFinding 1.1.Early efforts have demonstrated the potential of e-gov-
ernment, though much work remains before that potential can be
fully realized.  Achieving that potential will require addressing a

broad set of interrelated issues regarding organization, policy, tech-
nology development and transition, systems architecture, and en-
gineering practice.  In addressing these issues, the government will

benefit from collaboration with the computer science research com-
munity.The emergence of the Internet and other technologies for electroniccommerce has led naturally to the development of Òdigital governmentÓor Òe-governmentÓ services
Ñthe application of information technology,combined with changes in agency practices, to develop more responsive,
efficient, and accountable government operations.  During the 1990s, fed-

eral legislative and executive branch initiatives and state and local gov-
ernment efforts added impetus, fostering experimentation and new pro-
grams.  Early government Web sites were the pioneering creations of

enterprising individuals and groups. Today government agency and or-
ganization Web sites get attention from the highest levels of government
and the most senior officials.  Underscoring the importance of govern-

ment IT capability, in 2002 the federal government appointed a chief tech-
nology officer, whose mission includes coordination of efforts in e-gov-
ernment.  E-government
Ñwhich has diverse constituencies that includecitizens and other individuals; businesses; nonprofit organizations; and
the many federal, state, and local agenciesÑis envisioned as providingsome of the following key benefits:¥More accessible government information;¥Faster, smoother transactions with government agencies;¥Enhanced ubiquity of access to information and transactions;¥Greater effectiveness in meeting the needs of specific groups ofusers;¥Increased participation in government by all people, fostering amore informed and engaged citizenry;¥Greater ability to meet expectations for advances in government-unique areas, including challenges in the newly emerging homeland se-
curity mission; and¥More efficient internal government operations.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTIdeas from early experiments in e-government have contributed bothto technology development and to the improvement of government prac-
tices.  A tremendous amount of experience already exists in creating and

deploying e-government capabilities.  This experience resides in state and

local government as well as in a broad span of federal agencies.  Increas-

ingly, the best practices emerging from this experience are being adopted
by many government agencies.From the citizenÕs perspective, among the most visible enhancementshave been new means for the public to access government information,
the development of task-oriented cross-agency portals (such as seniors.
gov and students.gov), and the recently launched governmentwide portal
firstgov.gov.  Other visible illustrations include computer-based tax filing

and inquiry-response services that are provided by multiple agencies,
each accessed through a task-oriented Web portal.The benefits to business have also been considerable, includingbroader access to government data, more rapid and efficient interaction
with regulatory agencies (such as electronic filing of diverse required
reports and comments on proposed regulations), and streamlined acqui-
sition and procurement processes.  In addition, administrative burdens

associated with initiating and managing small and start-up businesses are
being reduced through online resources.Much work remains if government is to fully realize the ambition ofbroadening e-government services from information access to transaction
supportÑservices that enable citizens, businesses, and other governmententities to submit information to, engage in financial transactions with, or
otherwise interact with government organizations.  Much also remains to

be done in enhancing systems used for information management and
collaboration among government officials and agencies.  In these realms,

issues such as confidentiality, data integrity, information management,
and usability can present significant obstacles.  These issues mix technol-
ogy and policy, and they can be difficult to address without appropriate
collaboration between the technology and policy communities.Also apparentÑfrom briefings and workshops organized by this com-
mittee and in news accounts from across the countryÑare difficultiesexperienced by government agencies seeking to deploy new capabilities.
The committee identified a number of challenges to the governmentÕseffective exploitation of IT.  These challenges, which encompass a mix of

research and implementation issues, include the following:¥Ensuring the interoperation and integration of diverse systemsused by different departments and agencies with multiple stakeholders
and a significant legacy base;¥Adapting organizational structures so as to maximize their effec-Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS5tiveness in concert with IT-based innovation, which tends to be harder ingovernment than in the private sector;¥Improving trustworthiness, including guarantees of information-systems security as well as assurances regarding user privacy and system
availability;¥Bridging significant gaps between current practices and best-avail-able practices; and¥Meeting specific technology needs related to government missions.Recommendation 1.1.Government should continue to improve its
support for transactions with individuals, businesses, and organi-
zations.  In doing so, it should emulate, where possible, the com-

mercial trend toward integration of services to improve usability
for customers. This means, for example, that government should
continue the transition from program- or agency-centered service
offerings to user-centered services, which can imply aggregating
services from multiple government agencies and potentially from
private-sector third parties.A number of major government online services display a mature real-ization of information-access technology.  Future steps are likely to be

much more technically challenging.  For example, functionality will ex-

pand from emphasizing information access to providing comprehensive
support for the multitude of transactions between government and users
(citizens, businesses, and other organizations), which significantly lags
information access today.  Correspondingly, modalities will expand be-

yond peopleÕs interacting with Web browsers to include routine onlineaccess to government information and services through common pro-
gramming interfaces and access through devices other than desktop com-
puters.   As these services evolve, governments will have to figure out

how best to leverage IT as part of overall customer service strategies.  Part

of the process has been adopting a customer service perspective on inter-
actions with citizens, businesses, and othersÑa trend that began evenbefore the widespread use of the Internet.To better meet customer needs and serve particular customer groups,such as small businesses or students, businesses are participating in the
rapid coevolution of e-business technology and commercial processes.
Today, improvement in customer focus is often accomplished by reorga-
nizing corporate structure to aggregate information and transaction ser-
vices in ways that better serve specific market segments.  Although the

process can be organizationally difficult and technically challenging, busi-
ness organizations have often been able to reorganize internally to match
the procedural flows appropriate to the new ÒportalÓ technologies
Ñforexample, by restructuring to bypass intermediaries in relationships. Gov-Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTernment has been taking some initial steps in this direction as well, asevidenced by multiple government-information portals (firstgov.gov,
fedstats.gov, seniors.gov, and others) that aggregate information from
individual agency Web sites and early efforts to aggregate transaction
services from multiple agencies.  In deciding whether to provide inte-

grated capabilities, an organization must weigh the potential benefits

against the technical challenges.  Integration is hard and the results tend

to be fragile (a change in one of the systems being integrated may cause
cascading effects).As alluded to above, one complication special to the government set-ting is that integration is fraught with legal and structural challenges.
Legal constraints can significantly inhibit rapid, wholesale structural
changes in government structures (at both inter- and intraagency levels).
For example, legal and regulatory barriers to sharing information have
been established to protect citizen privacy.  At the same time, the stove-

piped appropriations processÑin which agencies compete for resourcesand appropriations that are determined by separate congressional com-
mitteesÑmakes cross-agency collaboration to build more integrated sys-tems very difficult.  Explicit authorization and resources to undertake

cross-agency efforts is an important element of a solution.  Also, as noted
above, governments differ from businesses in their inherently compre-
hensive scope.  Finally, the desired span of aggregation can include state

and local governments as well as federal agencies.One option for building integrated user-oriented services is the use ofintermediary software that draws on data from multiple sources to for-
mulate a set of smaller queries that can be separately dispatched to data-
bases operated by different government entities. For example, an aug-
mentation to fedstats.gov could be devised to support an increasing range
of aggregate queries that combine statistical data held by individual agen-
cies.Intermediaries might be operated commercially as well as by govern-ment.  Indeed, a competitive market of commercial services that conduct

transactions with multiple separate agencies could result in improved
access to government services, suggesting that government should ex-
plore this opportunity.  For example, a commercial service might interact
with government transaction services to undertake all of the actions re-
quired to register a new small business.  An interesting challenge with

respect to commercial services is how to provide the expected level of
confidentiality and integrity of information, especially as the point of
aggregation shifts from government to third parties.   Meeting this chal-

lenge will require codevelopment of both policy and technical safeguards.
For example, some of the data that government collects from individualsInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS7is subject to legislative or regulatory safeguards designed to keep anyonebut the individual from combining the information.At present, much of the thinking about e-government focuses on whatcan be delivered with todayÕs technology; this is reflected in the foregoingfinding and recommendation.  But it is also essential that, in looking

ahead, planners contemplate how both technology and user expectations
will evolve. This is another element of the rationale for direct collabora-
tion and interaction between technology innovators and end users.GOVERNMENT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY PRACTICEThe delivery of new digital government services depends on access toadvanced information technology, the right management strategies and
processes within organizations adopting the new technology, and effec-
tive, ongoing evaluation of new service concepts and goals.Technologies and PracticesFinding 2.1.Many aspects of e-government development can and
should follow the marketplace in selecting technology and associ-
ated practices.Recommendation 2.1.Government should adopt commercial e-
commerce technologies and associated practices wherever possible.Government can make considerable progress toward the e-govern-ment vision even without new research results.  Businesses (and govern-

ment) have made significant strides as they have made use of rapidly
maturing Internet-based information technologies and responded to the
corresponding growth in user expectations.  Because the technologies and

processes that underlie digital services in government are in most re-
spects similar to those used in e-business, government obviously benefits
when it can exploit off-the-shelf components, infrastructure, systems, and
successful practices already used in the private sector.  In many cases,

government can and should follow the example of business with respect
to service concepts, technical standards, infrastructural components, and
interface design.  Recognition of this point is reflected in more than a

decade of movement toward increasing use of commercial off-the-shelf
technology for government applications.  (Of course, for some specific

applications and systems, there may be no off-the-shelf option.)When government systems exploit widely used standards and tech-nologies, government can Òride the curvesÓ of performance growth and
enhancement that are characteristic of the broader IT marketplace.  Pro-
Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTgram managers must balance these benefits in cost and capability withthe added uncertainty that they can experience in the management of
systems whose evolution is less under their control compared to that of
systems custom-built for specific purposes.Finding 2.2.Although government should maximize the use of
commercial technology as it builds e-government capabilities, gov-
ernment requirements sometimes differ from those found in the
commercial world.  With respect to requirements for such capabili-
ties as ubiquity (and others listed below), government is a Òdemand
leader.Ó  Targeted research in computer science, coupled with effec-

tive technology transition strategies, can contribute significantly to
the development of such capabilities.Although it can generally build on the technologies and servicesemerging in the e-business marketplace, government leads demand in
several areas.  Research in these areas can help government agencies

better accomplish their missions and alsoÑwith the right research-man-agement strategiesÑstimulate commercial interest and development.Successful stimulation of the commercial marketplace could enable gov-
ernment to move more rapidly away from acquisition of expensive cus-
tom systems, whose full life-cycle costs government must bear, to the use
of less costly off-the-shelf commercial capabilities.  As the result of such

investments in the past, government now can make use, for example, of
commercial operating systems with enhanced security (e.g., better pro-
cess separation), multimedia databases, and packet-switched networking
equipment. In the experience of mission agencies such as the U.S. Depart-
ment of Defense (DOD), National Aeronautics and Space Administration
(NASA), and U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), this strategy has been
effective not only in areas where government leads demand, but also in
areas where aggressive requirements for innovation are shared by gov-
ernment and the commercial sector.Important areas of leading demand (discussed in more detail in themain text of this report) include these:¥  Ubiquity.  Governments must provide services to all citizensÑtheycannot, in general, opt to serve only the easiest-to-reach customers or
participate only in particular market segments. Nor can citizens choose
which government they will deal with.  The breadth of service provided

by government must encompass a wide range of individualsÕ physical,
cognitive, and language abilities as well as their education, income, and
geographic location.  Near-universal communications access is provided

today primarily through telephone and postal mail interactions, but e-
mail, the World Wide Web, public information kiosks, and other IT-basedInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS9approaches are providing new opportunities to expand the range andaccessibility of services.  Research in areas such as human-computer in-

teraction, information retrieval, language translation, and speech recogni-
tion and synthesis can help increase the ubiquity of such services. Achiev-
ing usability and accessibility requires that systems be evaluated in
realistic settings, and government applications may provide a range of
contexts in which researchers can frame their efforts.¥  Trustworthiness.
  Citizens expect government to provide assurances
of securityÑincluding confidentiality (protection of personal and busi-ness information), integrity of information and systems, and availability
of information and systemsÑthat are generally stronger than those ex-pected of the private sector.  But what is expected or desired may be

beyond what technology and practice can actually offer.  Conventional

business practice incorporates risk management, in which the costs of
implementing security measures are balanced against the consequences
of not having them, and these calculations sometimes show that certain
levels of exposure can be tolerated for certain applications.  (Credit card

fraud is an example.)  Government agencies, however, are expected to

adhere to a higher standardÑno improper disclosure of personal infor-mation contained in statistical data, tax filings, social security records,
and the likeÑeven though government is also charged with releasingcertain kinds of information, which may be derived from sensitive per-
sonal or corporate information that it collects, and making it uniformly
available to all.Trust in public systems is essential for citizensÕ compliance with gov-
ernment mandates (e.g., paying taxes, completing census forms); equally
critical is trust in the safety and reliability of systems on which peopleÕslives may depend. In military applications, requirements for trustworthi-
ness have led to efforts to promote Òhigh-assuranceÓ technologies for
critical systems; similar requirements apply to IT in the transportation
and health arenas, in which government is often in partnership with the
private sector.  In the wake of the September 11, 2001, attacks, there is

increased attention to protection of critical infrastructure, including both
government and private sector infrastructure.  Addressing issues related

to trustworthiness involves intermingled considerations of policy, orga-
nizational behavior and culture, and technology.  Computer science re-

search can contribute tools and approaches for facilitating dissemination
of information without compromising confidentiality, as well as for de-
signing and developing systems that provide appropriate, comparatively
high overall levels of trustworthiness (as is the intent of the federal inter-
agency High Confidence Software and Systems research program).¥  Information heterogeneity and semantic interoperability.
  Like other
large entities, governments confront significant organizational and tech-Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTnical challenges when they seek to use information drawn from multiplesources.  Integration is especially difficult in ad hoc situations
Ñsuch aswhen federal, state, and local agencies must establish an Òinstant bureau-cracyÓ to respond to a crisis and support recovery efforts.  But integration
is difficult in preplanned situations as wellÑsuch as when agencies seekto serve customers through aggregation of services (see next bulleted
item) or to share information in order to comply with legislative or ad-
ministrative directives (e.g., mandates to exchange state welfare data or to
monitor visa status and U.S. border crossings).  Because agency informa-

tion systems are generally ÒstovepipedÓÑthat is, they employ differentand often incompatible conventions for data format and semanticsÑsuchinformation sharing and data fusion can be difficult.  (On the other hand,
there can be privacy risks when fusion can be easily accomplished, as is
discussed in Chapter 2, in the subsection ÒAccess and Confidentiality.Ó)Organizational barriers, including a frequent reluctance to share informa-
tion across agency boundaries, further complicate matters.  Technological

responses include efforts to employ prevailing commercial standards, de-
velop common standards, and develop improved capabilities to translate
information across systems.¥  Providing software interfaces to services.  
The provision of application-programming interfaces (APIs) or structured data representations (as in
use of the markup language XML) can enable third parties to engage
government services on behalf of clients.  The Internal Revenue Service

(IRS), for example, now allows commercial tax-preparation firms to file
returns electronically.  Health care researchers, as another example, are

actively creating XML representations in order to more readily exchange,
combine, and analyze clinical trial data.  More generally, appropriate

interfaces would also enable citizens and businesses to use software that
directly connects with government services.  A number of technical chal-

lenges exist, though, including protocol design, development of informa-
tion representations and metadata standards, security and authentica-
tion, and development of digital library systems.  Government has

historically provided data in electronic form, but often the design of the
formats makes it infeasible for all but a few specialized contractors to
exploit the data readily. Achieving ÒlightweightÓ protocols or standards
can be difficult, however, because of the often-large number of specific
cases that must be handledÑfor example, those relating to seeminglysimple data items such as names and addresses.¥  Building large-scale systems.
  Many problems associated with large-
scale systemsÑincluding delays, unexpected failures, and inflexibility incoping with changing needsÑexist in government at all levels.  Budget-
ary constraints also dictate the development of systems that can be sus-Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS11tained at low cost. Continued research activity, involving case studies ofparticular systems as well as methodology research on architecture, tech-
niques, and tools, is needed to address the difficult challenges, technical
and nontechnical, posed in realizing these systems.Finding 2.3. In building e-government systems and the supportingdigital infrastructure, government faces significant nontechnical
challenges in the way it acquires IT capabilities.Best practices in government acquisition already recognize the itera-tive nature of systems development, due to the simultaneous evolution of
technology capability, user requirements, and the environment in which
a system is used.  For example, the Information Technology Management

Reform Act of 1996 (the Clinger-Cohen Act) promotes iterative processes
in mainstream IT systems acquisition.  Contracts with system integrators

that were built around a traditional waterfall acquisition modelÑin whichone first defines the full set of requirements for a system and then builds
a system that complies with those specificationsÑare widely understoodto be inadequate except for systems whose requirements are well under-
stood at the outset, and for which there is a corresponding base of experi-
ence in design and operation.  A characteristic of iterative processes is

that life-cycle requirements and/or the engineering design space may not

be fully understood at the outset.  Iterative processes are also appropriate

when unexpected changes in the operating environment are likely.In electronic business, the frequency of iteration can be very rapid,with consequently high demand on capability for acquisition and engi-
neering management. This fast pace of e-business evolution is shaping
expectations for the delivery of government services, creating pressure
for an even more rapid pace of evolution in capability and scope.  This

places even greater demand on governmentÕs ability to manage its rela-tionships with its technology supply chain, including system integrators,
vertical suppliers, vendors, start-up technology companies, and research-
ers. For IT systems, a particular challenge is that there are rapid changes
both in underlying technologies and in the expectations of customers.
Users seek to avoid getting locked in to rapidly obsolescing technologies
and practicesÑwhich implies that nontechnical, market-based decisioncriteria can be significant.  Incentives that promote risk sharing between

vendors and the government in the development of innovative solutions
are also helpful.  Complicating the situation is the persistent challenge

faced by government in attracting, retaining, and rewarding program
managers who can effectively articulate and negotiate the governmentÕslong-term interests in contracts with system integrators and other ven-
dors.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTWHY E-GOVERNMENT RESEARCH?Sustaining the IT Technical Base and Addressing Government NeedsFinding 3.1.By leveraging its dual roles as a user of IT and a long-
term investor in IT research, government can increase its awareness
of the opportunities afforded by IT advances and influence the
development of IT that can help to meet its own needs.  This syn-

ergy can be stimulated by government through investment through-

out the technology supply chain and through the development of
relationships with all appropriate segments of the IT research, de-
velopment, and vendor communities.Like all major IT customers, government has an interest in the man-agement of its future, which includes maintaining both awareness and
influence throughout its IT supply chain.  This suggests that there is value

for government in developing relationships with diverse segments of the
IT research, development, vendor, consultant, and integrator communi-
ties.Government has an additional role, however, as a long-term, patientinvestor in IT research, particularly with respect to research results that
have broad value (Finding 3.4).  In this role, the government creates pub-
lic goods with broad and significant socioeconomic valueÑsuch as newalgorithms, conventions enabling interoperation, measurement methods,
shared testbeds, and the like.Finding 3.2.A cooperative alliance between researchers and agency
end users in defining requirements for new IT-based capabilities
has benefits for both groups.  Researchers gain a better understand-

ing of the real challenges and obstacles, along with access to data
and artifacts that can inform or validate design.  Agency users, es-

pecially those that lack in-house research capability, gain under-
standing of emerging and future technologies.  By collaborating

directly, the two groups can more rapidly converge on requirements
that meet real needs and that are technologically achievableÑandthat may not have been expected by either party in advance of the
collaboration.Interaction between researchers and end users on problems of mutualinterest has become increasingly important to progress in many areas of
IT.  Working on government IT problems in particular offers researchers

a number of potential benefitsÑan important one being access both tosubject-matter experts and to associated artifacts that are needed in com-
puter science research.  A government setting gives researchers access to
Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS13applications with a richness and texture typically lacking in the labora-tory, and it may also provide a less constrained environment as it is less
subject to proprietary considerations that are often associated with work
in the private sector.  The National Science Foundation
Õs Digital Govern-ment program, which funds collaborative research between computer
science researchers and government agencies, has begun to demonstrate
the potential of such collaborations.For government agencies, benefits stemming from research can ex-tend well beyond the research results themselves.  While there is no sub-

stitute for in-house IT talent, interactions with researchers are a useful
way to tap additional technical expertise, especially top-caliber research
talent that is unlikely to be obtainable in-house or through the usual
advisory mechanisms.  In addition, sustained involvement by a research

community in a mission area helps define the metaphors and problems
that drive that community.  This is evident among researchers who have

worked over long periods with DOD, DOE, and NASA, for example.
Some of the most significant benefits of government mission research
investment can be indirect, because research results can have consider-
able value beyond the particular application area and because research on
hard and long-term problems sometimes leads to unanticipated break-
throughs. Although it is very difficult to do a precise evaluation, these
additional indirect benefits have to be considered when assessing the
ultimate impact and value of government research programs.  Finally, a

close collaboration between researchers and agency users can create an
environment for stimulating creative solutions to challenges, for example,
through rapid iteration of prototypes. (See Chapter 4, ÒTechnology Tran-sition and Program Management:  Bridging the Gap Between Research

and Impact.Ó)Finding 3.3.A sound foundation for e-government and other appli-
cations of information technology throughout society depends on a
continuing, broad, federal computer science research program.The historical record shows that broad and sustained federal invest-ment in IT research has nurtured the development of computer technol-
ogy and the IT industry.  Many IT research programs not only reached

their intended goals, whether mission or scientific, but also stimulated
commercial products, companies, and indeed industries.  They also con-

tributed fundamentally to the training of researchers and practitioners,
who often transferred technologies to the commercial sector through em-
ployment or entrepreneurship.  Illustrations can be found, for example, in

distributed transaction processing, raster displays, very-large-scale inte-
grated circuit design, and data mining.Indeed, the rapid rise of e-business in the 1990sÑand subsequent e-Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTgovernment developmentÑwas based on a variety of information tech-nologies that were developed incrementally over a period of many de-
cades, eventually reaching a point of maturity, scale, and usability that
allowed them to be incorporated directly into the infrastructures of com-
merce and government.  The rapid growth in the past decade was also

based on the acceptance of an evolving set of common standards that
enabled scaling up, competition, and interoperation.  The development of

the Internet suite of protocols, along with the establishment of processes
for evolving them, is perhaps the most widely recognized example.  A

significant portion of these technologies and standards resulted directly
from ongoing, farsighted government investment by a number of research
agencies.  Indeed, without this investment, it could be argued that the

Internet phenomenon would not have come into existenceÑit was by nomeans an inevitable development.When mission goals are approached strategically, new thinking canbe infused into a mission agencyÕs supply chain of vendors and technol-ogy developers, which can yield major dividends for government.  For

example, products or standards that address government needs can be
acquired off the shelf rather than by developing more expensive custom
systems. Of course, these products or standards might have emerged
without government investment, but quite possibly at the cost of consid-
erable delay.Finding 3.4. In areas of research whose benefits cannot be fullyretained by the investorÑareas in which the private sector may notbe able to justify investmentÑgovernment investment can be criti-cal to creating new technology capabilities and opportunities for all
participants, including government itself.Universities and some private sector research laboratories have longled in the development of the core technical underpinnings of e-business,
in the education of the IT workforce, and in many aspects of the creation
of new technologies and technological commonalities.  Building in part

on past research results, the U.S. information technology industries have
seen tremendous growth.  Even with this growth and success, govern-

ment investmentÑboth from research and mission agenciesÑin IT re-search and education continues to enhance the overall competitive posi-
tion of the U.S. information technology industry.  The government role in

addressing long-term issues continues to be unique and critical.This special role of government in IT research investment can beunderstood in the light of typical industry return-on-investment calcula-
tionsÑwhich generally (but not always) preclude innovations that arefundamentally long term in character or that have broad and nonspecificInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS15impact.  In the language of economics, many of these innovations are
nonappropriableÑthe results of the research diffuse broadly into the tech-nical community and cannot successfully be retained by a single sponsor-
ing organization for its exclusive use.  Similarly, particular innovations

may be competition-neutral or their impacts may be unpredictable; such
innovations, though they could be of broad benefit across the industry,
are therefore not in a companyÕs self-interest to support.  (See the discus-
sion of nonappropriability in the subsection ÒWill Industry Do It?Ó in
Chapter 4.)Among the products of such research innovation in diverse technicalareas are Internet protocol standards, algorithm-analysis techniques, pro-

gramming-language foundations, and, to a great extent, technologies for

interoperation.  Government investments leading to such broad benefits

not only serve the sponsoring agenciesÕ needs but also have much wider
impact by creating new technologies that can be used by all participants,
public and private.Finding 3.5. There are a number of broad technical areas wheregovernment investment in IT research would be particularly likely
to have an impact on the creation of more advanced capabilities in
e-government.Enhancements to a number of classes of technologies would greatlyfacilitate the building of advanced e-government capabilities. These in-
clude, for example:¥Information infrastructure and e-commerce technologies, which provide
the foundation for e-business outside and inside government;¥Information management technologies, which permit search and re-
trieval from the very large volumes of information held by governments
and allow integration of diverse sets of heterogeneous information sys-
tems;¥Middleware, which provides common services and capabilities thatÒglueÓ software components together into larger systems;
¥Human-system interfaces, which provide Òevery-citizenÓ usability;
¥Modeling and simulation, which are important tools underlying gov-
ernment planning and decision making (such as in crisis management);
and¥Software technologies, which permit construction of more robust,
larger-scale, interdependent software systems.Details of each research area are provided in Chapter 3 of this report.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTRecommendation 3.1.The federal government should continue to
participate actively in developing a full range of information tech-
nologies.  At the same time, government should leverage its role as
a long-term supporter of IT research to embrace e-government chal-
lenges within its broad research programs and to stimulate more
targeted technology development to meet particular needs.E-government research encompasses targeted research to meet par-ticular mission needs, research in technical areas where government leads
in demand (Finding 2.2), and broad research of benefit to e-government
and elsewhere (Finding 3.5).  In each case, government research programs

can take steps to stimulate a broader commercial response as well as meet
government needs.  A historical example of this kind of government

stimulus is the development of distribution and security support for op-
erating systems.  To meet the demand for large-scale and reliable dis-

tributed computing in the Department of Defense, the government in-
vested over a period of many years in underlying technical approaches
and engineering-process concepts.  The resulting technologies not only

address specific government needs but also have formed the basis of
mainstream commercial systems.STIMULATING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INNOVATIONAND TRANSITION INTO OPERATIONAL SYSTEMSWithin the federal government, some mission agenciesÑincludingDOD, NASA, DOE, the National Institutes of Health (NIH), and the Envi-
ronmental Protection Agency (EPA)Ñmaintain research capability thatsupports both intra- and extramural research in innovative IT.  Govern-

ment also has a number of mission areas, such as federal statistics and
crisis management, that are supported by multiple entities and for which
explicit coordination mechanisms have been devised (such as the coop-
eration between federal statistical agencies and the Office of Management
and Budget [OMB], the lead role played by the Federal Emergency Man-
agement Agency [FEMA] among federal agencies in crisis management,
or the emerging coordination potential of the new Office of Homeland
Security).  In addition, mechanisms within government coordinate re-

search and development activity in certain key technology areas such as
geographic information systems and high-performance computing.  Gov-

ernment is taking action to ensure that its long-term needs are addressed
in these areas of shared mission, shared reliance on aggressive technol-
ogy, or both.The sections above considered basic research and exploratory devel-opment that contribute to understanding of core concepts and key designInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS17issues.  The next subsections consider additional success factors in this
innovation process.Stimulating Innovation in Systems BuildingFinding 4.1.Most government agencies have limited capability (or
mandates) to manage IT research programs or to undertake explor-
atory IT development or aggressive prototyping programs.  While

some agencies would benefit from developing this capability, for
others it may be more effective, with respect to cost and risk, to
collaborate with agencies facing similar challenges.To address their technological needs, most federal, state, and localagencies must choose between acquiring off-the-shelf products and build-
ing custom systems. In the former case, costs may be low, but the agency
customer has less control over product capability and can exert influence
on vendor product plans only in proportion to its (relatively small) share
of the market. In the latter case, the agency customer defines the capabil-
ity but must also bear the total costs of ownership over the lifetime of the
system, including explicit management of system evolution and
interoperation.Recommendation 4.1.Consideration should be given to providing
specific mechanisms, such as a centrally managed cross-agency IT
innovation fund, as incentives to enable government organizations
to  undertake innovative and risky IT projects.
Agencies, particularly in their acquisition activities, may need explicitincentives and process models in order to stimulate and exploit leading-
edge technologies. In many cases, early digital-government capability
emerged primarily as a result of imaginative, independently entrepre-
neurial federal employees taking initiative and accepting risks, but this
approach does not scale.  Agencies are normally driven by prudence to

make conservative decisions in setting requirements and establishing in-
centives for contractors to deliver within cost and schedule constraints. A
centrally managed innovation fund can provide funding resources that
help Òbuy down the riskÓ for a would-be innovator and a group of ex-
perts who can work with contractors to help them develop innovative
solutions.  Such a fund can also provide opportunities for sharing best

practices, experimental integration, scaling up of prototypes, and creation
of evaluation testbeds.  NSF
Õs Digital Government grant-making programhas demonstrated the concept on a small scale.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTBuilding the Bridge Between Research, Systems Development, andGovernment InnovationFinding 4.2.Success in the development of innovative systems de-
pends not only on underlying technical capability but also on re-
search-management strategy.  In particular, the transition of new

technologies into operational systems remains one of the areas of
greatest risk and difficulty.Even assuming that there are sufficient incentives and rewards forinnovation in IT development, huge challenges remain in moving new
technology into government operationsÑfrom research to prototype de-velopment and operational experimentation.  This 
ÒmiddleÓ set of tech-
nology development stages is central to successful realization of the vi-
sion of digital government, and it can be the most problematic and least
controllable portion of the overall process of innovation. There is more to
the story than simply understanding the tensions between the risk-averse,
operationally focused culture of the acquisition system and the risk-toler-
ant, future-focused culture of the IT research community.In particular, managing this set of transitional stages can mean work-ing across the entire supply chain of IT innovation, recognizing that each
of the participantsÑgovernment system integrators, vertical applicationdevelopers, vendors of major components such as databases and operat-
ing systems, technology-focused start-up companies, and university and
laboratory researchers, among othersÑhas its own unique set of incen-tives and interests.One of the greatest challenges is how to escape from the Òspecifica-tion-firstÓ acquisition model, which one sees even in some prototyping
programs that were meant to be exploratory and to undertake risks. Effec-
tive innovation in systems development requires simultaneous commit-
ment to developing new technology and to defining new concepts of
operation.  In this model, iteration (in the sense of the spiral model from

software engineering, in which a sequence of prototypes of increasing
functionality is created) is undertaken both with respect to definition of
operational concept and development of the technology.  Ironically, adop-

tion of the spiral model may increase overall programmatic risk (for de-
velopment projects) unless it is carefully managedÑwhich is one reasonthat sequential models are often adopted even when incentives exist to
use iterative approaches.Regardless, exploratory IT development and prototyping programsare an important mechanism for better exploiting new IT.   Such applied

research allows agencies to evaluate potential new capabilities and to
assess their implications for operational concepts.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS19Recommendation 4.2.The federal government should develop
more effective means for undertaking multiagency collaborative
efforts that support aggressive prototyping, technology evaluation,
and technology transition in support of e-government.The recent emphasis in government on homeland security, includingthe development of new science and technology in support of the
counterterrorism mission, has fostered new attention to cross-agency ac-
tivities related to information technology.  The appointment during the

Bush administration of a federal chief technology officer and develop-
ment of an associate director for information technology and e-govern-
ment within OMB reinforces both the need and the potential for cross-
cutting activity.  Circumstances have become more propitious than

expected at the outset of this study for the kind of cross-agency program
development that the committee believes is required and appropriate.Government agencies that lack robust in-house IT research capabili-ties should explore research partnerships with agencies that do have them.
Several agencies currently manage IT research programs that aim both to
conduct IT research in support of agency mission requirements and to
stimulate IT innovation more broadly. These agencies include NSF, the
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), DOE, and NASA,
as well as the National Institute of Standards and Technology (which is
charged with addressing measurement, standards, and interoperability
challenges).  Each of these agencies has in-house capabilities, an IT re-

search culture, and existing relationships with the IT research community
that could prove useful in e-government innovation programs.  NSF has

already established research partnerships on a modest scale through its
Digital Government program, which could be expanded to include more
government partners.  Others might also explore development of such

programs where there is a natural alignment of existing missions with
common requirements.  Given these various options for supporting e-

government-related research, it would appear more appropriate for agen-
cies lacking in-house IT capabilities to tap some combination of these
existing capabilities (possibly adding some coordination mechanisms)
than to create a new entity to manage e-government research.Recommendation 4.3.To ensure success in the development and
transition of new technologies, explicit attention should be given to
program-management practices.  Research program managers

should be cognizant of the complexities of technology develop-
ment and transition processes, and aware, in particular, of the range
of program-management models and strategies that could be em-
ployed.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTBy facilitating collaboration among mission agencies and governmentresearch organizations, it may be possible to address areas of shared con-
cern, such as security, more effectively. Cross-agency attention is evident
in OMB, the federal Chief Information Officers Council, and in congres-
sional activity, but it has only infrequently translated into long-lived rela-
tionships being established to do research or to undertake prototyping
studies.  Details of various program-management strategies are provided

in Chapter 4 of this report.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.211Vision for IT-Enabled
Enhancement of GovernmentGovernment expenditures on information technology (IT) are sub-stantial. In Fiscal Year 2001, the total annual federal IT investment was
roughly $44.5 billion.1  This level of spending reflects governmentÕs great
reliance on IT systems in carrying out its diverse missions.  The emer-

gence of the Internet into the mainstream, along with the growth of other
electronic-commerce technologies, is fundamentally altering the environ-
ment in which government delivers services to citizens, businesses, and
other government entities. These innovations in technology and business
practices have given rise to the concept of Òe-government,Ó which refers
to the adoption of electronic-business practices in government.Estimates of the fraction of this spending that goes toward e-govern-ment vary, depending on what criteria are used to distinguish e-govern-
ment initiatives from other IT programs. The consulting firm Gartner
Group recently estimated that federal, state, and local spending on
government-to-government, government-to-business, and government-
to-citizen initiatives was roughly $1.5 billion in 2000 (with the projection
that this sum will grow to more than $6.2 billion in 2005),2 while the
1Office of Management and Budget (OMB). 2001. ÒClinger-Cohen Act Report on FederalInformation Technology Investments.Ó OMB, Executive Office of the President, Washing-ton, D.C., April 9. Available online at <http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/final53.xls>.2Gartner Group. 2000. ÒGartner Says U.S. E-Government Spending to Surpass $6.2 Bil-lion by 2005Ó (press release), April 11.  Available online at <http://gartner11.gartnerweb.
com/public/static/aboutgg/pressrel/pr041100c.html>.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTmarket research company Input estimated the current expenditures atabout $7.2 billion.3At the same time that government is seeking to apply IT in new waysto fulfill its own particular obligations, the role of government with re-
spect to broad-based IT development and use is also shifting.  In recent

decades, the private sector has surpassed government leadership in many
areas of IT adoption and use, even as government continues to play a
criticalÑsome would say increasingly criticalÑrole as a principal agentfor long-term IT basic research and innovation.Much like their counterparts in the private sector, many in govern-ment are actively experimenting with the harnessing of new Internet and
other information technologies to improve operations and the delivery of
services.  A wide range of ideas is emerging from these experiments,

contributing to technology development, the improvement of business
practices, a more streamlined government, and a more sophisticated pub-
lic.  Traditionally, formal paper-based information dissemination was

undertaken by specialized document-distribution services such as the
Government Printing Office and the National Technical Information Ser-
vice. With the rise of the World Wide Web, agency-specific sites that
provide access to a range of documents and databases have been devel-
oped over the past several years. Complementing the development of
Web sites available through the Internet, agencies such as the U.S. Depart-
ment of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), the General Services
Administration (GSA), and the Office of Personnel Management (OPM)
have also developed kiosk systems, using Web technology, to provide
access to information resources in public locations.The federal government now offers a number of information portals,which aggregate and present government information for access by cus-
tomers in particular Òmarket segmentsÓ (such as students, workers, or
senior citizens) and provide links to commonly performed transactions.
In 2000, a federal governmentwide portal, firstgov.gov, which provides a
search engine across federal Web sites along with a directory of com-
monly used sites and services, was launched;4 a number of other, more
targeted, federal portals also exist (see Box 1.1).With these efforts, a rapidly increasing corpus of government-gener-3William Mathews. 2000. ÒE-gov Leads IT Spending Forecast.Ó Federal Computer Week,December 8. Available online at <http://www.fcw.com/fcw/articles/2000/1204/web-egov-12-08-00.asp>.4Generally hailed as a promising next step, the Web site is not without controversy.Concerns include the management structure and relationship between the private founda-tion responsible for the search engine component and whether the search engine returnsthe most relevant, useful results.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VISION FOR IT-ENABLED ENHANCEMENT OF GOVERNMENT23ated information is available directly to users via the Internet, and IT isbeing exploited to deliver government services in new ways, including
the use of the Internet to conduct transactions that previously required
postal mail or an in-person visit.Indeed, various agencies and programs were early adopters of Webtechnology, and some level of online presence, albeit with varying de-
grees of sophistication, is the norm for government today at the federal
and state levels.  At the same time, inputs received by the Committee on

Computing and Communications Research to Enable Better Use of Infor-
mation Technology in Government, over the course of two workshops
and during additional discussions with informed individuals, suggest
that the federal government generally continues to lag behind the private
sector both in adopting present-day technology and in addressing its own
special needs.  The committee
Õs in-depth examinations of two areasÑfederal statistics and crisis managementÑsuggest that while a good dealof experimentation is occurring and considerable experience is being
gained in implementing a range of sophisticated capabilities, many sys-
tems significantly lag behind the state of the art.  For example, the

committeeÕs consideration of the federal statistical agencies revealed thatwhile fedstats.gov, coordinated by the Federal Interagency Council on
Statistical Policy, was of one of the earliest implementations of interagency
portals, there was also an instance in which the Bureau of the Census had
only recently retired an obsolete Univac computer system.  The inquires

of the committee also revealed cases of government bodies having very
specific technology needs that have not been adequately addressed.  These

include, for example, software to support the complex surveys adminis-
tered by the federal statistical agencies and a number of crisis- and conse-
quence-management applications.According to a recent report from the National Association of StateInformation Resource Executives, many states have also made the transi-
tion from presenting a simple directory of agencies to a portal design in
which available information is organized around the needs of specific
user segments. Several states planned to develop portals in partnership
with an outside vendor, with an expectation that the vendor would be
compensated through transaction fees.5  A number of these portals repre-
sent a fairly mature realization of present-day information-access tech-
nology, but considerable scope for improvement remains.  Box 1.2 pro-

vides several examples of state e-government services.5National Association of State Information Resource Executives (NASIRE). 2000. Prelimi-nary Survey of the Digital Government Landscape. NASIRE, Lexington, Kentucky. Availableonline at <http://www.nasire.org/publications/digital_government_report_2000.pdf>.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTBox 1.1Examples of Federal Government Information Portals¥FirstGov <www.firstgov.gov>.  The portal FirstGov was established as a joint
project of the federal government and the private FedSearch Foundation, which over-sees the siteÕs search engine.  Funded in 2001 and 2002 from the General Services
Administration (GSA) and 22 federal agencies, FirstGov is managed by GSAÕs Officeof FirstGov.1 The Web site provides a search engine that uses an index of Web pagesgovernment wide as well as a directory of commonly accessed information resourcesand services.¥Access America for Seniors <www.seniors.gov>.  A government information
portal dedicated to the needs of seniors, Access America for Seniors exemplifies asite that attempts to make the resources of multiple agencies available to a particular
user group.  It was developed through the cooperation of the National Partnership for
Reinventing Government (NPR) and several other interested organizations, includingthe Social Security Administration, the Administration on Aging, the U.S. Depart-
ment of Housing and Urban Development, the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs,and the American Association of Retired Persons.¥Access America for Students <www.students.gov>.  As with Access America
for Seniors, Access America for Students was created to serve a specialized group ofusers. Developed and maintained through the cooperation of NPR and the U.S. De-partment of Education, the site offers links to information about planning an educa-
tion, financial aid, career development, community service, travel, military service,and more. It also contains an array of links to legislative, executive, and judicial Websites.¥FedStats <www.fedstats.gov>.  FedStats is maintained by the Federal Inter-
agency Council on Statistical Policy to provide users with easy access to the fullrange of statistics and information produced by more than 70 participating govern-
ment agencies.2 Funding is provided by in-kind donations of services and small
contributions from 12 federal statistical agencies to support hardware and softwareprocurement and dedicated manpower. Participating agencies host their own statis-
tics on their own servers; FedStats provides an efficient gateway to their information.For instance, if one selects the Crime link in the subject index, FedStats forwards theuser to the U.S. Department of JusticeÕs Bureau of Justice Statistics Web Site.  Also,
FedStats contains a feature called MapStats, through which users can locate statisti-cal information about particular U.S. states or counties by clicking on a series ofmaps.¥U.S. Consumer Gateway <www.consumer.gov>.  U.S. Consumer Gateway
was created by the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), and the FTC continues to main-tain it with the participation of the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Con-
sumer Product Safety Commission, the Food and Drug Administration, the NationalHighway Traffic Safety Administration, the Environmental Protection Agency, theU.S. Department of Agriculture, the U.S. Department of the Treasury, the Federal
Communications Commission, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.  The
1For more on the history, funding, and management of Firstgov, see <http://www.firstgov.gov/About.shtml>.2See <http://www.fedstats.gov/agencies> for a full list of participating agencies.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VISION FOR IT-ENABLED ENHANCEMENT OF GOVERNMENT25site is designed so that users can locate government consumer-related information bycategory (Food, Health, Product Safety, Money, Transportation, and so forth). Eachcategory has further subcategories to direct users to areas within individual federal
Web sites containing related information. For instance, the Product Safety categoryincludes links to product information from the Consumer Product Safety Commis-sion, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, the Food and Drug Admin-
istration, and the FTC, among others.¥Code Talk <www.codetalk.fed.us>.  Code Talk is a federal interagency Native
American Web site that provides access to a wide range of information for Native
American communities.  It is hosted by the Office of Native American Programs of
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.  Code Talk contains sec-tions concerning Òcurrent issuesÓ and 
Òkey topicsÓ among Native Americans, and
major subject areas include housing, health, the arts, children, and the environment.Within these broad areas, users will find links to relevant government agencies andprograms.  Selecting the link to environmental information, for instance, takes users

to the major source of government information on this topicÑthe American IndianEnvironmental Office (<http://www.epa.gov/indian>) of the U.S. Environmental Pro-tection Agency (EPA).  The site also contains links to a host of other federal Web sites

(e.g., the Bureau of Indian Affairs, the Indian Health Service, the Senate and theHouse of Representatives, the Government Accounting Office, and the Office ofManagement and Budget) and provides links to other resources and tools, including
information on training and employment, laws, and taxes.¥The Federal Commons <www.cfda.gov/federalcommons>.  The Federal Com-
mons is an Internet grants-management portal serving the grantee organization com-
munity. Coordinated through the Inter-Agency Electronic Grants Committee,3 the
site is working toward offering all grantees (state and local governments, universities,small businesses, and so on) full-service grants-processing across all functions in the
grant life cycle. The siteÕs main feature is a subject-oriented directory to grants infor-mation; the subject categories include Agriculture, Health, Business and Commerce,Energy, and Natural Resources, among others. These broad categories are further
subdivided into topics under which links to relevant grant information (generallyhosted on another organizationÕs Web site) are listed. In the future, the Federal Com-mons plans to expand its Grant Transactions section to offer the capability to search
for grant-funding opportunities across the federal government, and to apply for andreport on federal grants.¥Federal Business Opportunities (FedBizOpps) <www.fedbizopps.gov>. Fed-
Biz Opps (formerly known as the Electronic Posting System) is a governmentwideInternet-based information system for announcing government acquisitions. It servesindustry vendors by allowing them to search for government acquisition opportuni-
ties. It also serves government buyers by providing them with the capability to postsolicitations on the Internet. The site was designed to be a single entry point forvendors to search government acquisition opportunities across all departments and
agencies. The project was begun as a joint effort of the General Services Administra-tion, the U.S. Department of Transportation, and the National Aeronautics and SpaceAdministration, among others.3See <http://www.financenet.gov/iaegc.htm> for further information about the Inter-AgencyElectronic Grants Committee.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTBox 1.2Examples of State Online ActivitiesFor Citizens¥Texas.  The Web site of the State Office of the Attorney General allows citi-
zens to file consumer complaints with the office electronically. Individuals simplysubmit an online form with all the necessary information (e.g., contact information
for both parties, a statement of the complaint, and a description of what the citizenthinks would be an acceptable resolution) to begin the complaint-resolution process.The system also allows users to submit copies of scanned supporting documents (in
TIF format) via e-mail.1¥Illinois.  The state offers citizens the capability to file their state income taxesonline through the stateÕs Web site. The advertised benefits to filing tax forms in thismanner include faster processing of refunds (10 days), accuracy (as the system doesall the calculations), and availability of the system 24 hours a day.2¥New York.  The Department of Motor Vehicles allows citizens to purchase
vanity and custom license plates online, as well as to submit registration renewals.One can search the departmentÕs database to check whether or not the desired com-bination of letters, numbers, or spaces is available, and then purchase the plate on-
line with a credit or debit card.  The site even features a rendering of what the user
Õsplate will look like with the chosen characters.3For Businesses¥Washington. In March 1999, the state launched a system through which busi-nesses (some of which must pay on a monthly basis) can pay their excise taxes1See <http://www.oag.state.tx.us/consumer/complain.htm>.2See <http://www.revenue.state.il.us/electronicservices/ifilefacts00.html>.3See <http://www.nydmv.state.ny.us/cplates.htm>.This range of experience exists in local government as well; a substan-tial fraction of municipal and county governments have established some
sort of online presence.6  Still, the committee
Õs examination of crisis man-agement suggests that while some local governments are in a position to
lead in the use of IT, there is large variation among them with respect to6A survey conducted for the International City/Council Management Association(ICMA) found that among the roughly half of municipal and county governments thatresponded, more than 80 percent had established Web sites. See Donald F. Norris, PatriciaD. Fletcher, and Stephen H. Holden. 2001. ÒIs Your Local Government Plugged In? High-Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VISION FOR IT-ENABLED ENHANCEMENT OF GOVERNMENT27technology capabilities.  For some, both financial and IT-management
resources are very limited.Altogether, hundreds of e-government initiatives are taking place atthe federal level alone.  A recent survey found that most federal depart-

ments and agencies were engaged in such activities, and more than 1,300
initiatives were reported.  Nearly 50 percent were identified as delivering
online. The Web-based Electronic Filing (ELF) system offers users a fast, simple, cus-tomizable, and accurate way to calculate and pay the tax they owe. Using detailedhelp screens, the system guides users through the appropriate filing processes, elim-
inating the need for tax filers to wade through large amounts of irrelevant informa-tion. The system also offers the capability to postdate filings and payments to betteraccommodate usersÕ schedules. Payment of taxes is accomplished through the use of
an Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) debit arrangement between the userÕs bank andthe Department of RevenueÕs bank.4¥California.  The California Business Portal,
5an initiative of CaliforniaÕs secre-tary of state, provides information for users who are starting business entities, and itallows them to file related information with the state online.  Intended as a 
Òone-stopshop,Ó the site provides access to information on filing requirements and various
state forms, and it combines resources from several government agencies and privatesector organizations.  One of the site
Õs main features is a step-by-step guide to start-ing a business, offering suggestions on everything from selecting a name for the
business to formulating a business plan; a detailed checklist to help users manageeach step of the business creation process is provided as well. Among the siteÕs moreadvanced features is a pilot project that gives businesses the capability to file their
corporate Òstatement of officersÓ form electronically using a secure server and a
credit card. The site also allows users to search through existing corporate records. Alink to CalGOLD, <www.calgold.ca.gov>, another California state Web site that pre-
sents businesses with information on permits and other requirements of Californiaagencies at all levels of governmentÑincluding addresses, telephone numbers, andlinks to agency Internet Web pagesÑis also provided.64See <http://dor.wa.gov/index.asp?/elf/elfcontent.htm>.5See <http://www.ss.ca.gov/business/business.htm>.6For more information, see <http://www.ss.ca.gov/executive/press_releases/2001/01-006.htm>.lights of the 2000 Electronic Government SurveyÓ (prepared for ICMA by Public Technol-
ogy Inc., University of Maryland, Baltimore County), February 27. Available online at
<http://www.icma.org/download/cat15/grp120/sgp224/E-Gov2000.pdf>.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTinformation and services to citizens and about 85 percent as making useof the Web.7In this shift toward e-government, commercial third parties are alsoplaying an important role. For instance, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
accepts electronic tax returns through tax-preparation software vendors.
Still, the opportunities and challenges associated with using IT in govern-
ment are just starting to be addressed.  And as IT innovation in the private

sector continues apace, the gap between private sector and government
practices appears to be growing.Congressional hearings, reports of the federal Chief Information Of-ficers Council, agency analyses, and similar activities at the state level
attest that governments are aggressively exploring how to shape their
policies and practices to leverage IT technologies most effectively and to
stimulate ongoing innovation and experimentation.  For example, the

federal government recently established a new central point of responsi-
bility for information technology within the Office of Management and
Budget (OMB).  Following September 11, 2001, government efforts in

information collection, aggregation, and analysis may well expand on a
number of fronts, placing corresponding demands for enhancement and
flexibility on institutional IT capabilities.  At the same time, analyses such

as those from the General Accounting Office (GAO) have raised questions
about the management and execution of a number of IT programs.8This report examines several questions related to IT research and theuse of information technologies in government operations. These ques-
tions are raised primarily from the perspective of the relationship be-
tween IT research and government IT applications. The aim is to identify
approaches that support government in building e-business capabilities
analogous to those being developed in the private sector, and in advanc-
ing government IT applications such as crisis management and federal
statistics.  In keeping with its charge from the sponsoring agency, the

committee emphasizes in its report the role of IT research, how to struc-
ture fruitful interactions between government and the IT research com-
munity, and how the research community can help address the leading
challenges of e-government.  The committee recognizes, however, that a
7From a summary prepared by the General Services Administration, Office of Intergov-ernmental Solutions, of its E-Gov Initiatives Inventory.  Summary is available online at

<http://www.policyworks.gov/intergov/OIS-EGovInventory.htm>, and the inventorydatabase is online at <http://www.policyworks.gov/intergov>.8See, for example, Government Accounting Office (GAO), 2001, Electronic Government:Challenges Must Be Addressed with Effective Leadership and Management (GAO-01-959T), GAO,Washington, D.C.,  July 11.
Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VISION FOR IT-ENABLED ENHANCEMENT OF GOVERNMENT29significant part of the e-government challenge relates to management andimplementation challenges associated with deploying todayÕs technolo-
gies in government.9  But engagement with researchers offers govern-
ment an opportunity to better understand where opportunities for inno-
vation lie and to observe and influence the development of the
technologiesÑproviding insights that can help government cope withmanagement and implementation challenges.The scope of this report includes characterization of research needsand opportunities, identification of pertinent research topics, consider-
ation of research-management methods and technology-transition ap-
proaches, and aspects of government IT practice that affect the delivery of
e-government services.  While the focus of the report is the role of the

federal government, most of the ideas discussed could apply equally well
to state and local governments.10  The committee also expects that the
benefits resulting from the federal governmentÕs involvement in and sup-port of IT innovation will likewise apply to all levels of government.ELEMENTS OF THE VISIONStimulated in large part by widespread adoption of the Internet andthe associated phenomenon of electronic commerce, a broad consensus
has emerged in the past several years that governments at all levels can
exploit IT to deliver information and services more efficiently and to make9The General Accounting Office (GAO) has written numerous reports related to moreimmediate implementation challenges associated with e-government programs.  See, for
example, GAO, 2001, Electronic Government: Challenges Must Be Addressed with Effective Lead-ership and Management (GAO-01-959T), GAO, Washington, D.C.,  July 11.  Academic work
examining these challenges includes work by the Strategic Computing Program atHarvardÕs Kennedy School of Government (e.g., Jerry Mechling and Thomas M. Fletcher,1996, Information Technology and Government: The Need for New Leadership, May), the Centerfor Technology in Government at the State University of New York at Albany (e.g., SharonS. Dawes et al., 1999,  Four Realities of IT Innovation in Government,  Center for Technology inGovernment, Albany, N.Y.), and the Center for Research on Information Technology andOrganizations (CRITO) at the University of California at Irvine (e.g., Kenneth L. Kraemerand Jason Dedrick, 1996, ÒComputing and Public Organizations,Ó Working Paper #URB-
092, CRITO, Irvine, Calif.).10That research efforts should encompass state and local as well as federal e-governmentinnovation was underscored in Sharon Dawes, Peter Bloniarz, Kristine L. Kelly, and Patricia

D. Fletcher, 1999, Some Assembly Required: Building a Digital Government for the 21st Century,Center for Technology in Government, State University of New York at Albany, March.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTimprovements in other functional areas. The nature of these opportuni-ties and challenges has been considered by government bodies, advisory
groups, information technology consulting firms, and the like.  Box 1.3

lists several of these. Some express the grand view that IT is a principal
means for fundamentally reshaping government and democracy, while
others focus more on shorter-term opportunitiesÑto enhance the servicesdelivered to citizens and to facilitate enhanced interactions between citi-
zens and government.  Somewhere between these two views, there ap-

pears to be a general consensus that e-government is a means to such
ends as a more informed and engaged citizenry and a more responsive,
efficient, and accountable government.This vision can be captured in terms of a set of generally acceptedelements or basic goals.  These elements, which underlie the arguments

and technical agenda presented in this report and are described below,
include the following:¥Satisfying customer service expectations,¥Increasing the efficiency and effectiveness of government opera-tions,¥Providing effective access to information,¥Providing access to a full range of transactions online,¥Increasing participation in government,¥Meeting expectations for trustworthiness, and¥Meeting special challenges in government-unique areas.Presented in Appendix A are several specific scenarios developed bythe committee to illustrate the potential impact of e-government on the
daily lives of individuals.In keeping with the general wisdom that IT should be developed anddeployed with all users in mind (internal employees, vendors, and cus-
tomers), this report considers IT requirements and research needs across
each of these user groups.Satisfying Expectations for Customer ServiceBusiness features such as telephone-calling centers and e-businesstechnologies have given rise to high expectations.  Many consumer ser-

vices are available 24 hours per day, 7 days per week or can be used
asynchronously via e-mail and Web communications (that is, with no
need for round-the-clock staffing by the service provider).  Thus govern-

ment services, at the very least, are also expected to overcome barriers of
time and distance and to be customer-oriented.One element of responsiveness includes providing citizens with en-Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VISION FOR IT-ENABLED ENHANCEMENT OF GOVERNMENT31Box 1.3A Sampling of E-Government ObjectivesGoals Contained in the Chief Information Officers CouncilFY 2001 Strategic Plan1Goal 1. All Citizens Connected to the Products, Services, and Information of TheirGovernmentGoal 2. Interoperable and Innovative Government-Wide IT Initiatives
Goal 3. A Secure and Reliable Information Infrastructure that the Customer CanAccess and TrustGoal 4. IT Skills and Resources to Meet Mission Objectives
Goal 5. Collaborations Between the Public and Private Sector to Achieve BetterGovernmentGuiding Principles Developed by the E-Government ExcellenceInitiative of the Council for Excellence in Government2What should e-government be?1. Easy to use
2. Available to everyone
3. Private and secure
4. Innovative and results-oriented
5. Collaborative
6. Cost-effective
7. TransformationalE-Government Objective Outlined in the Bush AdministrationÕs2002 Budget Blueprint3Use the Internet to Create a Citizen-Centric Government: The explosive growth ofthe Internet has transformed the relationship between customers and businesses. It is
also transforming the relationship between citizens and government. By enabling
individuals to penetrate the federal bureaucracy to access information and transact
business, the Internet promises to shift power from a handful of leaders in Washing-
ton to individual citizens. The president believes that providing access to information
and services is only the first step in e-government.  In order to make government truly

Òcitizen-centered,Ó agencies will have to work together to consolidate similar func-
tions around the needs of citizens and businesses.  Citizen-centered government will

use the Internet to bring about transformational change: agencies will conduct trans-
actions with the public along secure Web-enabled systems that use portals to link
common applications and protect privacy, which will give citizens the ability to go
online and interact with their governmentÑand with their state and local govern-ments that provide similar information and servicesÑaround citizen preferences andnot agency boundaries.1Chief Information Officers (CIO) Council. 2000. ÒStrategic Plan: Fiscal Year 2001-2002.Ó CIO
Council, Washington, D.C. October. Available online at <http://www.cio.gov>.2Council for Excellence in Government.  2001.  
Òe-government: The Next American Revolu-tion,Ó Washington, D.C., p. 5. Available online at <http://www.excelgov.org/techcon/egovex/
index.htm>.3Executive Office of the President (EOP). 2001. A Blueprint for New Beginnings: A ResponsibleBudget for AmericaÕs Priorities.  U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., February
28, Section IX, Government Reform. Available online at <http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/
usbudget/blueprint/budix.html>.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENThanced ways of locating information and performing transactions.  Auto-
mated phone systems and Web sites able to handle routine information
requests and transactions are common in the private sector and are find-
ing increased use in government.  But when there are exceptions to the

routine, it may be necessary to locate an individualÑsomeone with therequired knowledge or authority to make a decision or respond to a par-
ticular query. IT can help locate the right individual as well as facilitate
communications with that person.  Sites may use e-mail to permit the

exchange of messages with a customer-service representative, facilitating
asynchronous resolution of some problems.  These sorts of capabilities

are especially important for efficient, effective handling of exceptional
circumstances whose resolution requires more than straightforward ap-
plication of procedures.It is also now a common practice for commercial Web sites to offersmooth transitions from Web-based interactions with customers to tele-
phone interactions (or chat sessions) with human service representatives.
This approach offers advantages to both the site operator and the cus-
tomer:  the customer can rapidly acquire information available on the

Web site and, having established context, proceed to click a button on the
Web page that provokes a telephone call from a service representative
who has knowledge of the state of the customerÕs interactions with thesite.  The resulting conversation can thus immediately focus on particular

questions without devoting additional time to re-establishing context.Another element of a responsive service is in-process visibilityÑanalogous to the in-transit visibility that deliverers of express packages
offerÑwhich allows one to determine the status of a particular transac-tion or claim at any given time, thereby making government agency pro-
cesses more transparent.Customer orientation also means delivering services in ways thatalign with the concerns and processes of customers, rather than according
to government organizational structure or some other framework that is
arbitrary from the customerÕs perspective.  For example, Web sites oper-
ated by state and municipal governments offer services for small business
operators that present a uniform, business-oriented interface, even though

this requires integration of interactions with separate government enti-
ties.  Business owners, for example, are then freed from having to main-

tain comprehensive and detailed working knowledge of the roles of the
various agencies with whom they must interactÑthe Web site embodiesthis knowledge for them. A possible extension of this model would span
federal, state, and local governments and even third-party service provid-
ers (see Box 1.4).Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VISION FOR IT-ENABLED ENHANCEMENT OF GOVERNMENT33Increasing the Efficiency and Effectivenessof Government Operations Although the most visible manifestation of e-government may be inenhancing interactions between government and its customers, the e-gov-
ernment vision also extends to internal operations. Across the political
spectrum, it is believed that appropriate use of IT provides a basis for
more effective government programs, more efficient work within govern-
ment agencies, and decreased total program costs. Important IT applica-
tions include reducing collection of redundant information, enhancing
government workersÕ access to information required for decision making,
and improving workflow management.  These interests are reflected in

legislation, implementing regulations, and other government initiatives
(see the subsection on ÒE-Government Policy InitiativesÓ in this chapter).Providing Effective Access to InformationIn carrying out their various missions, government entities collectand retain a great deal of informationÑinformation about individuals,businesses, demographic or other statistical data, and material regarding
their own activities, rules, and decisions.  Government has multiple and

occasionally conflicting responsibilities with respect to such information.
First, it is charged with keeping a comprehensive historical repository,
including long-term preservation of federally generated data and federal
decisions.  It also has responsibility for providing citizens with access to

most government information, though access to certain information isBox 1.4An Enhanced ÒStarting a BusinessÓ Portal
What capabilities could  a portal dedicated to 
ÒStarting a BusinessÓ provide to
facilitate that process? To help determine the feasibility and best site for a new busi-ness, the portal would provide access to such things as econometric, demographic,
and trade data; geographic information systems and satellite imagery; information onfederal, state, and local regulations for that type of business; and state and localgovernment investment-incentive programs. To help with establishing a business,
the portal would permit checking and registration of trademarks and copyrights andonline business registration. Once the business was launched, the portal would sup-port payment of withholding for state and federal taxes, social security, unemploy-
ment insurance, and the like. Such a portal might also include links to third-partyservices that could help a business to start up quickly, such as banking, payroll, andtax services.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTlimited by confidentiality rules and other considerations (regarding clas-sified, proprietary, and other sensitive information).It is useful to classify access to government information in three cat-egories, each of which entails different technical requirements:¥Effective access to public information. Online presence or searchability
of information is only a first step.  ÒEffectiveÓ means that tools and capa-
bilities exist to allow relevant targets to be located in the wealth of gov-
ernment-supplied information.  It should be possible to search for appro-

priate information and resources across government agencies and levels
of government without the boundaries being apparent.¥Access by individuals to information about themselves.  Citizens should
be able to review and request revision of personal information with the
assurance that only authorized people have access to their records.  For

example, individuals might examine their own social security and tax
records or uniformly update contact information, but this information
should be kept private from people other than authorized government
personnel.¥Specialized access to government-gathered or government-held informa-tion, under controlled circumstances. For example, administrative and statis-
tical data are made available to researchers with the aid of technical and
nontechnical measures that limit the disclosure of confidential data.Providing Access to a Full Range of Transactions OnlineCitizen and business interaction with government involves an enor-mous number of different transactions. Many fall into the categories of
Òvery simpleÓ (e.g., purchase a publication) or 
ÒroutineÓ (e.g., renewing a
car registration or filing a tax return), but interactions with government
cover a broad range of complexity.  The long-term vision expressed by

many (and called for in the Government Paperwork Elimination Act of
1998; see more details in the subsection ÒE-Government Policy Initia-tivesÓ in this chapter) is to make it possible to conduct all government
business online. This involves more than simply converting all existing
systems into electronic ones, which alone would be a substantial under-
taking, given the myriad functions that government supports.Indeed, a key element of the e-government vision is to provide one-stop portals that integrate across multiple government agencies and lev-
els of government. The goal is to allow users to interact with a wide range
of government agencies and officials in seamless fashion, with interac-
tions based on function rather than on organizational details.  This can

help free users of government services from the daunting task of tracking
all government agencies with which they must interact in order to com-Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VISION FOR IT-ENABLED ENHANCEMENT OF GOVERNMENT35ply, say, with business regulations or tax-reporting requirements. An-other aspect of this goal is that users avoid having to re-enter information
across multiple transactions or sessions.  Such elimination of redundancy

is not a trivial issue for the user; consider, for instance, how much of
income tax reporting involves copying data from one form to another.
Nor is the goal trivial for government to implement.  Achieving it will, for

example, depend heavily on improving capabilities for protecting pri-
vacy, integrating or establishing appropriate authentication capabilities,
and providing other safeguards with respect to access to government-
held information.Increasing Participation in GovernmentInformation technology is also a way of providing new means forinteractions between citizens and governmentsÑboth to improve the in-teractions and to engage people who have not participated in the past.
Providing facilities for enhanced interaction does not ensure greater par-
ticipation, but it is a logical and fundamental step.  At the simplest level,

such facilities involve e-mail, Web forms, or chat systems to complement
the usual mail and telephone channels for communicating with govern-
ment offices and officials (people might use such means to comment on
proposed decisions, inquire about the status of a pending action, and the
like).  Long-term, the vision extends to enabling new structures that per-

mit greater dialog and more direct involvement with the decision-making
process: how can citizens communicate with government officials and
with each other to support effective and informed governance? This goal
also includes enhancing the electoral process (e.g., by decreasing barriers
to voting), while maintaining and improving the accuracy and trustwor-
thiness of elections.Meeting Expectations for TrustworthinessIt is widely acknowledged that preserving public confidence in thesecurity of government systems is a cornerstone of effective e-govern-
ment.  This was a recurring theme in the workshops convened by the

committee and in discussions with individuals within and outside gov-
ernment. The challenge is how to accomplish this goal while expanding
and easing access in a rapidly evolving Internet and personal-computing
infrastructure. Information requests and transactions often involve the
exchange of sensitive informationÑbetween individuals and government,between private organizations and government, within government, and
among governments at different levels.  Protecting the privacy, confiden-

tiality, and integrity of this information against unauthorized disclosureInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTor modification is essential.  At the same time, government systems are
subject to attack, whether by hackers, terrorists, or nations, which dictates
serious attention to information-systems security. With increasing atten-
tion to critical infrastructure protection, government interest in trustwor-
thiness will continue to span both government and private sector sys-
tems.Meeting Special Challenges in Government-Unique AreasFor many services, government can build on technologies and pro-cesses, already established in the e-business marketplace, that have low-
ered the barrier for organizations seeking to establish an electronic pres-
ence. Most commercial efforts, however, address broadly identified
market needs that may not satisfy the requirements of government appli-
cations. Such requirements include providing for exceedingly stringent
precautions (e.g., for national security or for protecting individual tax
records), providing for indefinite persistence of certain archival records
(such as those retained by the National Archives), and providing ubiqui-
tous accessibility to certain critical government services (related to social
security records, for example). The committee explored two areasÑfed-eral statistics and crisis managementÑin which a number of government-unique requirements are concentrated.  Each was considered through an

in-depth workshop that brought together domain specialists, particularly
those serving in operational roles, with IT experts. (Detailed results of
these workshops were published in two separate volumes; 11 the conclu-
sions drawn in this report build on those results.)  In both cases, the

committee found that specific government-unique requirements pre-
sented a mix of longer-term research challenges and shorter-term, more-
applied R&D challenges.TECHNICAL AND PROCESS CHALLENGES TO ADVANCINGE-GOVERNMENT PROGRAMSWhile in many instances e-government programs can simply build onexisting technology and e-business practices, in some areas government
leads in demand for IT.  Chapter 2, ÒSpecial Considerations in E-Govern-11For further details, see Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), Na-tional Research Council (NRC), 1999, Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Re-search for Crisis Management, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.; and CSTB, NRC,2000, Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Federal Statistics, NationalAcademy Press, Washington, D.C.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VISION FOR IT-ENABLED ENHANCEMENT OF GOVERNMENT37ment,Ó discusses several specific mission areas for which this is true;
Chapter 3, ÒTechnology Levers,Ó discusses a number of more generic
research areas where IT capabilities could enhance e-government pro-
grams.As an illustration of the sorts of technical challenges that arise withmore aggressive e-government programs, this report considers what is
needed to extend interactions with government from information deliv-
ery to support for transactionsÑconsolidated services (sometimes knownas portals) that enable citizens, businesses, and other government entities
to provide information to or engage in financial transactions with mul-
tiple government organizations.  Some agency Web sites already support
a variety of basic transactions with citizens, many analogous to those
offered by e-commerce sites.  Systems that permit residents to renew

driverÕs licenses and vehicle registration online have been a common areaof state focus, reflecting the servicesÕ near-ubiquity, the relief from the
hassle associated with traditional renewal at state motor-licensing bu-
reaus, and the relative ease of implementing these systems.Building interagency portals presents numerous technical and man-agement challenges, including these:¥A legacy of information systems supporting numerous govern-ment functions, many of which were not designed for interoperability
with other systems or for Web-based access (a challenge not unique to
government);¥Interoperation challenges arising from working across organiza-tional stovepipes;¥Rules constraining the nature of information sharing across gov-ernment agencies and programs;¥Funding new online systems while maintaining existing ones;¥Difficulties in identifying and maintaining funding for what areinherently cross-agency activities; and¥Resolving technical issuesÑsuch as protocol design, informationrepresentation, and security and authentication measuresÑassociatedwith interfaces that would enable third parties to operate portal sites that
interact with government services on behalf of citizens and businesses,
permitting third parties to use software that directly connects their own
information systems with government services.Areas of innovation and continuing technical challenge extend wellbeyond the more visible information and transaction portals.  For ex-

ample, although government has historically provided a great deal of
data in electronic formÑsometimes directly to the public in easy-to-useformats and sometimes in more esoteric formats that only a few special-Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTized contractors can useÑone area of current exploration relates to tech-nology for supporting third-party provision of e-government information
and services.  The relative roles of the government and private sectors in

relation to providing data and information products have long been a
subject of controversy.   This report does not take a position in this debate,

but the committee does note that it would be possible to provide capabili-
ties that more easily permit nongovernment parties (commercial or non-
commercial) to provide access to government information and services.
Complementing more traditional electronic data interchange technology
for interactions between government and larger businesses and organiza-
tions, a number of systems for online procurement and grant or contract
processing have been rolled out.  Finally, there are challenges associated

with increasing intragovernment information management and collabo-
ration and with performing such functions across levels of government.
In these realms, technical issues such as confidentiality, data integrity,
and information management also present significant obstacles.WHY NOW?Multiple factors have driven expectations that governments will ag-gressively exploit IT.  The most obvious of these factors is the widespread

adoption of technology and related practices in the commercial sector,
contrasted with their less pervasive though growing adoption in govern-
ment.  On the demand side, use of the Internet (and other information

technology) among the general population has resulted in a rising level of
comfort and familiarity with the technologies in other contexts; this fuels
expectations that governments will provide services analogous to those in
the commercial sector.  This growing demand is mirrored in a series of

policy initiatives and legislative efforts.Technology Foundations for E-Government in PlaceThe recent and rapid growth in e-business is the direct result of twomutually reinforcing factors:  (1) a number of technologies reaching points

of maturity, scale, and usability at which they can be incorporated di-
rectly into the infrastructure of commerce (and government); and (2) the
emergence of business practices that can effectively employ these tech-
nologies to advantage.  A brief review of these technological underpin-

nings is useful from two perspectives:  (1) it illustrates the role that past

research efforts have played in providing the foundation for todayÕs e-commerce and e-government, and (2) it illustrates the multitude of tech-
nologies that have come together to permit e-commerce and e-govern-
ment systems to be built.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VISION FOR IT-ENABLED ENHANCEMENT OF GOVERNMENT39The most visible technology supporting e-business is the Internet,which has quickly made the transition from research network to critical
societal infrastructure. The Internet provides a near-ubiquitous, general-
purpose interface across diverse communications links and multiple com-
puting platforms.  The World Wide Web, built on top of the Internet,

provides hyperlinking among information resources and a uniform user
interface for accessing resources located throughout the network.  But

behind the Web interface, which together with e-mail is the way that most
end users experience e-business, lie a number of information technologies
that have been developed incrementally over periods of years or even
decades.  Examples include these:
¥Distributed-processing technologies that support scaling up to very
large numbers of users;¥Approaches to facilitating data interchange, including mediator andwrapper techniques (which allow legacy systems to be integrated into
newer systems) and the Web-inspired XML standard for describing data;¥Capabilities for remote service invocation across the network, which arecurrently being developed and standardized;¥Safe mobile code capabilities, which enable code to be downloadedand run on end-user computing platforms;¥Database/transaction capabilities, most notably the development ofreliable, large-scale relational databases (and more recent object exten-
sions); capabilities for ensuring integrity and consistency of databases;
and the emergence of a standard language, SQL, for querying databases;¥Multimedia technologies, including techniques for compressing au-dio and video, that support streaming or downloaded content and real-
time interactions;¥Graphical Web browsers, which made Internet services accessible togeneral users and across a wide range of hardware and software plat-
forms;¥Search engines, including indexing, query interfaces, and spidersthat build indexes of Web content;¥Data mining, which allows patterns to be inferred and relevant datato be identified from very large data sets;¥Improved understanding of human-computer interface issues, rangingfrom page layout and navigation design to e-commerce transaction sup-
port and online collaboration;¥Public-key and other cryptographic security capabilities that provide
confidentiality and integrity of in-transit and stored data, nonrepudiation
of transactions, and the like; and¥Other security capabilities, including authentication of users, net-work monitoring, and intrusion detection.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTGrowing Awareness and DemandConfirmation of growing public interest comes from a January 2001Hart-Teeter poll conducted by the Council for Excellence in Government,
which found that about three-quarters of Americans believed e-govern-
ment should be a top priority for the then-incoming Bush administration;
and from market research by Deloitte Consulting that projected signifi-
cant growth in customer demand over the next two years.12  Actual de-
mand has also been growing, as illustrated by the inclusion of the Internal
Revenue ServiceÕs Web site, <www.irs.gov>, in Jupiter Media MetrixÕsFebruary 2001 ÒTop 50 Web SitesÓ ranking.
13With image and economic development at stake, competition amonggovernments at the state and local levels to deliver improved services is
high, a point emphasized by the then-director of the Washington State
Department of Information Services, Steven Kolodney, in his remarks to
the committee. Internationally, a number of other nations are developing
and deploying e-government services.  These efforts are at varying levels
of maturity, with the more advanced featuring national e-government
portals designed to offer a single point of access to both information
resources and transactions.14As these pressures result in more services being deployed, conflictingdemands will arise for increased reliability; for anywhere, anytime, any-
device access; for accuracy and timeliness of information; and for privacy
and security of confidential information (these trade-offs are discussed in
Chapter 2, ÒSpecial Considerations in E-GovernmentÓ).Finally, interest in e-government is also driven by the desire to in-crease efficiency in government. Ever-present budgetary pressures, espe-
cially on the so-called discretionary portion of the federal budget, have
prompted legislators and those in the executive branch alike to seek ways12Deloitte Consulting and Deloitte and Touche. 2000. At the Dawn of e-Government: TheCitizen as Customer, March 1.  For more information, see <http://www.deloitte.com/vc/
0,1323,sid=2228&ar=&cid=3446,00.html>.13Jupiter Media Metrix. 2001. ÒJupiter Media Metrix Announces U.S. Top 50 Web andDigital Media Properties for February 2001Ó (press release).  Available online at <http://
www.jmm.com/xp/jmm/press/2001/pr_031301.xml>.14For example, building on earlier efforts to make information and forms available online,France launched its <mon.service-public.fr> portal in late 2001. Development is slated tocontinue through 2005. See Rory Mulholland. 2001. ÒFrench Bureaucracy Takes OnlineLeap.Ó BBC News, November 14. Available online at <http://news.bbc.co.uk/hi/english/sci/tech/newsid_1655000/1655820.stm>.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VISION FOR IT-ENABLED ENHANCEMENT OF GOVERNMENT41of leveraging information technology to decrease the costs of providingcustomer service and administering government programs.15E-Government Policy InitiativesWith growing awareness of e-government, it is becoming a focus oflegislation.  Building on the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980, enacted to

decrease burdens on the public from information collection and reporting
requirements, and on its subsequent amendments, the Government Pa-
perwork Elimination Act (GPEA) of 1998 (P.L. 105-277) requires federalagencies to provide individuals or other entities the options of submitting
information to or transacting with the agency electronically and of main-
taining records electronically when practicable.  The legislation sets a

target date of 2003 for implementation throughout the federal govern-
ment.GPEA provides that electronic records and their related electronicsignatures not be denied validity merely because they are in electronic
form, and it encourages the federal government to use a range of elec-
tronic signature alternatives. The Clinger-Cohen Act of 199616shifted re-sponsibility for IT acquisition from the General Services Administration
to individual agencies.  It established the role of chief information officer

(CIO) in executive-branch agenciesÑgiving the CIOs both strategic andoperational responsibility for all IT programsÑand it gave the Office ofManagement and Budget responsibility for setting overall policies and
reviewing agency IT programs through the budget process.A number of additional legislative measures have helped propel e-government.  For example, the FY 1999 Department of Defense Authori-

zation Act requires DOD to establish a defensewide electronic system for
ordering supplies and materials, and the Electronic Benefit Transfer
Interoperability and Portability Act of 2000 (P.L. 106-171) requires the U.S.Department of Agriculture to establish a national standard for electronic15While this effect is widely accepted as an article of faith, economists have struggled tosubstantiate it.  In recent years, some economists have reported that this failure may have
been an artifact of the measures selected. For instance, some of them may not have ad-
equately captured any productivity growth manifested in increased output quality ratherthan quantity.  There is a general sense that productivity depends on careful execution of IT
programs, often in conjunction with business-process changes.  This issue is discussed in

CSTB, NRC, 1993, Information Technology in the Service Society:  A Twenty-First Century Lever,National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.; and CSTB, NRC, 1998, Fostering Research on theSocial and Economic Impacts of Information Technology, National Academy Press, Washington,D.C.16Formally, the Information Technology Management Reform Act (P.L. 104-106).Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTfood-stamp benefit transactions.  A series of hearings on e-government
issues were held in the 106th Congress, and new e-government legislation
has been under consideration in the current, 107th Congress. Legislative
proposals being actively considered as of this writing include establish-
ment of a fund for innovative cross-agency IT programs.The executive branch has also been the locus of a number of initia-tives aimed at advancing e-government. The Clinton administration ini-
tiative called the National Partnership for Reinventing Government (origi-
nally named the National Performance Review, or NPR), which had the
stated goal of increasing the efficiency and effectiveness of government,
placed considerable emphasis on leveraging information technology in
meeting that goal.  The Access America initiative, in part an outgrowth of

NPR activities, included several instances of cross-agency collaboration
and resulted in the establishment of several targeted portals aimed at
particular population segments.  Executive branch policy making with

respect to e-government has included a presidential memorandum that
called on federal agencies to, among other things, make available online
by the end of 2000 the forms associated with the top 500 government
services. This action resulted in the implementation of the Web site
<www. fedforms.gov>.17Another offshoot of the NPR initiative was the Information Technol-ogy Innovation Fund (ITIF), which was operated from 1995 to 2000, expir-
ing with the end of the Federal Telephone System-2000 (FTS-2000) pro-
gram.  Funded through a 1 percent set-aside from FTS-2000 charges

assessed to agencies, the ITIF provided about $30 million for some 70
programs.18  A 1996 executive order established the Chief Information
Officers Council, an organization of CIOs of the largest 28 federal agen-
cies and two representatives of the smaller agencies, to address IT issues
on a governmentwide basis.19  In addition to setting up an e-governmentcommittee in 2000, the CIO Council worked on a variety of issues that17Executive Office of the President.  1999.  
ÒMemorandum for the Heads of ExecutiveDepartments and Agencies (Subject: Electronic Government).Ó  December 17.  Available
online at <http://www.govexec.com/links/121799memo.htm>.18Projects were selected by a committee of representatives from the interagency bodyadvising the General Services Administration on the Federal Telecommunications System
(the Interagency Management Council) and another interagency IT group (the GovernmentInteragency Technology Services Board).  Gayle Gordon.  2000.  
ÒInformation TechnologyInnovation in the Federal GovernmentÓ (unpublished).19Executive Office of the President (EOP).  1996.  Executive Order 13011. EOP, Washing-
ton, D.C.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VISION FOR IT-ENABLED ENHANCEMENT OF GOVERNMENT43included Y2K, privacy and security, governmentwide strategic planning,and a number of shorter-term problems.Attention to e-government has continued in the Bush administration.The presidentÕs 2002 budget blueprint includes a small e-government fundfor interagency initiatives, with a proposed budget of $10 million in 2002
and total of $100 million over 3 years. The presidentÕs proposal wouldhave the fund allocations made by OMB.20  In October 2001, OMB, with
the approval of the PresidentÕs Management Council, identified 23 prior-ity cross-agency e-government projects.21  The USA PATRIOT Act of2001,22 which is replete with new IT programs and initiatives in suchareas as border security, immigration, and airline security, underscores
the critical role that IT capabilities are seen as playing in homeland secu-
rity efforts.   In 2002, OMB released a report, which builds on the work of
a federal task force convened in 2001, that maps out an e-government
strategy and identifies priorities for implementation.23GOVERNMENT IT RESEARCH FORELECTRONIC GOVERNMENTIT research and development programs exist across the federal gov-ernment, and many agencies have development programs aimed at creat-
ing e-government capabilities.  The Digital Government program, an ini-

tiative of the National Science FoundationÕs Computer and InformationScience and Engineering (CISE) Directorate, is a program that supports
research at the intersection of the IT research community and the opera-
tional needs of the government.  It aims to help agencies improve internal,

interagency, and intergovernmental operations and government-citizen
interactions.  In particular, the program supports joint research programs

between academic researchers and government agencies and requires that20See Executive Office of the President.  2001.  
A Blueprint for New Beginnings: A Respon-sible Budget for AmericaÕs Priorities. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., Feb-ruary 28. Available online at <http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/usbudget/blueprint/budtoc.html>.21Diane Frank. 2001. ÒOMB Sets E-Gov Agenda.Ó Federal Computer Week, October 29.Available online at <http://www.fcw.com/fcw/articles/2001/1029/news-omb-10-29-01.asp>.22Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Inter-cept and Obstruct Terrorism Act (USA PATRIOT Act) of 2001, P.L. 107-56.23Office of Management and Budget (OMB).  2002.  
E-Government Strategy:  Simplified
Delivery of Services to Citizens (Implementing the PresidentÕs Management Agenda for E-Govern-ment).  OMB, Executive Office of the President, Washington, D.C., February 27.  Available
online at <http://www.cio.gov/Documents/egovreport.pdf>.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTat least one government agency be a partner.  It encompasses work at thefederal, state, local, and international levels.  Partner agencies are ex-

pected to contribute resources to the collaborative efforts, with the expec-
tation that the programÕs funding will increasingly leverage additionalresources from participating agencies.24Launched in 1998, the Digital Government program has issued grantstotaling roughly $30 million to fund more than two dozen research
projects and a number of planning grants and exploratory workshops.
Funded proposals involve more than 30 federal departments and agen-
cies, some 60 universities and nonprofit organizations, and a handful of
commercial firms, and have attracted more than $4 million in matching
support from the participating government agencies.25  Stimulated in
part by the availability of federal and state research support, several uni-
versity-based research centers examining e-government issues have been
established.An offshoot of the Digital Government program is the Digital Gov-ernment Consortium, a grouping of agencies partnering with IT research-
ers and/or interested in pursuing future research collaborations.  Among

other activities it publishes ÒDG Online,Ó a quarterly that presents news
on digital-government developments and related IT research, and main-
tains the Web site <www.diggov.org>.  Another offshoot of the NSF pro-
gram is an e-government fellows program conducted by the Council for
Excellence in Government that is intended to help create awareness of the
strategic benefits of and opportunities for collaborating with the academic
research community on the part of mid-level government program man-
agers.  In addition, the Interagency Working Group on Information Tech-

nology R&D has established a program, called the Federal Information
Services and Applications Council (FISAC), with the goal of transitioning
research results from federal agencies that conduct IT R&D to missions
and systems across the federal government. FISAC carries out these ac-
tivities through several working groupsÑthe IT for Crises Management,Federal Statistics (FedStats), Next-Generation Internet Applications, and
Universal Access teamsÑand through engagement with the NSFÕs Digi-tal Government program.24National Science Foundation (NSF), Directorate for Computer and Information Scienceand Engineering. 1999. ÒDigital Government, Program Announcement NSF 99-103.Ó NSF,
Arlington, Va.  Available online at <http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/1999/nsf99103/
nsf99103.pdf>.25Updated from information provided in briefing slides presented to the committee byLarry Brandt, Digital Government Program director, August 3, 2000, and the Digital Gov-ernment program announcement, cited in footnote 24 above.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.452Special Considerations inE-Government:  Why Government
Leads in Demand for CertainInformation Technologies
Although government can generally build on the technologies andservices emerging in the e-business marketplace, special requirements
arise in certain areas, reflecting the nature of the governmentÕs operating
environment.  This chapter briefly discusses several areas where govern-

ment leads in demand for technologies used for e-government services.UBIQUITYGovernments must provide services to all citizens. Unlike the privatesector, they cannot opt to serve only the more profitable customers, nor
can they select particular market segments in which to participate (though
governments obviously do target specific populations to achieve their
policy objectives). Nor can citizens choose which government they wish
to deal with.In the context of e-government, ÒservicesÓ should not be taken toimply only interactions resembling commercial transactions. In govern-
ment, important services may involve provision of information, for ex-
ample, or interactions with elected representatives, or commentary from
citizens, businesses, and organizations on proposed regulations. Service
is provided today primarily through in-person, telephone, and postal mail
interactions; but e-mail, the Web, kiosks, and other forms of IT are provid-
ing new opportunities to expand the accessibility of services and makeInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTthem available ubiquitously.  Ubiquity has three dimensions: access for
everyone, access everywhere, and access anytime.Access for EveryoneThe challenge of providing ubiquitous access to all citizens has sev-eral elements. First, it involves overcoming geographical and financial
barriers. Much of the excitement associated with e-government is akin to
that associated with e-commerceÑonline access from the home meansnot having to trek to a government office or find the time to place a
telephone call during normal business hours (often only to be put on
hold).But home access is constrained by such factors as the affordability ofcomputer equipment and whether Internet or other telecommunications
services are available and affordable in a given area. While the cost of
computers has dropped significantly over the years and the penetration
of computers and Internet access has reached roughly one-half of U.S.
households, the hardware cost is still greater than that of many other
consumer appliances; thus penetration lags significantly behind that of
telephone service (which is nearly ubiquitous). Similarly, although dial-
up Internet access is available from a number of providers in most parts of
the country through a local call, there are areas where dial-up access is
either not available or only available from a single provider.1Helping provide for those without home access, a growing number oflibraries and other community institutions offer public Internet access,
supported in part by several federal programs.2  Residential broadband
Internet service provides much higher data rates that support faster down-

load times and the use of richer multimedia content, but its availability is
spotty. As this availability continues to grow, there will be concerns about
whether those limited to dial-up access will be at a disadvantage similar
to that experienced earlier by people without any form of Internet access.
Even if affordable and available, todayÕs technologies and services present1Thomas A. Downes and Shane Greenstein. 1998. ÒDo Commercial ISPs Provide Univer-sal Access?Ó Available online at <http://www.kellogg.nwu.edu/faculty/greenstein/im-
ages/htm/Research/tprcbook.pdf>.2The e-rate program, established under section 254 of the Telecommunications Act of1996, uses a levy on interstate and international telecommunications providers to support
discounts on eligible institutionsÕ purchases of telecommunications and Internet services
plus internal networking, with discounts varying with location (e.g., high-cost, low-income).Community-based Internet access is also supported by the U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban DevelopmentÕs Neighborhood Networks program and the U.S. Department ofEducationÕs Community Technology Center grants.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS IN E-GOVERNMENT47significant usability barriers for those less adept with computers and theInternet. The frustrations of trying to use present generations of systems
and software are widely acknowledged to have the effect of discouraging
use, especially among less-computer-literate segments of the population.
Therefore, at least for the foreseeable future, many people are likely to opt
not to adopt these technologies, though they still want access to govern-
ment services. At a minimum, these gaps suggest that there will of neces-
sity be a long transition period during which new IT-based services will
complement but not replace more traditional forms of interaction with
government.With respect to disability or language barriers, computerized servicesinvolve both advantages and disadvantages. They present additional bar-
riers to those with vision or motor impairments, given the high degree of
dependence on visual communication and the fine motor skills that char-
acterize todayÕs keyboard and mouse-interaction paradigm. But the tech-nologies may also provide the most effective tools to enhance access:
online interactions can substitute for visits to a government office, thereby
facilitating access to information and services for those with mobility
impairments.Where adequate provisions have been made, it is possible to installmodifications or use adaptive software (e.g., text-to-speech or voice rec-
ognition) to compensate for disabilities.  Recent operating-systems re-

leases and Web software standards contain provisions for this sort of
access (such as hooks that allow screen readers or alternative input de-
vices to work with them), and the World Wide Web ConsortiumÕs WebAccessibility Initiative has developed both technology and usability
guidelines. To maximize the extent to which such techniques are used,
legislation was enacted in 1998 that mandates improved access both for
federal employees and the public.3 In addition, rules developed by the
Electronic and Information Technology Access Advisory Committee are
in the process of being implemented by agencies.4  When implemented,
they will ease, though not eliminate, access issues.Ubiquity also implies that important information be presented to citi-zens in a useful and meaningful manner. Simply offering access to gov-
ernment documents is not very effective without some means of conve-3Section 508 of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998, P.L. 105-220, which amendedSection 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, 29 U.S.C. ¤ 794d.  The Americans with Disabilities Actof 1990 extended similar provisions beyond the federal government.4Government bodies working on accessibility include the General ServicesAdministrationÕs Center for IT Accommodation and the U.S. Department of DefenseÕs Com-puter/Electronic Accommodations Program.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTniently searching them and cataloging the results. Similarly, providingdirect and unstructured access to the wealth of statistical data collected by
the federal government does not necessarily constitute meaningful ac-
cess. For example, one concern of the federal statistics community is that
a low level of numerical/statistical literacy in the general population
makes it especially important to provide users with interfaces that pro-
vide the necessary context and make it easier to interpret the information.
It is certainly not feasible (nor affordable) for government to provide all of
its information in a form that is understandable to everyone.  But for key

information and services, there will be expectations that segments of the
population not be disenfranchised.  One challenge in building systems

that provide universal access is doing so without forcing everyone into a
lowest-common-denominator situation.Access Everywhere, AnytimeÒUbiquityÓ has another meaning in the information technology arena
that is also relevant to e-government:  it signifies software and infrastruc-

ture capabilities that enable individuals to connect and communicate in
more natural ways. The vision, to date unrealized, is that applications
from different organizationsÑincluding government agencies and of-ficesÑwould work smoothly together and that users would be providedwith effectively seamless access to information and services across vari-
ous access devices and communications links. Moreover, users would be
able to obtain information and services from wherever they are located,
and they could use a variety of computing devicesÑnot just desktopcomputers with wired Internet access.  In this arena, both the private

sector and government are only in the early stages of exploring potential
applications and modes of operation.Use of IT in government applications requires availability and reli-ability. Even for common, nondemanding applications such as renewing
a driverÕs license, expectations will be high that computer servers andcommunications links are functioning most of the time. Particular appli-
cations such as emergency services and crisis management demand a
very high level of reliability and availability.TRUSTWORTHINESSServices supplied by government have to satisfy high expectations ofsecurity and confidentiality.  In this regard, government must provide

guarantees that generally exceed those offered by the private sector. Indi-
viduals simply will not tolerate unauthorized or accidental disclosure ofInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS IN E-GOVERNMENT49personal information contained in tax filings, social security records, andthe like.Conventional business practice is to treat trust requirements with arisk-management approach in which the costs of implementing security
measures are weighed against the consequencesÑa calculation that indi-cates what (small) level of exposure may be acceptable, as zero risk is
impossible to achieve. This approach is not easily implemented in a gov-
ernment setting, where the high level of scrutiny leads to a very low
tolerance for failure and where stringent security requirements are the
norm. Security in both classified and nonclassified systems has long been
an area of emphasis in government information policy, as reflected in the
Computer Security Act of 19875 and the security provisions of OMB Cir-
cular A-130.6One essential ingredient of a trustworthy system is the ability to au-thenticate the identity of someone wishing to access it, whether that indi-
vidual is a citizen seeking to retrieve personal records or engage in a
transaction online, or a government employee authorized to open
records.7 Identity theft has already proven to be a troublesome issue in
the private sector, and it is easy to anticipate heightened concerns if it
occurred with e-government services. The simplest computer-based au-
thentication mechanisms, commonly used in Internet transactions today,
rely on a shared secret, such as a password. But passwords have a number
of weaknesses; for example, because they are chosen by users, they are
often easily guessed. One way to strengthen such mechanisms is to make
the secrets dynamic, such as by using information contained in recent
transactions or communications, but this approach also has vulnerabili-
ties.Public-key cryptography technology provides more robust authenti-cation, though a major challenge is distributing the public keys in a secure
manner. A public-key infrastructure (PKI), which encompasses technolo-
gies, processes, and policies, makes use of certificates that allow the iden-
tity of users to be authoritatively associated with their public key. One
PKI model relies on trusted third parties, known as certificate authorities,5The Computer Security Act of 1987 (P.L. 100-235).6Office of Management and Budget (OMB). 2000. Management of Federal Information Re-sources. OMB Circular A-130. November 30. OMB, Executive Office of the President, Wash-ington, D.C. Available online at <http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/circulars/a130/a130trans4.html>.7The importance of adequate online authentication and lack of a good solution was ap-parent in the 1997 Social Security AdministrationÕs stumbles in providing online access toPersonal Earnings and Benefit Estimate Statements (PEBES).Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTwho themselves use public-key cryptography to digitally sign certificatesthat bind the identity of subscribers to a public key.   But full-featured PKI

systems are not yet commonplace in either the government or the private
sector. Obstacles to widespread use include the complexity of key man-
agement; the need to establish systems and procedures for issuance and
revocation of certificates; the lack of compatibility among different imple-
mentations; and the cost, inconvenience, and system-performance penal-
ties associated with PKI systemsÕ use.  Design choices must balance such
tensions as ease of use versus security and accountability versus privacy.Several federal agencies are currently working to develop or imple-ment PKI systems, complemented by cross-agency PKI efforts by the Chief
Information Officers Council.8  For instance, the Department of Defense
is rolling out the Common Access Card, which uses PKI technology to
issue certificates to military, dependents, civilian employees, and some
contractors.  Challenges in implementing PKI in government include jus-
tifying the cost premiums associated with being an early adopter, en-
abling the necessary level of interoperability among systems and across
agencies, developing systems that scale up sufficiently, and funding and
sustaining a cross-agency effort.  Government pilots will also provide

insight on important operational issues such as how frequently cards are
lost or stolen and how well these circumstances can be handled through
certificate revocation.In the development of authentication services, technology, policy, and
management considerations are tightly intertwined. In the United States,
there has been long-standing opposition to government-issued universal
identifiers, as evidenced by the absence of a national identification card
(though the issue resurfaced in 2001-2002 in the wake of the September
11, 2001, terrorist attacks).9  The reality is that each person establishes a
number of different identities for interacting with businesses, organiza-
tions, and government bodies, and that each of these organizations limits
the information that it discloses. For instance, a driverÕs license is used fora different purpose and is associated with information different from the
purpose and information related to a voter-registration card, and there is8General Accounting Office (GAO). 2001. Information Security: Advances and RemainingChallenges to Adoption of Public Key Infrastructure Technology. GAO-01-277. GAO, Washing-ton, D.C., February.9For an assessment of technology and policy issues associated with national identifica-tion systems, see the forthcoming  Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB)
interim report on nationwide identity systems.  The report will be available from the CSTB

home page at <http://www.cstb.org>, as well as the National Academy Press Web page at<http://www.nap.edu>.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS IN E-GOVERNMENT51little need for exchange of data between the respective authorities. Re-flecting concerns about privacy implications, record linkage by govern-
ment has in fact long been limited by law.With electronic records, however, it becomes much easier to use iden-tifying information (such as name, address, or social security number) to
match records across multiple identities and different government pro-
grams.  Although there will inevitably be pressures for e-government

systems to mirror the complex web of authentication and identity mecha-
nisms found in the paper-based world, trade-offs will be required. These
pressures must be balanced against increased complexity that could re-
duce the utility of e-government systems and compromise their ease of
use.The committeeÕs exploration of crisis management pointed to the needfor dealing with exceptions with respect to who can access information
and systems.  In a crisis situation, access to a variety of private and/or

government confidential records may be neededÑsuch as quick access tothe blueprints of a building that has collapsed in an earthquake or to
medical records needed for emergency treatmentÑalthough it would bemore tightly restricted under normal circumstances. With electronically
protected records, one needs explicit mechanisms for handling exceptions
in an emergency.  Simply persuading someone holding needed informa-

tion of the urgency of a situation, which is how such contingencies are
typically addressed with paper-based records, might not suffice, as this
request alone would not permit records to be unlocked.  More generally,

tools supporting adaptive policies will be needed in order to accommo-
date crisis situations, for both enabling additional access (to provide ad-
equate response) and shutting down certain kinds of access (to avert new
threats).Additional trust issues arise if software agents that purport to act onbehalf of an individual are used.  First, if a user grants authority to an

agent to act on his or her behalf, what kind of trust can that person have
that the agent will not abuse the authority?  This issue requires both

validating the code and the environment within which the code will oper-
ate with the userÕs authority.  Second, when allowing code to run in one
Õsown environment (e.g., downloading code that will do useful things on
oneÕs own local machine), how does the person trust that the code willonly do what it purports to do and not, for example, gain unwanted
access to personal information stored on the computer?  Two approaches
have been developed for trusting code distributed over the Internet from
servers to clients:  (1) have the source authenticate the code before it is run

(the approach used with MicrosoftÕs ActiveX controls), or (2) run the codein a special ÒsandboxÓ environment that limits what the code is able to do.
Of course, there are potential weaknesses in both approachesÑsuch asInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTmisappropriated credentials in the case of ActiveX or bugs in the codeimplementing the sandbox in the case of Java.  Thus, it remains an open

question whether citizens will trust software agents to provide informa-
tion and services in such critical areas as tax or health care or feel comfort-
able running mobile code on their own machines.Another dimension of the trust issue relates to the consequences ofinadvertent information disclosure. Given the authority associated with
government data, premature release of, say, a key economic indicator
could have significant implications for financial markets. (This was the
concern raised in 1998 when the Bureau of Labor Statistics inadvertently
posted employment numbers to a bureau Web site in advance of the
correct release date and time.)While such tensions arise in the private sector as well, the long historyof public concerns over the potential ability of government to gather and
correlate information about individuals means that the government will
continue to play a key role in how these tensions are addressed.  Research

alone cannot resolve them, of course, but it can create technologies that
enable greater flexibility. For example, technological tools can enable
adaptive policies such as mutually trusted intermediate agents.ACCESS AND CONFIDENTIALITYGovernment collects some information on a strictly confidential basis(e.g., answers to statistical surveys), and other information is collected
under the assumption that it will be carefully guarded. Both overall and
specific statutory and regulatory restrictions control how such informa-
tion is used or released publicly, reflecting very strong expectations that
the promise of confidentiality will be upheld. Yet at the same time, gov-
ernment is charged with releasing information and making it uniformly
available to all.Disclosure-limiting practices and technologies are required when in-dividuals (or organizations) provide data under confidentiality pledgesÑpromises that if and when the data are released by the government, they
will be in a form that does not reveal the sourcesÕ identities. In certain
cases, disclosure can be limited to carefully selected individuals (e.g.,
those who have agreed to disclosure terms or who are sworn employees
accessing the data for internal government purposes). By contrast, an
organization conducting a marketing survey, for example, is not bound to
the same requirements.Governments are also expected to protect the privacy of citizensÑtoinclude safeguards on what information is collected and how it is used. A
basic privacy framework for the federal government is provided by the
Privacy Act of 1974 (P.L. 93-579), which applies principles of fair informa-Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS IN E-GOVERNMENT53tion practice to federal agencies. As illustrated by the concerns expressedover government Web sites that tracked user behavior by using cookies
(small files created by Web browsers to preserve information across Web
sessions, providing such capabilities as tracking usersÕ access across Websites or correlating separate visits to a single Web site) and by the subse-
quent 2000 OMB memorandum laying down strict conditions for cookiesÕuseÑgovernment experiences significant pressures to maximize the pri-vacy accorded to those using government systems and services. An ongo-
ing challenge is providing citizens with assurances that these policies are
being fulfilled.STRUCTURAL CONSTRAINTSBusinesses are competing to meet customer needs better and are tai-loring their market segmentation (identification of customer groups such
as small businesses or students) accordingly. For electronic services, this
usually means coevolving e-business technology and business models.
Improvement in customer focus is often accomplished by changing pro-
cesses and organizational structure to support business needs betterÑfacilitating in particular the creation of portals for information and trans-
actions that are aggregated around the needs of specific market segments.
For example, businesses can reorganize to bypass intermediaries in rela-
tionships (so-called disintermediation).Government has been taking some initial steps in this direction aswell, as evidenced by multiple government information portals and an
increasing number of aggregate transaction portals. Difficult in any set-
ting, modification of processes and organizational structure in govern-
ment is often significantly constrained by legal and administrative stric-
tures.  For example, information-sharing barriers have been legislatively

established to protect citizen privacy. A further complication is that the
desired span of aggregation can include state and local governments as
well as federal agencies. These factors raise the possibility that, rather
than reorganizing itself, government might adopt technology to offer in-
tegrated user-oriented services. For example, one might create portals
that aggregate information or services for the customer and dispatch the
elements of the query or transaction to the appropriate set of government
entities.Significant privacy challenges are also posed by portals for govern-ment information and transactions that are operated by third parties.
Though a competitive market of third-party portals could result in im-
proved access to government services, they will face the issue of how to
provide legal and technical safeguards relating to confidentiality and in-
tegrity of information that citizens enjoy when interacting directly withInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTthe government.  For example, the privacy (and compliance) of a citizen is
enhanced by laws that prevent certain government entities (such as the
Bureau of the Census or the IRS) from sharing information with other
government entities. This means that potentially no one but the citizen
would be legally able to fuse the multiple data streams provided to the
various government entities. The issue is what privacy safeguards can be
provided when the citizen presents a broad range of data to a portal
operated by a government entity or a third party, in order that the portal
operator may appropriately transact on the citizenÕs behalf with multipleseparate agencies.IT IN SUPPORT OF GOVERNMENT FUNCTIONSThis section provides a brief overview of two areasÑcrisis manage-ment and federal statisticsÑexplored by the committee, and it also takesnote of several other government application areas in which government
leads in technology demand. This presentation is not intended to be com-
prehensive. Rather, it is meant to provide an illustration of the sorts of
unique requirements that arise in the government sector.Crisis Management and Homeland DefenseCrises include natural disasters (e.g., hurricanes, earthquakes, floods,and fires) and man-made disasters (e.g., industrial accidents, infrastruc-
ture failures, and terrorist attacks). Crises can put lives at risk and pose
significant economic threats. The escalating costs (both human and eco-
nomic) of natural disasters, reflecting in part the increased population
living or working in areas at risk, underscore the importance of enhanc-
ing Òcrisis managementÓ capabilities.  The September 11, 2001, attacks
have led to greater attention to preventing, detecting, and responding to
terrorist attacks.  Crisis management encompasses crisis response
Ñtheimmediate activities in the wake of a disasterÑas well as the longer-termÒconsequence managementÓ activities associated with addressing disas-
ters past, present, and future to improve planning, preparedness, mitiga-
tion, and recovery efforts.By its nature, crisis management is a very challenging process.  It
draws on the capabilities and resources of multiple organizations, includ-
ing national, state, and local government, nongovernmental organiza-
tions, and the private sector (and, depending on the location and scale of
the disaster, on international organizations and other national govern-
ments).  Efforts may encompass many functional areas, including trans-

portation, communications, public works and engineering, firefighting,
law enforcement, mass care, health and medical support, urban searchInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS IN E-GOVERNMENT55and rescue, hazardous materials management, food supply, and energysupply. Information technology needs include telecommunications, in-
formation management, geographic information systems, remote sens-
ing, and models and simulations.As explored in more detail in the committeeÕs earlier report on aworkshop examining crisis management,10 government
Õs particular tech-nological needs include these:¥Robust, high-performance communications infrastructure that canadapt to changing demands, manage traffic congestion, and permit prior-
ity overrides for emergency usage;¥Temporary infrastructure that can be quickly deployed when ex-tensive damage has occurred;¥Data management and delivery mechanisms that can function evenwhen the communications infrastructure is degraded and that support
unanticipated information needs;¥Composition of information and communications systems in adhoc situations, such as the establishment of an Òinstant bureaucracyÓ for
crisis response and recovery (see Box 2.1);¥Improved interoperation of information systems, including thatamong systems operated by all levels of government and by private orga-
nizations (see Box 2.2);¥Support for effective decision making and coordination in the faceof uncertainty and stress;¥Overcoming of language and other barriers to communicating withcitizens;¥Enhanced means of warning populations at risk, especially provid-ing information targeted to local circumstances faced by individuals or
neighborhoods; and¥Adapting of e-commerce technology and practices to accommo-date the exception-handling necessary in crisis situations.Federal StatisticsFederal statistics on population characteristics, the economy, health,education, crime, and other factors play a key role in a wide range of
policy, business, and individual decisions. The decennial censusesÑalongwith related estimates that are produced during the intervening yearsÑ10Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council(NRC). 1999. Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis Manage-ment. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTBox 2.1 ÒInstant BureaucracyÓ Capability for Crisis Response and Recovery
One way to assist affected citizens in gaining access to needed information andservices in the wake of a crisis might be to provide the means to build, on the fly, aportal that links information and resources from federal, state, and local agencies;nongovernmental organizations; and businesses. In the event of a hurricane strike,
for example, such a service might provide individuals with information on evacua-tion routes and available shelters, allow people to apply for federal disaster assis-tance, access relief services, file insurance claims, and so forth. At the same time, it
would provide capabilities that support decision making and that coordinate actionsand resources among federal, state, and local agencies and nongovernmental organi-zations. Such a service would be accessible via multiple channels, including the
Internet, from kiosks (including ones quickly set up in or near a disaster area), andwireless devices. The technology for Òinstant bureaucracyÓ would take the form of atoolkit for rapid ad hoc assembly of a portal to support response to a crisis. The
following would be components of the toolkit:¥Software tools for such things as authentication of users, access control, data
integration, and query across multiple databases;¥Standards for data exchange among systems and agencies; and
¥Personalization/persistence capabilities that would retain state between trans-
actions, thereby permitting users to reuse previously captured information and re-
sume interrupted sessions.drive the allocation of federal funding to state and local governments andthe apportionment of legislative districts. Federal statistical data are used
to adjust wages, retirement benefits, and other spending, and to provide
insight into the status, well-being, and activities of the U.S. population.The surveys conducted to derive this information are extensive un-dertakings that involve the collection of detailed information, often from
large numbers of respondents. Most executive branch departments are, in
one way or another, involved in gathering and disseminating statistical
information. About a dozen agencies have statistics as their principal line
of workÑthe two largest are the Bureau of the Census in the U.S. Depart-ment of Commerce and the Bureau of Labor Statistics in the U.S. Depart-
ment of LaborÑand others collect statistics in conjunction with activitiesin particular areas.These federal statistical agencies are characterized not only by theirmission of collecting statistical information but also by their indepen-
dence and commitment to a set of principles and practices aimed at ensur-
ing the quality and credibility of the information they provide. Thus,
these agencies aim to live up to the trustworthiness expectations of citi-Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS IN E-GOVERNMENT57zens so that people will continue to participate in statistical surveys, andto meet the expectations of decision makers who rely on the integrity of
the statistical products they use in policy formulation.Confidentiality protection and trust take on particular importance infederal statistical data collection: information records are linked and data
are combined across agencies (subject to statutory and regulatory con-
straints), and the resulting statistical products are made available to the
public as well as to specialized users. Those providing the information
want assurances that it is properly protected. The federal statistical sys-
tem leads demand for IT in other areas as well. For example, because the
data sources and users are extremely diverse and heterogeneous, one
cannot rely on a simple system for retrieval and integration. Survey data
collection technologies were another example of government leading de-
mand for IT cited at the committeeÕs workshop; federal data collectionefforts frequently exceed private sector efforts both in scope and com-
plexity.Box 2.2Enhanced Capabilities for Rapid Exchange of Information AcrossLevels of Government and with Nongovernment OrganizationsUnder the rubric of Òhomeland defense,Ó a number of cases involve interest in
building enhanced capabilities for exchanging information among diverse actors,including government agencies at all levels as well as private organizations.  Early

detection of biological attacks, for example, depends on rapid gathering of informa-tion assembled by doctors, hospitals, medical laboratories, and local and state healthofficials.  Detecting misuse of student visa programs to gain entry to the United States

for illegitimate purposes requires correlating student visa applications, immigrationentry information, and college attendance records.  In each of these cases, there is
technical complexity in terms of needing to draw on multiple databases systems that
are operated by distinct organizations and do not necessarily conform to any com-mon standard.  Also, sensitivities are associated with information exchange in each
caseÑboth medical and educational records have privacy expectations (and specificlegal and procedural safeguards) associated with them.  The following technologies
would help enable these capabilities:¥Middleware agents that issue standing queries into local databases and sendthe results to a federal agency.  For example, agents could periodically pull specified
student enrollment information from university databases and  transmit it to the ap-

propriate federal agencies.¥The means for organizations to audit the information transferred to federalagencies, to provide assurance that privacy safeguards are being upheld.¥Tools for anomaly detection based on information drawn from multiple data-bases.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTMilitary ApplicationsMilitary applications have been a dominant focus of IT research formore than 40 years. The military was, and continues to be, an important
customer of IT vendors, and military-funded research programs have
provided a considerable fraction of academic research funding. The de-
manding information-management, analysis, and communications needs
of national defense have been reflected in research programs addressing
such areas as survivability, security, interoperation, life-cycle manage-
ment, software engineering, embedding, networking, wearable comput-
ing, systems research, modeling and simulation, communications (includ-
ing support for mobility), and high-performance computing. Progress
made in these research programs not only has enhanced defense systems
but also has stimulated advances in the commercial computing sector.ArchivingGovernment is charged with preserving records of its activities. Atthe federal level, the National Archives and Records Administration
(NARA) has overall responsibility for archiving, and it provides guidance
and assistance to agencies on the creation, maintenance, use, and disposi-
tion of government records. Each federal agency is responsible for ensur-
ing that its records are created and preserved in accordance with the
Federal Records Act of 1950.11 A combination of pressures to reduce costs,
enhance access, increase efficiency, and modernize aging technical infra-
structures has contributed to a shift to government information resources
being Òborn digital.Ó12 NARA and the agencies are challenged by the
increasing amounts of material that either originates as or is converted to
digital formats. Another agency whose central mission faces pressure as
materials are increasingly born digital is the Library of Congress.13As elsewhere in government, expectations on the part of both the11Federal Records Act (44 U.S.C. 2904), as described in GAO. 2000. National Archives: TheChallenge of Electronic Records Management. GAO/T-GGD-00-24. GAO, Washington, D.C.Available online at <http://www.gao.gov/new.items/gg00024t.pdf>.12The answer to whether this shift will realize cost savings, especially in the short term,is not straightforward. Major reports still must be published in paper form, and all of thewriting and editorial costs remain the same regardless of format. In addition, there are costs
of preparing files for the Web and costs associated with maintenance and connectivity ofWeb servers. The cost of printing a report may decline as more people use its online ver-sion, but it could well turn out that the total cost of providing the report increases.13CSTB, NRC. 2000. LC21:  A Digital Strategy for the Library of Congress
. National AcademyPress, Washington, D.C.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS IN E-GOVERNMENT59general public and specialized stakeholders for archiving are being in-creased by what is available on the Web in nongovernmental contexts.
This shift, together with rapid technological change, challenge existing
archival practices and the institutions responsible for providing long-
term access to government information.In the past, standardized publication and filing systems were used tomanage at least key documents, facilitating archiving. Today, the situa-
tion is more informal, with a considerable body of material residing either
on internal systems or on agency Web sites. Efforts to establish
governmentwide systems for such digital information have had limited
success. Electronic documents are frequently changed over time, and

methods for tracking changes or validating the authenticity and integrity
of archived electronic documents require further development.The advent of digital material also raises many new questions aboutwhat is worth archiving, especially with respect to files with dynamic
content. Web sites come and go (for example, there is no government
source for the Clinton administrationÕs version of the White House Website <www.whitehouse.gov>). With paper documents, one might choose
to retain only final documents such as memoranda and not interim docu-
ments such as rough drafts and phone logs. With digital information,
how does one selectÑor even distinguish amongÑmaterials forarchiving?  Technologically, it might be easier to keep all e-mail or all

distinct draft documents rather than to be selective, but to make sense of
this plethora of material (much of which might be superfluous) would
place a greater burden on the archivist. Could techniques be developed to
automatically select and archive appropriate content?Even when material is selected for archiving, a key challenge is thatwhile some government systems make provisions for upward compat-
ibility, obsolescence of the associated hardware and software and the
fragility of physical storage media pose the risk that digital information
will become inaccessible over time. Consensus does not exist at present
on standard formats or standard metadata descriptors, although efforts to
develop and adopt them are underway.The basic technical challenge is how governments can maintain digi-tal material that is vital for their own operations, for public access, or for
future research. The simplest approach is to create a physical artifact
(paper or microfilm printout) of digital materials so that they can be pre-
served using traditional archival techniques. This does not appear to be
an acceptable solution. For example, it takes away the very benefits that
electronic documents can provide, such as easier search and retrieval.
Furthermore, important types of information, such as databases or links
among documents, do not lend themselves to paper representation. OnInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTthe other hand, preservation of digital materials is not a straightforwardmatter in light of media fragility and system and format obsolescence.Approaches to preserving digital material include migration of exist-ing digital material to new software and hardware platforms as necessi-
tated by new technology; development of emulators of obsolete hardware
and software systems to permit continued access; and development and
adoption of long-term standards and descriptive formats with longer life
spans. Once digital material has been archived, another key challenge is
to construct search and retrieval systems to facilitate access.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.613Technology Levers
THE ROLE OF RESEARCH IN MEETING IT NEEDSThe federal government has been instrumental in developing the fieldof computing since the early days.  One of the first applications of infor-

mation-processing technology in government was the use of punched
cards and mechanical punch card-based tabulation devices, invented by
Herman Hollerith at the Bureau of the Census. These devices, used to
tabulate results of the 1890 census, led to the ubiquitous use of punched
cards as a medium for input, output, and storage for several decades.
After World War II, with the advent of larger computers, demanding
government missions including national defense, gathering and analyz-
ing statistical data, and operating the Social Security system prompted
substantial federal R&D on both hardware and software. The mission of
preparing federal statistical data, for example, triggered a number of in-
novations, including the 1951 delivery of the first Univac (Remington-
Rand) computer to the Bureau of the Census to help tabulate census re-
sults; development of the Film Optical Scanning Device for Input to
Computers (FOSDIC) that enabled 1960 census questionnaires to be trans-
ferred to microfilm and scanned into computers for processing; and Bu-
reau of the Census development of the Topologically Integrated Geo-
graphic Encoding and Referencing (TIGER) digital database of geographic
features covering the entire United States, which served as a foundational
data set for subsequent geographical information systems.  Indeed, prior

to 1960, the federal government was the dominant customer for comput-Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTers.1  This federal dominanceÑor at least heavyweight statusÑin the IT
sector was also manifested in governmentÕs investment in efforts to estab-
lish federal data-processing standards, a substantial fraction of which was
aimed at information systems security (reflecting a long-standing federal
interest in this area).As the commercial market for computing grew in the 1960s, federalsupport for IT research continued to reap benefits.  Over time, govern-

ment lost its position as the leading customer for computers, but because
information technology remained critical to its various missions and be-
cause government led demand in many specific respects, federal support
for IT research continued.  In the 1980s, the Strategic Computing pro-

gram, for example, was launched in the U.S. Department of Defense
(DOD) in order to accelerate the development and transition of informa-
tion technologies critical to defense applications.  Expanding on Defense

Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) research aimed at meeting
military requirements, and on U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) energy
research, NASA space research, NSF basic science, and the mission re-
search of several other agencies, the High Performance Computing and
Communications (HPCC) initiative was created in the early 1990s to help
address Ògrand challengeÓ applications in areas of government interest
such as health, education, libraries, and crisis management, and to accel-
erate innovation in critical supporting information technologies.The history of federally funded IT research shows that problems mo-tivated by government needs, such as networking and parallel process-
ing, when suitably framed in a well-designed research program have
proved to have wide commercial application (as evidenced by the Internet,
distributed transaction processing, and data mining).  Broad goals were

often pursued in order to infuse new thinking into the technology supply
chain of vendors and technology developers for a mission agency.  Ex-

amples of the success of this approach include process separation for
security in operating systems (funded by DARPA in the 1970s and 1980s),
computational science (NSF, DOE, and NASA in the 1980s), and custom
very-large-scale integrated circuit (VLSI) chip design (DARPA in the 1970s
and 1980s).Ideas were transferred to the commercial sector through direct spon-sorship, or through employment or entrepreneurship of laboratory re-1Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council(NRC). 1999. Funding a Revolution: Government Support for Computing Research. NationalAcademy Press, Washington, D.C., Chapter 4.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LEVERS63searchers.  CSTB
Õs report Evolving the High Performance Computing andCommunications Initiative to Support the NationÕs Information Infrastructure
(also known as the Brooks-Sutherland report, after the committeeÕs co-chairs)2 examined the payoff and key lessons learned from federal invest-
ment in computing research. The study concluded that this broad and
sustained federal support profoundly affected the development of com-
puter technology and ultimately led to numerous commercially success-
ful applications.  In turn, this stimulation of the commercial sector pro-

vided the means for government to acquire IT to meet its own needs.The importance of continued investment in foundational technolo-gies, by players across the board, should not be underestimated. Govern-
ment in particular has a unique and historic responsibility to help Òraisethe floorÓ by working in critical research areas that need stimulus. These
are areas in which innovation tends to be nonappropriableÑthat is, enti-ties cannot retain, or appropriate, the value from an invention, and in-
stead the value diffuses broadly. Thus, advances that are nonappropriable

may not directly advance the competitive position of any individual com-
mercial entity, though they may create increments of capability that in the
long run may benefit all users of a technology.  An additional effect of

innovation is that it can create market uncertaintiesÑinnovations candisrupt the competitive position of established players, and in unpredict-
able ways.  Thus, it may not be in the self-interest of any commercial party

to support innovation.  (This point is discussed further in the section

ÒWill Industry Do ItÓ in Chapter 4.)
Today, as government looks to continue to stimulate IT innovationand meet its own needs through IT research, three categories of research
are apparent, which might be handled quite differently with respect to
research management, government sponsorship, and engagement with
industry.  The categories are these:
1. Broad infrastructure.
  These 
ÒplatformÓ technologies are important
for all users of IT, whether commercial or government.2. Governmentwide use.
  There are important developments that could
be applied broadly across many government programs but that might not
necessarily apply in commercial settings.  Many of these technologies fall
2CSTB, NRC. 1995. Evolving the High Performance Computing and Communications Initiativeto Support the NationÕs Information Infrastructure. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.An expanded discussion of the lessons from history is provided in CSTB, NRC, 2000, Fund-ing a Revolution: Government Support for Computing Research, National Academy Press, Wash-ington, D.C.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTin the category of middleware (see the subsection ÒMiddlewareÓ in this
chapter).   DOD has made some attempts to develop agencywide tech-

nologies in this category (such as the High Level Architecture [HLA] and
the Common Operating Environment [COE]).  An example of an un-

solved problem here is that of developing one or more authentication
schemes that government agencies can use to authenticate citizens for
various categories of transactions.  Where government is successful in

developing technologies of this sort and stimulating their uptake, wider
commercial use may be an important consequence.  But the investment is

justified in terms of the government use because there is no established
market.3. Mission-specific. 
 There are many technologies with narrower appli-
cability that address more focused government technical problems.  In

the course of the committeeÕs workshops examining crisis managementand federal statistics, a number of opportunities were identified where
the mission interests of federal agencies and the technical interests of
researchers overlap.  Government applications provide not only new tech-

nical research challenges but also, frequently, texture, richness, and ve-
racity not easily created in laboratory studies. Working on this class of
problems can thus represent a mutually beneficial situation for the re-
searcher seeking to explore an idea and the government body seeking to
discover new approaches to solving a particular problem. Research
funded by the NSFÕs Digital Government program illustrates some ofthese points of intersection, many of them already identified by other
federal agencies and computer science researchers (see Box 3.1).  A num-

ber of specific applied-research opportunities identified in the committeeÕsworkshops are described in its earlier workshop reports.All agencies with organic research programs undertake research incategory 3, above. Those for which IT plays a strategic role also undertake
programs in category 2.  Those with a broad stake in the growth of IT

(such as DOD, NASA, DOE, and others) also address challenges in cat-
egory 1, along with the NSF. The NSF Digital Government program is
positioned to undertake research in all three categories, forming alliances
with mission users in order to identify requirements more concretely,
provide access to data and subject-matter experts, and provide potential
for early validation of innovative concepts.SOME E-GOVERNMENT RESEARCH AREASThe research areas discussed in the following subsections are drawnfrom the committeeÕs detailed studies of crisis management and federalstatistics, as well as from its less-intensive explorations of other govern-
ment application domains, reviews of the literature on government IT,Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LEVERS65and interactions with experts both from within and outside government.The research topics presented in this chapter are intended to provide
examples of the kinds of topics likely to be important to government
information technology.   
It must be noted, however, that inclusion of a topic inthis chapter does not mean that it is an area of sole or even primary importance to
government. Many of these issues are important across-the-board
Ñingovernment and the private sector alikeÑthough the government contextmay present especially stringent requirements or particularly novel is-
sues or in some other way lead in demand. In addition, it must be noted thatthis compilation of topics is not a comprehensive research agenda. Because theIT requirements across government mission agencies are numerous and
diverse, the absence of an area of research from this chapter should not be
taken as an indication that it is not worthy of support in the context of e-
government. Moreover, lists of pertinent topics will evolve over time as
the state of the art advances, requirements in government are modified or
become better understood, and other changes occur. Nor could a study of
this scope and level of effort present a comprehensive analysis of require-
ments and gaps governmentwide.These caveats notwithstanding, the committee intends the compila-tion of topics presented below to be useful to those seeking to stimulate
innovative projects, solicit proposals from researchers, or engage opera-
tional government agencies in IT research.Information ManagementGovernment applications present significant challenges for informa-tion-management technology. Governments hold large amounts of het-
erogeneous data from a wide variety of sourcesÑtextual information,demographic data, geographic data, image and video data, and so forthÑand in databases with many different schemas. They also present a het-
erogeneous computing environment, with numerous types of computer
platforms, database systems, information retrieval systems, and docu-
ment-management systems, just to cite a few.This diversity of computing systems reflects the substantial scale andlongevity of legacy investment that is typical of government (and often
found in the private sector as well), and the large number of departments,
agencies, and programs that traditionally have specified and procured
systems without reference to an overall information or systems architec-
ture. Many older systems adhere to obsolete federal information-process-
ing standards.  More recent systems adhere to prevailing commercial

standards. But agreement on standards is difficult to achieve, compliance
with such specifications is never total, standards do not cover the full
range of design decisions (especially with respect to semantic issues),Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTBox 3.1Research Grants Funded by the NSFÕs Digital Government Program,1999-2001¥A Framework for the Dissemination, Use, and Storage of Geospatial Images
for Field Data Collection¥A Multinational Investigation of New Models of Collaboration for Govern-
ment Services to Citizens and Businesses¥A Planning Proposal: Quality Graphics for Federal Statistical Summaries
¥An Ontology for Geospatial Knowledge

¥Challenges in Statistical Digital Government: A Workshop Promoting
Agency-Research Institution Interaction¥Citizen Access to Government Statistical Data

¥Criteria-Based Inference from Geospatial Data: Automating Government
Decision Making for Genetic Food Security, Crop Improvement, and GlobalGermplasm Needs¥Defining a Motion-Imagery Research and Development Program
¥Developing an Information Technology and Organizational Design Research
Agenda for the Evaluation and Management of Research Proposals¥Digital Gazetteer Information Exchange (DGIE)
¥Bringing Government and Citizens Together: A Metadata Extension Testbed
for the Kentucky Spatial Data Infrastructure (KYSDI) Clearinghouse¥Exploratory Research on Transnational Digital Government
¥Digitalization of Coastal Management and Decision-Making Supported by
Multi-Dimensional Geospatial Information and Analysis¥Geospatial Data-Mining Techniques for a Multimedia Integrated Modeling
System¥Heterogeneous Reasoning Tools for Design Support
and, perhaps most significantly, standards evolve over time. In short,standards alone are not a solution to the challenges of information shar-
ing and integration.Government systems also provide direct support for diverse usersand applicationsÑincluding, for example, commonly required transac-tions at local, state, and federal levels; requests for information about
people and property; requests for historical information (including infor-
mation retained in official archives); requests for statistical information;
researcher requests for various types of information; and government-
worker requests. While some systems are intended as servers or only for
expert users, others are expected to provide meaningful access to a
broader user base. And regardless of their role, information-management
systems design must also take into account a basic tension in the govern-
ment environment: providing access to as much information as possible
while protecting system security and individual privacy.  This goal can be
Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LEVERS67challenging to accomplish because there are interactions among systemdesigns even when the systems themselves do not interactÑthe results ofqueries to separate systems can be combined externally. These consider-
ations are reflected in a number of research needs, both basic and applied,
for systems that access government information:¥Capabilities for finding relevant information in text and extractingstructure from text;¥Managing unstructured and semistructured data;¥Finding relevant information in other types of data, including time-dependent data, geographical databases, satellite data, images, video, and
audio;¥Providing effective access to heterogeneous information types (e.g.,mixed text, image, audio, and geographical data);¥Providing effective access to multilingual information, including¥Identifying Where Technology Logging and Monitoring for Increased SecurityEnd and Where Violations of Personal Privacy and Student Records Begin¥Information Technology Accommodation Research: Creating a Doorway forUniversal Access¥Internet Voting Study¥Knowledge Management Over Time-Varying Geospatial Datasets¥NSF-CNPq Collaborative ResearchÑIssues in the Development of SpatialSpreadsheets and Browsers¥Planning Grant for Research into the Use of Internet-Based Intelligent Systemsfor Shaping and Enhancing Citizen Participation and Service Delivery¥Regulatory Compliance Reporting at EPA: Moving to Digital Information Ac-quisition, Exchange, and Dissemination¥Citizen Agenda-Setting in the Regulatory Process: Electronic Collection andSynthesis of Public Commentary¥Evaluating Information Integration Architectures for a National Statistical DataInfrastructure¥Exploratory Research for Correlating and Data-Mining Flight Data from NTSBAccident Investigations¥Social Processes and Content in Intelink Online Chat Data¥Testbed for High-Speed ÒEnd-to-EndÓ Communications in Support of Com-
prehensive Emergency Management¥Workshop on an Urban Research Agenda¥Workshop on Biodiversity InformaticsSOURCE:  National Science Foundation Award Abstract Database, October 2001.  Available
online at <https://www.fastlane.nsf.gov/a6/A6Start.htm>.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTways of entering queries and searching in multiple languages, includingcross-lingual searches; and¥Representing and managing approximation, uncertainty, and in-consistency.A second class of problems is that of metadata and interoperabilityamong data sets and information systems. Without agreement on the
format and meaning of data (or a means of reconciling different formats
or semantics), it is not possible to transfer information from one system to
another or combine information from multiple systems. One set of issues
concerns information about the data or metadata. For example, metadata
about a raw number provides informationÑsuch as its scale, accuracy, orunitÑthat permits it to be interpreted. Interoperation is easier when sys-tem designers reach consensus about the metadata. This is primarily a
social process, but it involves the technical dimensions of representation
and semantics as well.Representation issues include the syntactic/lexical representation ofeach individual data item (e.g., a date or name), the record structure for
aggregates of multiple data items (e.g., a set that includes a name, social
security number, date of birth, and employment start date), and the linear
byte-stream representation of that data for transmission over networks
and storage on secondary media. Semantic issues include reliability,
source, and other attributes related to the quality of the information; the
interpretation of the information; and the consistency relationships of
that information with other data.The XML Òmeta standardÓ for metadata has been widely embraced
because it provides an effective approach to achieving commonalities with

respect to the three representation issues just noted. XML itself only pro-
vides a language for describing data and relies, therefore, on the success
of social processes to obtain consensus on representation within specific
domains of common interest. With respect to semantic issues, there is less
progress, though the XML standard at least enables communities to
ÒspeakÓ a standardized language in addressing semantic issues.  Stan-
dardization of the metadata describing the format of databases can be
achieved through agreement on XML DTDs (document type definitions,
which are formal descriptions of what can appear in a document and how
documents are structured), and while not research per se, this is an area
deserving continued work. A variety of government and industry bodies
are working to develop standards for various application areas.33See <http://www.xml.gov/scripts/efforts.cfm>.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LEVERS69Research on semantic issues is taking place in the areas of knowledgerepresentation and agent-oriented computing. While various approaches
have been advanced, including mediators and wrappers that act as trans-
lators between the format and syntax of one system and another, seman-
tic interoperability is generally viewed as an unsolved problemÑor rather,one that can be solved only in increments. The social process of agreeing
on metadata that describe the content or the important topics covered by
information objects and databases is difficult to standardize but is one
crucial element for integrating information resources. This type of
metadata is often expressed using a predefined vocabulary, represented
as a list of categories or more structured forms such as taxonomies and
ontologies. Common ontologies facilitate semantically meaningful inte-
gration of data from diverse information sources.Efforts to agree on standard data descriptions, which are more a mat-ter of implementation than of research, should not be confused with work
aimed at developing and merging ontologies for describing content, as
well as at tools for ontology building and sharing. Many taxonomies al-
ready exist in government agencies, and many others are being createdÑfor example, in the sectors of human resource, finance, and health care.
Developing technology to support the development and merging of tax-
onomies, as well as the application of these taxonomies to information
objects, is an important research challenge. As part of these efforts, ways
must be found of coping with the evolution of metadata. Another chal-
lenge is to find ways to address heterogeneous metadata standards, much
as systems must support multiple image or document format standards.A number of other research issues come up in the area of integrating/fusing information from diverse sources. For example, improved tech-
niques for combining results from different systems (e.g., multiple-text
search engines, database systems, geographic information systems) and
techniques for presenting those results would all be of value in a govern-
ment setting.The design of information systems themselves is an area of ongoingexploration. One recent trend has been the development of centralized
data warehouses, which contain data extracted from operational transac-
tion systems, to facilitate retrieval or analysis. Such warehouses could
provide short-term benefits, such as improved understanding of the cost
of programs and how agencies use resources, and long-term benefits,
such as better understanding of the impact of programs and support for
enhanced planning of new programs. Frequently, information is stored in
multiple systems, which necessitates special techniques for locating and
retrieving it. This entails developing improved algorithms for finding
information resources, selecting the appropriate sources for a given query,
representing their content, and merging the results.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTData-mining techniques offer capabilities for discovering importantbut nonobvious patterns and relationships among and between a wide
variety of data types. These include improved algorithms for data mining
of conventional structured databases (including data warehouses) as well
as techniques for the data mining of less-structured text data and more
complex multimedia data sources.4 The wealth of data in government
information systems presents an attractive opportunity for developing
new data-mining techniques, though it will be important to differentiate
among user groups. Statisticians or social scientists seeking to explore
patterns in demographic data will have a different set of needs from those
of nonexperts. Interesting questions include how nonexperts might use
data-mining capabilities and how one could make these techniques avail-
able to them in a usable form.Human-Computer InterfaceCSTBÕs 1997 project examining every-citizen interfaces to the nationÕsinformation infrastructure underscored the opportunity and challenge of
developing technology that could be used easily and effectively by all.5Many e-government systems must provide information and services to a
range of users: experts within the government, experts outside govern-
ment, and the general public. Even when the user population is seg-
mented by capability and interest, success in delivering services depends
on the development of appropriate human-computer interfaces (HCIs).
HCI issues are especially important because there is no MooreÕs law onhuman perceptual, attentional, or cognitive/problem solving capabili-
tiesÑin other words, peopleÕs abilities do not scale up at the same rapidrate that basic computing capabilities do (or, for that matter, the rate at
which the total volume of information resources is growing). Thus, as
Herbert Simon has observed, the scarce resource in human-computer in-
terfaces is and will remain human attention. This is especially true in
nonroutine applications such as crisis management.HCI is an inherently multidisciplinary research area, drawing on ideasfrom psychology as well as computer science (and related areas such as4For example, in its statistics workshop, the committee hosted a discussion of data-mining opportunities using data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Sur-vey, which collects clinical information in text form as well as in X-ray images.5CSTB, NRC. 1997. More Than Screen Deep: Toward Every-Citizen Interfaces to the NationÕsInformation Infrastructure. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LEVERS71information management). A hallmark of the field is the use of iterativeuser-centered design (UCD) methods to develop usefulÑand especiallyusableÑsystems. Current UCD methods include early focus on users andtheir tasks, ongoing empirical measurement and evaluation of the system,
iterative design and testing, and integrated focus on the end-to-end sys-
tems that considers the larger social context in which they are deployed.
HCI professionals are involved early in the design of systems and partici-
pate throughout the later stages of system development. Existing UCD
methods have been found to work well when there is a limited range of
users and tasks, which means that accommodating the greater diversity
of individuals and applications in government will likely require exten-
sion or refinement of the approach.Government systems need to be usable by a wide range of individu-als and organizations with heterogeneous needs, cognitive abilities, and
hardware and software. How can we create systems that allow users,
whether they be students, journalists, local community groups, govern-
ment workers, or policy makers, to access the wealth of government in-
formation in a way that is useful to each of them? Providing ÒuniversalaccessÓ means building systems to work well with a diverse user popula-
tion and making appropriate facilities available for populations with spe-
cial requirementsÑsuch as disabled citizens, speakers of languages otherthan English, and those located at remote sites. Analysis of individual
differences, and requirements and methods for accommodating them,
will play a role. Where some users have low skills and/or little experi-
ence, for example, systems that have a high tolerance for human error are
likely to be especially valuable.One particular HCI problem is that of finding, understanding, using,and integrating information of the diverse types found in the multitude
of government information sources. Formulating good queries is diffi-
cult, and tools that support this process could be improved. Developing
advanced systems requires a better understanding of user requirements,
information-presentation techniques, information-access strategies, and
the development of flexible and modular architectures.  A challenge that

often comes up in government for supporting decision making, and in
governmentÕs communications to the public, is how to represent the un-certainty associated with many sorts of data. Because uncertainty reflects
sampling and systematic errors (such as results from a statistical survey),
known limitations in the model being used (such as a model of earth-
quake damage), and other extenuating circumstances, it often plays an
important role in correctly interpreting and acting on a piece of informa-
tion.Computer systems, including those for information summarizationand presentation techniques, should exploit knowledge of basic humanInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTperceptual and cognitive skills. Because todayÕs interfaces rely on a lim-ited set of input and output capabilities, researchers should continue to
push the hardware and software envelopes to support new interaction
styles (e.g., richer visualization, perceptual user interfaces, multimodal
input, and support for a range of motor and language capabilities). One
promising approach for environments in which users interact extensively
with data is to provide tight coupling of user actions to displayed results
and easily reversible actions. Tight coupling implies low latency, which
means that careful attention must be paid to how data transfer and pro-
cessing are divided between the server and the client. Advances are re-
quired at the cognitive level as well, where peopleÕs rich but falliblememories and vast amounts of general and domain-specific knowledge
often do not match well with the information required by computer sys-
tems. A richer range of interaction styles is also important to match the
userÕs environment. At the forefront of all design improvements shouldbe the goal of better leveraging and augmenting natural human capabili-
ties. One example is mixed-initiative systems that support both user-initi-
ated (direct manipulation) and agent styles of interaction.While there are many HCI challenges related to interactions betweena single user and an information system, many of todayÕs systems involvemore than one user interacting with local data and applications. Many
different communication scenarios of interest exist, including one-to-one
(such as when a citizen and a government worker interact), one-to-many
(such as when a population at risk in a crisis is being alerted), and many-
to-many (such as when a community explores a policy issue). Progress on
each of these fronts will require new theories, computing architectures,
and design methods to support collaboration, as well as better under-
standing of the group and organizational contexts of information use. A
variety of techniques, such as collaborative filtering, could play an impor-
tant role.Particular government applications will pose their own specific HCIchallenges.  For example, in crisis management, it is especially important

that systems be able to support users in carrying out nonroutine tasks
and facilitate working in unplanned, ad hoc situations. In the case of
statistical data, variability in the publicÕs statistical literacy poses a par-ticular challenge to effective presentation of federal statistical data.  While

an expert is equipped to locate the information necessary for under-
standing the limitations associated with a given piece of data (such as
sampling error or the implications of particular definitions used in deriv-
ing the data), a lay user may not be so equipped; he or she will benefit
from HCI approaches that make these factors as intuitively understand-
able as possible.Support for decision makers, including systems that help to frame,Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LEVERS73interrogate, and anticipate the world in such a way as to effectively assistin the decision-making process, is another area for continued HCI work.
A user-centric view, for example, allows a decision maker to individually
establish the context, pose the questions, control the content, and mold
the style of presentation. Related applications include interactive team-
decision environments, systems that capture and represent domain ex-
pertise, and systems that permit intelligent real-time control.Network InfrastructureA variety of infrastructure components provide an important founda-tion for e-government, starting with basic network-communications ca-
pabilities. Internet technologies are in widespread use, and both govern-
ment and the private sector continue to press the Internet industry to
provide yet moreÑgreater capacity, for example, and improved securityand reliability. These demands continue to stimulate research and devel-
opment, which has already resulted in dramatic increases in network
bandwidths. But because the R&D challenges are largely common to both
the private and public sectors, they are not explored in depth here except
to note that in government, as elsewhere, the attributes of privacy,
scalability, reliability, and accountability, among others, are highly val-
ued.If the communications infrastructure is to be available widely, espe-cially for use in interacting with individual citizens, then low-cost, ubiq-
uitous accessÑenabled in part by continued innovation
Ñwill be required.A range of new capabilities might be enabled through the use of the
Internet, particularly high-capacity, always-connected broadband access
(as opposed to the more typical low-speed, dial-up connections, which
incur a delay each time an Internet connection is established).  In the short

term, deployment will proceed using existing technologies with incre-
mental developments to them.  Looking to the longer term, further re-

search on wireless technologies offers the potential for improved perfor-
mance; and in the area of fiber optics, research could provide designs and
architectures with lower deployment costs.  The complex economic,

implementation, and public policy issues associated with provision of
broadband Internet access to residences have constrained deployment
more than the state of the technology has.6In contrast to the more routine government functions, domains such6See CSTB, NRC. 2002. Broadband:  Bringing Home the Bits
. National Academy Press, Wash-ington, D.C.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTas crisis management obviously change the normal demands for commu-nications.  Meeting the information requirements of a crisis depends on

an infrastructure that can handle above-normal loads at just the time
when large portions of it may have suffered physical damage. Whereas
for some applications infrastructure can be brought in from outside a
disaster area, crisis response would often benefit from having a more
survivable infrastructure in situ, and with sufficient headroom for reli-
able and survivable crisis response.Crises require the communications infrastructure to adapt to chang-ing demands by managing unusual traffic-congestion patterns, for ex-
ample, and permitting priority overrides for emergency usage. Such scal-
ing and robustness questions arise in a number of large networks that are
key to public safety, such as air-traffic control; police, fire, and safety
communications networks; and 911 and other emergency dispatch sys-
tems. Priority-access capabilities are already a feature of the wire-line
public telephone network.  But with increasing use of alternatives to the

public telephone network comes increased interest in providing priority,
scaling, and robustness capabilities in public wireless networks, the pub-
lic Internet, and private networks based on Internet technologies.Several networking-research questions arise from these requirements.
Networks that are self-adaptive are, for example, able to rapidly
reconfigure themselvesÑsay, as wireless infrastructure elementsÑin re-sponse to a crisis. In particular, networks that could reconfigure them-
selves quickly under conditions of damage and changes in demand would
be of great utility. Even in the absence of extensive self-adaptation, it is
better to have an infrastructure that is able to degrade gracefully as its
components are affected by a crisis than a system that completely fails.A research question that addresses the need to prioritize traffic is howto build networks that allow applications to interact with the infrastruc-
ture so as to allow the incorporation of capabilities such as priority over-
ride features or the recognition and management of information surges
during a crisis. Also, it would be useful to develop interfaces that allow
the combined deployment of private and public infrastructure, thereby
permitting crisis responders to exploit whatever infrastructure elements
are available.  In any case, efforts should not be confined solely to improv-

ing the infrastructure. Modifying the applications themselves can permit
them to cope gracefully with less-than-optimal network performance.
Designers of applications intended for use in crisis situations cannot as-
sume that there will be large amounts of bandwidth or that connectivity
will be available on a consistent basis. Strategies for coping would include
adapting the frequency of updates to the available bandwidth or falling
back to activities that consume less bandwidth (e.g., transmitting text
instead of multimedia data).Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LEVERS75Finally, there are opportunities to leverage ÒpushÓ technologies in
emergencies. Providing up-to-date information to large segments of the
public is important because it permits people to take appropriate actions,
helps prevent panic, speeds remediation efforts, and can prevent follow-
on crises. But widespread broadcasts (whether by television, radio, or the
Internet) are not necessarily the best approachÑthey provide only lim-ited, situation-specific information and cannot supply details tailored to
the needs of individuals, such as what evacuation route to use. By con-
trast, push technologies could deliver more focused (and presumably
more accurate) warnings and more detailed advice on what actions to
take and could decrease the frequency with which people receive false
alarms (warnings that do not apply to them).One approach identified as worthy of further investigation involvesÒreverse 911Ó systems, whereby the usual direction of interaction between
citizens and emergency managers is reversed. ÒCall by locationÓ can au-
tomatically contact all households and businesses that might be affected
by a fire or flash flood, warn them of the impending danger, and instruct
them on what evasive action to take. Telephone-based reverse-911 sys-
tems are already being used in a number of areas. Increasingly wide-
spread deployment, as well as the use of always-on broadband Internet,
wireless data, and similar new communications technologies, present ad-
ditional opportunities for providing this kind of service.Information Systems SecurityGovernment applications of IT often center on the management ofrecords about individuals and businesses. Significant savings can be ob-
tained by removing intermediaries and allowing direct access to these
recordsÑby the properly identified parties authorized to view them. Simi-larly, the accessed records are subject to change only by those authorized
to make changes.  To ensure the security of such systems and promote

trust in them by citizens, several services need to be applied: confidential-
ity, integrity, authentication, authorization, and audit.ConfidentialityConfidentiality services prevent the unauthorized disclosure of datawhile the data transit a network or communication link, or while they
reside on disk. These services are intended to prevent an attacker, or any
other unauthorized individual, from bypassing data-authorization func-
tions. Confidentiality of data is usually provided by the use of encryp-
tionÑthat is, the scrambling of data so that they can only be unscrambledwith the use of the correct secret information, called an encryption key.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTSecure Sockets Layer (SSL) is one widely deployed confidentiality mecha-nism. It is integrated with Web browsers and encrypts data exchanged
between the user and SSL-protected Web sites.IntegrityIntegrity services protect data from unauthorized modification. Likeconfidentiality services, they often depend on encryption algorithms, aug-
mented by calculation of checksums in order to detect changes.  A digital

signature is a form of integrity protection, as its validation shows that the
data to which the signature was applied have not been inappropriately
changed. SSL also provides data integrity for the messages sent between a
Web browser and a server, preventing an attacker on the network from
modifying the messages, and thus the data contained in them, without
such changes being detected.AuthenticationSeveral ways exist for validating a userÕs identity. The simplest is forthe server to keep a list of passwords and require that the user enter his or
her password. This approach is not particularly strong, and it is difficult
to manage, as the user would have to register in advance with each indi-
vidual system with which he or she might eventually communicate.Authentication can also be accomplished through the use of an au-thentication protocolÑsometimes based on the use of a private encryp-tion key, known only to the named individual, together with a certificate
issued by a trusted third party that associates the encryption key with the
userÕs identity (digital signatures are one example of this form of authen-tication). In other cases, authentication is based on other forms of encryp-
tion with keys that are also distributed by a trusted third party (Kerberos
authentication is an example).The use of third parties for authentication, whether these are certifi-cate authorities in the public-key infrastructure or authentication servers
in Kerberos, requires that these services be trusted, both by the govern-
ment systems accepting authentication and by the users whose identities
are being authenticated. This is where many of the problems associated
with the establishment of public-key infrastructure have been experi-
enced. There is no single authority trusted by everyone, and as a result,
many organizations (for example, banks) require separate registration by
users so that only the bankÕs own servers are relied upon.The establishment of a single government authority to authenticateusers presents privacy issues, because this authenticated identity becomes

a unique identifier. Letting the government rely on authentication au-Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LEVERS77thorities in the private sector also presents possible security problems,however, as a user might obtain a certificate fraudulently (this is not to
say that users could not do so with a government certificate authority).
Ultimately, it will likely be the case that multiple authorities are sup-
ported and that authorization policies will dictate which ones must be
used in particular contexts. When signing up for a service, the user would
specify or accept the default for which authorities may be relied upon for
subsequent authentication. This leaves unanswered the problem of how
the user would authenticate his or her first contact with a particular
agency.AuthorizationThe end point of security services is authorization: controlling accessto only those entitled.  Other security services play supporting roles, ei-

ther in helping to make the authorization decision (as is the case with
authentication) or in preventing individuals from bypassing the authori-
zation mechanisms to access or modify data through other means (pre-
vented by confidentiality and integrity services). Even audit, described
below, relates to authorization, as the goals of the audit mechanism are to
assure in retrospect that appropriate policies were enforced by the autho-
rization mechanisms and to find weaknesses.While the basic technologies are reasonably well understood, theirdeployment and operation at large scale are not.  One example of the sort

of poorly understood issue that arises at large scale is policy manage-
ment, which is one of the hardest aspects of creating secure systems. In
fact, many security breaches result from either the misapplication of secu-
rity policies, or the use of security policies that are not appropriate in
particular contexts. Writing correct policy requires a thorough under-
standing of how a system is to be used and how it is not supposed to be
used.  While creating consistent policies in a single system is hard enough,

creating them in government systems is likely to be even harderÑespe-cially when the policies are concerned with the exchange of information
between agencies. This is the case because there are likely to be numerous
legislated policies and procedures specifically associated with each
agency, many of which might not be consistent with one another.The whole issue of exception access is another aspect of security policythat must be considered. For example, one might want to create policies
that allow access to data in certain crisis situations, such as a building fire
or medical emergency, that is otherwise not allowed. If the data are stored
in a computer system, then these exception policies must be part of the
policy base enforced by the system, further complicating the problem ofInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTpolicy management. Such policies must allow exception access, but in alimited way, so that the security of the entire system is not compromised.One of the most effective ways to defeat security is the practice ofÒsocial engineering.Ó  For example, a perpetrator calls and explains that
there is a truly unique emergency, requiring urgent access to the records.
This is how many hackers, spies, and thieves gain unauthorized access.
So if a system is constructed to simply weaken access policies in an emer-
gency, then as a consequence it can also become easier to intrude through
social engineeringÑthere is a trade-off between efficiency of operationand efficacy in crisis situations and security and safeguards.  Improve

one, and the other gets worse. In the end, the weak link is always the
human elementÑnot because humans are faulty, but rather because theprocedures put in place as safeguards often end up thwarting those who
must use them on a continual basis.To date, most support for policy management is done on a custombasis for each application, creating stovepipe security systems that are
inflexible, difficult to understand, and present many weak links for an
attacker to exploit. Work is underway, for example, on the Generic Secu-
rity Services Application Programming Interface, to create common inter-
faces for authorization, but the results of such efforts will not be useful
until one starts to see integration of these interfaces with a wide range of
commercial systems.AuditAudit mechanisms are important for improving the publicÕs confi-dence in security systems because these mechanisms provide a way to
record the kinds of access that were granted; they allow administrators to
take action after the fact when access rights have been abused, and thereby
to correct the problem. Audit mechanisms will be of particular impor-
tance for any exception policies that are used by emergency workers or by
others with authority to override normal access protections.  For someone

with exception access, knowledge that his or her use could be scrutinized
helps deter abuse of such access. To be most effective, the audit mecha-
nism for exception access should generate reports that are submitted to
the person whose data were accessed.Audit also applies to the configuration management of systems, whichis the effective monitoring of the integrity of software components, hard-
ware devices, and supporting configuration data. Some viruses and
worms, for example, exploit vulnerabilities that were created by previous
infections of other viruses and worms. In addition, configuration man-
agement can detect failures in upgrading in response to security updates.
Indeed, many users and systems administrators lack the tools to detectInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LEVERS79whether systems software has been compromised or even whether new(and unwanted) software applications have been installed on agency or
corporate systems.E-Commerce and Related Infrastructure ServicesE-business depends heavily on a number of services that run on topof the basic communications fabric discussed above, including these:¥Information dissemination services, such as Web servers and pushtechnology;¥Communication services, such as e-mail and instant messaging;¥Directory services, which provide for referencing and retrieval ofcollections of personal information (e.g., name, organizational affiliation,
and e-mail address or mailing address) as well as information such as
who is authorized to perform which functions in an information system;
and¥Security and identification services, which permit information sys-tems to be secured, users of those systems to be authenticated, and access
to be authorized.Some of these services, such as Web servers, e-mail, and basic directo-ries, are all relatively mature technologies; the government is likely to be
able to leverage commercial-sector developments in them.  One related

area in which government generally needs to pay more attention to re-
search, however, is that of how to build a very-large-scale authentication
infrastructure (e.g., a public-key infrastructure that supports all citizens).
Another is back-end information-management challenges related to tying
together multiple systems feeding a Web site (such as building ontologies
to bridge the stovepipes in different agencies). Specific research issues
with respect to these areas are addressed in other sections of this chapter.In addition to enhancing its own transaction-support capabilities, thegovernment has an opportunity to promote the development and use of
common transaction mechanisms to widen access to government-sup-
ported services. Citizens would then be able to select a third-party inter-
mediary acting on their behalf to aggregate information from different
government services or to run software on their local computers for direct
access. Such third-party-provided portals would be similar to some of the
Web services that have become available recently for aggregating access
to multiple e-mail accounts, online banking, brokerages, and other pass-
word-protected Web sites, but without persistent storage of usersÕ cre-
dentials on the portals. The local application access example is similar to
applications like Quicken or Money, which pull data from multiple finan-Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTcial repositories and aggregate the data in local reports.  Government-run
Web portals could be provided in addition to the base transaction mecha-
nism, but such portals would also access the government service through
the transaction mechanism.The transaction mechanism would be accompanied by interfaces andmechanisms for communicating with the government portal, collecting
the information, and providing it to the application or third-party infor-
mation portal.  The data sent or retrieved through this transaction mecha-

nism would be described by common ontologies and data definitions
(e.g., based on XML) to allow this interface to be integrated with higher-
level applications. When access to government services is provided
through a third party (or even through a common government-provided
portal), security may be provided using proxy or delegate credentials.
These confer to an intermediary the authority to retrieve data or enter a
transaction on behalf of a citizen, but only for specific purposes and for a
short period of time.Government has historically provided data in electronic form, butoften in formats that make it infeasible for all but a few specialized con-
tractors to readily exploit the data. Application-programming interfaces
(APIs) would also enable citizens and businesses to overcome this prob-
lem by using software that directly connects their own applications run-
ning on personal computers with government services. A number of tech-
nical issues are related to achieving this ÒlightweightÓ capability,
however. These include protocol design, information representation and
metadata, security and authentication, and digital libraries.Crisis management and similar applications present some novel re-quirements with respect to e-commerce, including these:¥Data escrow services. Development of technologies and standards
would enable escrow sites to be established where citizens could store
important information that they might need to access in a crisis, as such
information might otherwise be rendered inaccessible in their home ma-
chines. These escrow sites would, in some sense, be a personal analog of
the disaster-recovery services already provided by commercial services
for businesses, government, and organizations. Escrowed data could in-
clude medical records, financial data, family contacts, and other essential
records. A principal challenge is that the escrow technology must protect
the userÕs privacy while improving the survivability and accessibility ofhis or her personal information.¥Circumventing normal controls on use of data that might have been col-lected for other purposes. The serious nature of a crisis may override the
normal desire and practice of not sharing the data. For example, tax
records might be used to help identify individuals who were working atInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LEVERS81companies affected by a disaster. Information such as names and homeaddresses would be candidates for release under extraordinary circum-
stances, while other information, such as income, should not be released.
E-commerce systems would need technology extensions that permit con-
trolled release under exceptional circumstances and a means to discern
when an Òexception stateÓ exists. Also, privacy policies and government
regulations would need to provide a means both for allowing and limit-
ing the extent of such emergency sharing, and for recovery of the data
(i.e., forcing its removal) from its temporary uses after the crisis is over.
As described above, social engineering is a significant risk that calls for a
systematic automating of the emergency access rules.  If such rules are

implemented properly, the declaration of an emergency or a particular
threat condition becomes an official action determined under a fixed set
of rules, rather than something amenable to convincing some operator
that such a situation exists.  Blanket bypass of security measures should

also be avoided in favor of a system that switches to enforcing an alterna-
tive set of security measures that are defined in advance. Modeling tools
can help administrators understand the long-lasting consequences (for
example, to privacy) of potential crisis-motivated decisions to change se-
curity policies.¥Enhanced point-of-contact services. The issue here is how one can
extend directory servicesÑin combination with the push technologiesdiscussed aboveÑto provide facilities for locating particular capabilitiesor individuals on an urgent basis.The committee notes, as others have, that the government can play aleading role in promoting certain aspects of e-commerce and e-business,
especially where the government is in a unique position to support the
deployment of certain technologies, or where specific government ser-
vices may be leveraged to improve the effectiveness of these technologies.
Such opportunities include the following:¥Government as a certification authority or licensor of such authori-ties;¥Government as a leading player in deployment of other securitytechnologies, such as smart cards; and¥Government as a standards adopter.Models and Simulation for Decision MakingTechnological advances have made enormous amounts of computerprocessing power available to government agencies. In particular, model-
ing and simulation technologies being developed today can be used toInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTapproximate extremely large and complex systems, frequently with hun-dreds of millions of interacting components. As representations of the
real world, these models are unique in their ability to illuminate the sys-
temsÕ inner workings and predict the consequences of particular actions.
Such models are relatively new additions to our arsenal of methods for
understanding and anticipating how the world works. Making use of
them for decision making imposes substantive burden of proof upon the
developers and requires a confidence level on the part of the users. Mod-
eling-research areas relevant to government applications include these:¥Underlying mathematical theory, including mathematical systemtheory, sequential dynamical systems, combinatorial and dynamical
graph theory, and algorithm theory;¥Statistical theory and methods in areas such as statistical analysisof computer-based-simulation experimentation and modeling, statistical
analysis of dynamical systems, and integration of statistical decision
theory with cognitive action analyses;¥Computational methods, including optimal representations forhigh-performance coupled system architectures and learning and adap-
tive systems methods; and¥Because sensor data provide critical input to models and simula-tions, techniques for fusion of sensor data and model output,
reconfigurable sensor architectures, and adaptive online data acquisition.Software TechnologiesNearly all major information technology systems in government areÒsoftware-intensiveÓ in the sense that the principal design risks relate to
the capability to produce effective and reliable software. Software is the
principal building material for information systems. It is difficult to de-
sign, develop, measure, analyze, evolve, and adapt.  It is fragile and unde-

pendable. The reality is that software engineering remains a largely un-
systematic craft, especially for large-scale custom systems. Few
government software-engineering projects are completed on time and
within their initially allocated budget.77These issues are discussed in CSTB, NRC, 2000, Making IT Better, National AcademyPress, Washington, D.C.  This point was underscored by the President
Õs Information Tech-nology Advisory Committee in its 1999 report, which, in addition to noting the potential ofinformation technology to transform government, highlighted software as the highest pri-ority for research attention.  See President
Õs Information Technology Advisory Committee(PITAC). 1999. Information Technology Research:  Investing in Our Future
. PITAC Report to thePresident. February 24. Available online at <http://www.itrd.gov/ac/report/>.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LEVERS83Software research includes not only development of software-engi-neering capability and the considerable range of associated activities, but
also the design of systems-dependable software components (such as op-
erating system kernels) and the development of architectural frameworks
to support the large-scale interconnection and interoperation of compo-
nents (see ÒMiddleware,Ó below).
The culture of the commercial software component marketplace, asevident from typical end-user license agreements, is that the maker of a
software system or component offers no warranty concerning software
function or quality. The persistent technical challenge of measuring qual-
ity promotes continuation of this caveat emptor situation.  That is, even a
considerable improvement in the technology of delivering and assuring
higher levels of quality would not likely be adopted in mainstream soft-
ware developments until the value of adoption could be measured and
quantified. This applies also to large-scale custom engineering, in which
challenges expand to include validation (conformance with actual organi-
zational need) as well as verification (compliance with stated require-
ments, which may or may not be consistent with actual need).Except for highly precedented systems, software-engineering pro-cesses in commercial industry tend to be iterative.  Major vendors release

periodic upgrades to components and systems, often several times per
year. The vendors are thus able to respond to market demand. Large-
scale government custom-development efforts often start with a Òrequire-ments elicitationÓ process, and the validity of the results of that process
may not be understood until well into developmentÑoften, years later.For this reason, there has been considerable activity in the acquisition and
regulatory community to support iterative models of development, in
which successive prototypes are deployed in order to allow early feed-
back on particular facets of concern (Òrisk issuesÓ) relating to require-ments, design, or underlying infrastructure.  (More discussion on this

subject is presented in the section ÒDimensions of RiskÓ in Chapter 4.)
A principal concern in the development of government IT systems isthe embedding of commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) components. This in-
cludes adoption of commercial components such as mainstream commer-
cial operating systems and office ÒproductivityÓ tools, as well as of open-
source components such as the Linux operating system, the Apache Web
server (which is the dominant server in use today), and the Mozilla Web
browser.  Many COTS components can be opaque and difficult to ana-

lyze, thus thwarting acceptance tests related to reliability and security.
They can also be subject to rapid evolutionÑthat is, from the standpointof the integration effort, they are on fundamentally uncontrollable trajec-
tories.  On the other hand, failure to adopt commercial components may

not only raise development costs and risks unacceptably but can alsoInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTincur increased training costs (necessitated by unfamiliar and system-specific human interfaces).With respect to the new generation of e-government systems, a sig-nificant challenge is in the rapid prototyping of new capability so that
functionalities and associated engineering issuesÑsuch as security,interoperation, and performanceÑmay be explored.  Major new software
libraries, both from vendors and open-source communities, are enabling
this kind of capability.Large-Scale SystemsA multitude of problemsÑincluding delays, unexpected failures, andinflexibility in coping with changing needsÑare associated with large-scale systems, and government offers notable examples of such systems
and their problems.  Such problems have occurred, for instance, at the

Internal Revenue Service and the Federal Aviation Administration and in
numerous systems at the state and local levels. This situation reflects not
only the size and complexity of some of those systems but the chronic
shortages of IT expertise in government. The problem is growing with
expanded use of the Internet, which has fostered proliferating intercon-
nected systems.  More robust systems would also help reduce the costs of

IT staffs currently needed to support IT systems.  And the importance of

the problem is growing as people come to depend more on such systems.Research should address deep interactions among system compo-nents and intersystem dependencies, unintended and unanticipated con-
sequences of system alteration, emergent behaviors in systems with large
numbers of components and users, unstable behaviors, properties of fed-
erated systems, and other phenomena.  In addition to these systems-

engineering issues, research must address operational engineering issues
such as how errors are corrected, how security breaches are detected and
remedied, and how backups or other robustness measures are executed.
A research program including case studies of particular systems and
methodology research on architecture, techniques, and tools could help
address the difficult technical (and nontechnical) challenges posed in re-
alizing these systems.88The case for researchers working on problems of large scale was made earlier in CSTB,NRC, 2000, Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet SocietyÕsNeeds, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LEVERS85MiddlewareÒMiddlewareÓ is software that provides common services and capa-
bilities that Òglue togetherÓ software components into larger systems.
Examples of middleware include authentication, journaling, auditing,
database-modeling services, ontological services, indexing, visualization,
translation, search and discovery, access control, and electronic commerce
services.9   In effect, middleware is software that reduces enterprise appli-
cation development time.  Compared to infrastructure elements such as

basic networking or relational database capabilities, which are more ma-
ture, middleware has continued to evolve at a rapid pace.  Its importance

notwithstanding, middleware has, historically, not been an area where
computer science research has focused much attention.  How can the

research community contribute in this areaÑespecially given that manyof the tough issues are ones of scale, heterogeneity, and integration that
are difficult to address in a laboratory setting?One role is through research that examines the properties of commer-cial middleware.  Middleware often comes in the form of uniform 
Òframe-works,Ó which embody principles for component interaction.  These prin-
ciples are intended to have useful scaling properties with respect to
numbers of components, distribution over networks, robustness, kinds of
capability that can be supported, and so on.  Frameworks in widespread

use include the Common Object Model family (COM, developed by
Microsoft) and Enterprise Java Beans (EJB, developed by Sun and IBM).
Designs for framework systems (such as those just cited) can be analyzed
by researchers from a theoretical standpoint.  Analyses have revealed

subtle flaws and design issues in each of the frameworks mentioned
above, providing useful information to program managers and system
developers seeking to make choices among frameworks.109Herbert Schorr and Salvatore J. Stolfo.  1997.  
Towards the Digital Government of the 21stCentury (a report from the Workshop on Research and Development Opportunities in Fed-eral Information Services), June 24.  Available online at <http://www.isi.edu/nsf/
prop.html>.10See, for example,  Kevin J. Sullivan, 1997, 
ÒCompositionality Problems in MicrosoftCOM,Ó available online at <http://www.cs.virginia.edu/~sullivan/standards.html>; Rob-
ert J. Allen, David Garlan, and James Ivers, 1998, ÒFormal Modeling and Analysis of theHLA Component Integration StandardÓ [abstract],  
Proceedings of the Sixth International Sym-posium on the Foundations of Software Engineering, November, available online at <http://www-2.cs.cmu.edu/afs/cs.cmu.edu/project/able/www/paper_abstracts/hla-fse98.html>;
and J. Sousa and D. Garlan, 1999, ÒFormal Modeling of the Enterprise JavaBeans Compo-nent Integration Framework,Ó Proceedings FMÕ99, pp. 1281-1300, available online at <http://link.springer.de/link/service/series/0558/papers/1709/17091281.pdf>.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTAnother role for researchers is in contributing to the development ofmiddleware aimed at specific government niche applications.  The De-

partment of DefenseÕs High Level Architecture and Common OperatingEnvironment are examples of efforts to meet perceived specialized gov-
ernment needs.  Authentication services
Ñboth internally and for interac-tions with citizensÑare another area where government leads in demandand has a role to play in middleware development.Middleware is also significant for e-government research because itcan provide an effective platform for rapid iteration in developing new
system concepts, both functional and architectural.  The library capabili-

ties available, for example, in SunÕs Java Development Kit or in MicrosoftÕs.NET or in the tools available with most major relational database systems
(to cite just three examples) permit skilled developers more quickly to
achieve a level of functionality that allows new ideas to be tried out.Organizational and Social IssuesAs a complement to research aimed at new technologies, research onthe relationship between organizational behavior and IT can also play an
important role in realizing e-government capabilities. The e-government
vision outlined in Chapter 1 aims to enhance rather than simply automate
governmentÕs operations and its interactions with constituencies.  Indeed,
success in implementing new practices often requires simultaneous evo-
lution of organizations and their supporting systemsÑit is not a matter ofsystems design alone. In addition, because numerous government activi-
ties bring together individuals to share information and collaboratively
solve problems, a better understanding of the social and organizational
aspects of IT use is critical.  That is, research needs to be done to under-

stand in a precise way the interplay of system design decisions, changes
to business practices, changes in the operating environment, characteris-
tics of the user population, and organizational outcomes. These issues
become very significant when joint efforts are undertaken involving mul-
tiple organizations in order to deliver an aggregated service for a particu-
lar customer segment.Such a broad perspective is in keeping with increasing appreciationof what CSTBÕs 2000 report Making IT Better termed 
Òsocial applications.ÓThat report observed that emerging demand for Òmore and better use ofIT in ways that affect [peopleÕs] lives more intimately and directly thanthe early systems did in scientific and back-office business applicationsÓpresents Òissues with which the traditional IT research community haslittle experience.Ó  Successful work on the social applications of IT will
require new computer science and engineering as well as research that is
coupled more extensively and effectively to other perspectivesÑperspec-Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY LEVERS87tives from other intellectual disciplines and from the people who use theend results, that is, the goods, services, and systems that are deployed.11The incorporation of a Òsocial, economic, and workforceÓ component to
the NSFÕs 1999 Information Technology Research initiative similarly re-flects this new emphasis.  CSTB
Õs 1997 report Fostering Research on theEconomic and Social Impacts of Information Technology12 explores the richresearch literature on social, organizational, and economic dimensions of
IT use and highlights a number of important research areas.Some specific organizational and socioeconomic research topics iden-tified by this committee as having particular importance for e-govern-
mentÑresearch that naturally complements technology capability devel-opmentÑinclude the following:¥Understanding the social and economic implications of e-government.Where and how is IT applied in government?  How can we assess the

extent to which it enables improved and new government services, opera-
tions, and interactions with citizens?  The goal of this research would be

to understand general principles rather than to evaluate specific govern-
ment agencies and operations.¥Understanding how to use e-government strategically as part of overallgovernment service delivery.  Research could help shed light on how specific
technology capabilities relate to a broader strategy for how people inter-
act with government.11CSTB, NRC. 2000. Making IT Better. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., p. 201.12CSTB, NRC. 1997. Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts of InformationTechnology. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.884Technology Transition and Program
Management: Bridging the GapBetween Research and Impact
Researchers, subject-matter experts, research program managers, andoperational line managers participating in the workshops convened by
the committee all pointed to the challenge of achieving actual impact on
mission performance from research programs. Even under ideal condi-
tionsÑwhen the research results are peer-recognized to be of high qual-
ity, when the user agency has a solid understanding of operational re-
quirements, and when there is strong institutional incentive on both sides
to accomplish the transitionÑsuccess in bridging the gap between the
creation of promising research results and the realization of effective im-
pact may nonetheless be elusive. This chapter examines how systematic
approaches can help research managers and user organizations collabo-
rate to bridge the gap between conception and use.The gap-bridging metaphor should not be taken to imply that thepath from concept to product is linear or predictable. Indeed, many major
IT innovations have followed paths with duration, complexity, and diver-
sity of players rarely foreseen by the original innovators. This phenom-
enon was well illustrated in the 1995 CSTB report on the High Perfor-
mance Computing and Communications Initiative,1 which offered a
1Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council(NRC). 1995. Evolving the High Performance Computing and Communications Initiative to Sup-port the NationÕs Information Infrastructure. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY TRANSITION AND PROGRAM MANAGEMENT89number of examples of well-established multibillion-dollar IT businessesemerging only after many years of research and development, with shift-
ing roles of government-sponsored research, industry research, and in-
dustry development.  Business areas considered in that report, nearly all

of which continue to remain pivotal in the IT economy, include graphics
and windows, redundant arrays of inexpensive disks (RAID), very-large-
scale integrated circuit (VLSI) design, and reduced instruction set com-
puting (RISC) processors (for an updated display of the links between
research and major IT industries, see Figure 4.1).  In each case, there was

sustained government research participation, including both formative
exploratory research and more focused attention to particular technical
challenges.  (Of course, not all research has this sort of outcome
Ñsomesuccessful research has far-reaching socioeconomic or mission impact but
nonetheless does not lead to billion-dollar industries furnishing products
or services.)From workshop discussions and other interactions of committeemembers with research-program managers, it is abundantly clear that
government agencies that sponsor major IT research programsÑsuch asNSF, DARPA and military service laboratories, NASA, DOE, and the
National Institutes of Health (NIH)Ñhave all evolved diverse cultures ofprogram-management practice. Programs are managed according to man-
agement models and practices that are embedded in organizational cul-
ture and that may be highly evolved. For example, the DOD has a rich
structure of technology-transition activities involving diverse contractors
that enable it to hasten the maturing of critical defense technologies along
the path from laboratory to operational deployment. This structure can be
understood, for example, as a systematic addressing of the many risk
issues (see the section ÒDimensions of Risk,Ó below) that arise along this
path. There are significant differences in management style and approach
among the various mission agencies and programs. (Box 4.1 describes
two agency programs in more detail.)In traditional basic research programs, research teams often operateindependently of any particular end user. The NSFÕs current Digital Gov-ernment program, however, represents an important first step in having
researchers collaborate directly with potential end users. This kind of
direct engagement enables researchers to understand requirements bet-
ter, validate concepts earlier, and accelerate transition into practice. It also
enables potential users to anticipateÑand influenceÑemerging technolo-gies. But regardless of whether an end user is present or not, transition
issues must be explicitly addressed, and obtaining an impact in practice
requires careful and flexible management by many parties. The teaming
structure of the NSF Digital Government program can accelerate this pro-
cess, but it does not replace it. The right combination of careful manage-Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTLANsInternetRings, HubnetEthernet, Datakit, AutonetLANs, switched EthernetGraphical user interfacesWorkstationsGraphicsSketchpad, UtahGM/IBM, Xerox, MicrosoftE&S, SGI, ATI, AdobeLisp machine, StanfordXerox AltoXerox Star, Apollo,  SunEngelbart / RochesterAlto, Smalltalk
Star, Mac, MicrosoftTimesharingCTSS, Multics / BSD

Unix
SDS 940, 360/67, VMSArpanet, Aloha, Internet
PupDECnet, TCP/IPRISC processorsBerkeley, StanfordIBM 801SUN, SGI, IBM, HPVLSI designMead/Conway,   MosisBerkeley, Caltechmany19651970197519801985199019952000
19651970197519801985199019952000
Client/server computingBerkeley, CMU, CERNParc, DEC, IBM
Novell, EMC, Sun, OracleAtari, Nintendo, SGI, PixarSpacewar (MIT),Trek (Rochester)to World Wide WebEntertainmentFIGURE 4.1Examples of government-sponsored IT research and development
in the creation of commercial products and industries. SOURCE:  2002 update by
the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board of a figure originally pub-
lished in Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National ResearchInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY TRANSITION AND PROGRAM MANAGEMENT91RAID / disk serversRelational databasesBerkeley, WisconsinIBM
Oracle, IBM, SybaseBerkeley
Striping / Datamesh, Petal

many19651970197519801985199019952000
World Wide WebAlta Vista
Netscape, Yahoo19651970197519801985199019952000
Speech recognitionCMU, SRI, MIT
Bell, IBM, Dragon
Dragon, IBM, L&HBroadband last mileBellcore
Amati, Alcatel, Broadcom
Stanford, UCLAPortable communicationParallel databasesIBM, ICLTokyo, Wisconsin, UCLAICL,  Teradata, TandemParallel computingIBM, IntelIlliac 4, CMU, Caltech, HPCCM-5, Teradata, Cray T3D
Data miningIBM, ArborWisconsin, StanfordIRI, Arbor, PlatoCERN, Illinois (Mosaic)Berkeley, Purdue (CDMA)Linkobit, HughesQualcommIT research areas are ordered roughly according to when they became $1 billion industries.UniversityIndustry researchProducts$1B market
from InternetCouncil, 1995, Evolving the High Performance Computing and Communications Initia-tive to Support the NationÕs Information Infrastructure, National Academy Press,Washington, D.C.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTBox 4.1Research Cultures at DARPA and NSFDefense Advanced Research Projects AgencyFor many years there has been tacit acceptance within the R&D community ofDARPAÕs primary national role in certain IT areas critical to DOD in the long term.These include packet-switched networking, distributed computing, machine intelli-
gence, software-reliability technology, and computer security. In each of these areas,program managers crafted engagements linking diverse participants in the researchcommunity, industry, and DOD according to principles that had been evolved
through practice over several decades. This national leadership role enabled DOD tocommand the attention of the computer science research community, and indeedmany computer scientists in universities have come to describe their research in
military terms such as survivability, decision support, and situation awareness. Sincethe early 1990s, the strategic environment has been changing rapidly, prompted bythe emergence of the private sector Internet, increasingly widespread computer-se-
curity challenges, greater military emphasis on asymmetric and coalition warfight-ing, broadening of the base of strong IT research universities, and a shift in the locusof innovation for many information technologies. Research and acquisition manag-
ers have attempted to adapt their strategies in response to these changes (with vary-ing degrees of success).National Science FoundationAt NSF, the principal criteria for research support are scientific quality and long-term socioeconomic impact.  Perhaps unique to NSF is the emphasis on develop-
ment of scientific foundations and a long time horizon, though other agencies, such
as the DODÕs Office of Naval Research and the Army Research Office, also accept along time horizon when they consider a potential mission impact.  In recent years,
NSF has increased its emphasis on broad socioeconomic impact yet further, coincid-
ing with the acknowledgment in the policy and legislative community of the emerg-ing pivotal role of information technology in the national infrastructure and in soci-ety broadly. This is also a reflection of the increased attention to measuring the
effectiveness of government programs. At the same time that it seeks to better identifythe socioeconomic impacts of the research it sponsors, NSF continues to recognizethat breakthroughs in Òcuriosity-drivenÓ basic research in fundamental areas can
have unexpected impacts in practice, and it maintains a broad portfolio of basicresearch in information technology subjects.ment and favorable and even fortuitous circumstances may be needed inthe operating environment of the recipient organization and in the mar-
kets for particular underlying technologies. Complicating this, the time
scales can be very longÑa decade or more in many casesÑpossibly wellbeyond the life span of individual research projects.The NSFÕs Digital Government program illustrates that there is a natu-
Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY TRANSITION AND PROGRAM MANAGEMENT93ral alliance between researchers and end users.  Both groups seek to iden-
tify new ways to address fundamental challenges in capability by stimu-
lating new concepts and accelerating their definition and development.
Researchers gain access to challenging problems and a real-world context
in which to explore them.  End users who participate in this process gain

insights into technology opportunities and thus are better able to influ-
ence their future and accelerate the introduction of new ideas into their
production systems.  Despite this alliance, however, the transition from

new concepts and prototypes to production systems and market accep-
tance can be lengthy and difficult. Below are examples of questions that
might be raised by a potential technology adopter in considering a prom-
ising new information technology. These questions, which apply regard-
less of whether the technology has been developed within the govern-
ment, at a university, or by a commercial contractor, illustrate how the
challenges of transition go beyond identifying functional requirements
and solving technical problems:¥Can the technology be effectively integrated into existing opera-tions and procedures?  Can it be packaged to interconnect with related

systems? Does it comply with the interface standards that are adopted
within the organization or by the integrators responsible for other major
systems used by the organization?¥Will it be a cost-effective way of meeting requirementsÑin termsof both initial acquisition and total life-cycle costs?¥Are there fundamental difficulties in adjusting the human inter-faces in a concept-demonstration system to conform better with organiza-
tional culture and practices?¥Can the new technology scale up appropriately to expected andpotential operational levels? What are the dimensions of scaling, and how
can testing and evaluation be conducted to understand the limitations of
capacity and performance of the concept?¥What re-engineering is needed with respect to the prototype con-cept-demonstration system? Are certain capacity limits expediently Òhard-wiredÓ into the prototype, for example, in order to simplify implementa-
tion?¥What are the dimensions of dependability and robustness that mustbe considered in adopting the prototype system? Will it respond appro-
priately, for example, to operator errors or misconfiguration?¥Can the prototype system handle the full range of categories ofinputs, or does it handle only a representative set? Are there hidden scal-
ing challenges?¥Has the prototype been designed to support possible trajectories ofevolution in the requirements it is addressing, in the systems environ-Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTment in which it is situated, in the underlying technologies, and in theculture and mission of the organization in which it is used?¥Who will be available to respond to questions and provide techni-cal support when problems arise or when adaptation is needed? What
assurances can be provided to enable an organizational commitment to
this new technology?From the standpoint of the researchers exploring a new algorithm orsystems concept, these questions may appear to be significantly less inter-
esting than the more fundamental issues related to overall feasibility of
the technical approach. This amounts to a division of both expertise and
responsibility: researchers and their sponsors may focus their initial effort
on the overall ÒconceptÓ or the new algorithmic (or other) idea. But part
of the price of success is that once these core conceptual issues are ad-
dressed, a diversity of other kinds of expertise must be applied to address
adoption-related challenges such as those enumerated above.A successful transition process must address a wide range of con-cerns beyond the ÒmerelyÓ technical
Ñincluding economic and marketissues, intellectual property and nonappropriability, standards, the Òtip-pingÓ of the market in favor of a particular product or standard, organiza-
tional issues, and engineering and usability issues.  At the committee
Õsworkshops, in the extensive discussions about the development, evalua-
tion, and transition of new technologies to practice, participants particu-
larly noted the risks and challenges of scaling and integrating new capa-
bilities. But perhaps the most important lesson learned from those
discussions is that transition cannot occur without broad knowledge of
the technological and operational environments, including the extent to
which those environments are affected by changing market conditions,
standards, and other external forces.STRATEGIES AND MODELS FOR PROGRAM MANAGEMENTHow can researchers, research managers, acquisition managers, andusers develop successful strategies in this complex and changing environ-
ment?  The sections below present an approach that is based on three

principal elements:1.Consideration and analysis of past programs, including both posi-
tive and negative experiences;2.Use of program-management models, which facilitate compara-
tive consideration of alternative approaches; and3.Identification of proven program-management strategies by which
Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY TRANSITION AND PROGRAM MANAGEMENT95management decisions can maximize the opportunity for impact withacceptable risk and time horizons.This chaper discusses two models2 in conventional use in program
management.  Also enumerated are several examples of strategies em-

ployed by program managers in implementing programs to achieve par-
ticular kinds of goals. (The emphasis here is on long-term programs seek-
ing a focused impact; approaches to managing purely exploratory
programs are not within the scope of this document.)Models play an informal but essential role in developing and manag-ing successful long-term research programs.  Little real data on research-

program management exist, which means that managers generally plan
and decide largely on the basis of personal experience and organizational
culture. The models identified here are intended to organize and express
concepts that are generally already present in the culture of program
management in various agencies and organizations. The following two
models are widely used, often in a tacit way, by research-program man-
agers in articulating, developing, and managing their programs.¥The supply chain, or technology food chain, is an identification ofstakeholdersÑand the relationships between themÑinvolved in trans-forming a new technical idea into operational reality (see Box 4.2).  Be-

cause this model is useful in understanding the respective roles and inter-
ests of stakeholders in the process of developing and delivering capability,
it can help guide a program manager in identifying potential partners in
an innovation process.¥The dimensions of risk are categories of engineering or marketstrategy issues that a program manager must address as a new technol-
ogy or concept moves through the supply chain from an initial innovative2Generally speaking, a model is a conceptual structure used to understand and predictphenomena that may be difficult to observe and influence directly. Models are abstract, inthe sense that they omit details in order to facilitate expression and understanding of as-
pects of the phenomenon. Good models are expressive, in that they capture knowledge thatcannot easily be gained by experience except perhaps at great expense or danger or overlong periods of time. The validity of a model is the extent to which it has predictive power
in the domains for which it is designed. Engineers, managers, and others may use a diver-sity of models in a design process in order to understand the various aspects of a problem,the design issues, and the potential consequences of particular design decisions. Qualitative
and informal models, such as those summarized here, may be less predictive than a vali-dated scientific model. The validation of these informal management models is necessarilyinformally based, and indeed all variables may not be identified. But for many disciplines
of endeavor, including research-program management, this is the best that can be achievedwith present levels of understanding.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTBox 4.2The Innovation PipelineIt is well understood that innovation does not follow a neat, linear progressionfrom research laboratory to delivered product; rather, innovation involves complexflows of ideas and people among the various organizational participants.  Nonethe-
less, it is often useful to view IT research, development, and application as constitut-
ing an innovation pipeline that includes the following:¥Academic and industry researchers develop new concepts and technologies.¥Exploratory efforts made in partially realistic settings by industry, academia,and government agencies co-develop concepts and technologies to identify promis-ing new solutions that combine innovations in technology and business practices.¥Vendors and tool suppliers develop software and hardware components andprovide them to system integrators or to the agencies directly.¥System integrators, vertical suppliers, and vendors respond to requests forproposals (RFPs) and build (and sometimes operate) systems for government agen-cies.¥Government agencies develop and modify programs, issue RFPs for informa-tion systems, select vendors, procure IT systems and services from them, and operateIT systems.This is a normative model for incorporating new technologies and practices intogovernment systems and for improving services. As is discussed in this chapter, theinterests and incentives of the actors in this process are not in reality always well
aligned, which leads to a set of challenges for mission agencies and research-pro-gram managers.idea to deployment in systems.  Engineering issues include, for example,
the scalability of a component or system, usability and adoption issues,
and robustness of internal interfaces.  Market strategy issues include, for

example, whether to focus on adaptation of existing components to pro-
vide some new capability or to stimulate a new component market that
packages the capability.  The model for budget management used in the

DOD for research, development, test, and evaluation addresses the di-
mensions of risk explicitly by categorizing funds used for programs (e.g.,
6.1, 6.2, 6.3a, and 6.5) according to the character of the risk being ad-
dressed.The following sections use these two models to elucidate a number ofprogram-management strategies and tactics.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY TRANSITION AND PROGRAM MANAGEMENT97LEVERAGE IN THE SUPPLY CHAIN MODELGovernment IT systems are acquired in several different ways. If off-the-shelf components (see Box 4.3) such as operating systems, network
components, and office-productivity tools can be used, they are obtained
from IT vendors. If custom engineering is necessary (to fill in where off-
the-shelf components are lacking), contracts are typically let with large
commercial systems integrators. Integrators themselves often have incen-
tives to incorporate off-the-shelf components into systems, thereby limit-
ing the extent of new engineering. Larger mission agencies such as DOD,
DOE, NASA, and NIH do some of this custom work in their own, internal
engineering organizations and affiliated laboratories. In some cases, the
custom engineering can be replaced by using vertically tailored products
from domain specialists (for example, geographic information systems).
Finally, in many government agencies, Òseat managementÓ approaches
are used in order to provide federal workers with a base level of common,
largely off-the-shelf services (desktop computer, office automation and
other basic software, network connectivity, and support).3  These provide
both a core set of ÒproductivityÓ tools and a common platform for custom
and vertical applications.In any case, the collaboration to develop new agency systems in-volves more than the immediate integrators and suppliers, because these
organizations themselves obtain components and technologies from ex-
ternal sources. Each of the acquisition paths noted above involves a wide
range of playersÑincluding hardware and software component vendors,systems integrators, niche technology providers, vertical-solution devel-
opers, government research-program managers, government acquisition-
program offices, acquisition regulators, standards organizations, and
other nongovernment customersÑthat have diverse capabilities and in-terests. Most integrators maintain significant relationships with vendors
in order to assure a future supply of critical technology components that
can address likely needs. A mission control system developed for NASA
Space Science, for example, may include off-the-shelf commercial hard-
ware in the form of workstations, servers, and network appliances, and
commercial software components such as operating systems, servers, da-
tabase systems, file systems, graphical toolkits, third-party domain-spe-
cific (or ÒverticalÓ) tools, and networking components. An integrator willdevelop custom software components and Òglue codeÓ to provide the
aggregate functionality and enable a flexible integration of components.3See <http://www.gsa.gov/seatmanagement/>.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTBox 4.3Off-the-shelf ComponentsVery few systems now being developed are entirely custom-made. As their dom-inance of the IT arena diminished, federal agencies recognized that they could nolonger afford to have vendors design and build systems Òfrom scratch.Ó This led to
the notion of purchasing systems fabricated from commercial hardware and soft-wareÑso-called commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) technology.   The goal with COTS
is to employ standard, widely used hardware and software products wherever possi-
ble so as to decrease costs and increase the likelihood that systems will be interoper-able with other systems.  The COTS strategy must grapple with a basic tension: even
as government seeks through COTS to obtain a greater degree of flexibility that en-
ables future vendor choice, vendors have an incentive to maximize the proprietarycontent of a system in order to increase the likelihood of future sales.  Agencies thus
face the dual issue of selecting an appropriate framework/architecture and managing
the consequences of that commitment.  In other words, once an organization has
made decisions about overall system design, this constrains future decisions andlimits which software products and vendor product lines will be compatible.Recent legislation and regulation have created strong incentives for acquisitionprogram managers to aggressively incorporate off-the-shelf (OTS) components as wellas to support iterative acquisition models, prototyping, product lines, and other pro-
cesses.  Such incentives are appropriate in an environment of rapid technological
change, shifting requirements, uncertainties in the life cycle, and demanding inter-operation requirements.Use of OTS technologies can improve affordability, reduce training requirements,improve dependability and interoperability, and enable the acquiring organizationto Òride the curvesÓ of performance growth (e.g., Moore
Õs law) over the life span ofthe system. OTS components can be from commercial sources (COTS), governmentsources (GOTS), or open sources (no acronym yet).On the other hand, the acquisition organization may find that it must sacrificesome control in the engineering process in order to accommodate vendor products.In particular, adoption of OTS components may force slight shifts in functionalitythat must be accommodated in requirements engineering and validation. In addition,
there can be significant risk in verification and validation, since the acquiring orga-nization may not have full visibility into the design or even functionality of the com-ponent. The acquiring organization also does not control the trajectory of growth for
OTS components, and may indeed have little opportunity to influence vendors toaccommodate special needs, given the breadth of their customer communities.Achieving a suitable balance in the adoption of OTS components can be a significant
challenge, especially because the benefits of adopting OTS components may beharder to measure (though they may be greater) than the benefits of increased con-trol.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY TRANSITION AND PROGRAM MANAGEMENT99The integrator will also employ tools and practices in the engineeringprocess that, while not part of the final product, are nonetheless critical to
the success of the effort. In short, the development of a major system
involves a large number of separate but interdependent organizationsÑthis is the information technology supply chain.The research manager needs to have a nuanced understanding of therespective roles, capabilities, and interests of participants in the supply
chain in order to maximize impact of a mission-oriented research pro-
gram. The innovation enterprises and R&D strategies in the major mis-
sion agencies such as DOD, DOE, NASA, and NIH have therefore been
structured in recognition of the scale, diversity, and depth (beyond first-
tier integrators and vendors) of this network of supply-chain participants
in providing advanced information technologies. For example, the his-
tory and, indeed, continued existence of DARPA illustrates the recogni-
tion in DOD years ago that achieving a desired stimulus over the long
term requires a broad range of relationships across this supply chain of
components and technologies. DARPA has developed a number of mecha-
nisms (and made sustained investments) to engage with entities through-
out the supply chain in order to ensure that long-term technology re-
quirements can be feasibly addressed. These mechanisms range from
sponsoring the development of underlying technologies and engineering
processes to the development of measurement and evaluation method-
ologies that permit assessment of technology candidates.In this regard, a strong parallel exists with the actions of major ITusers in the private sector who work closely with suppliers in order to
ensure that future needs will be addressed. Prudent developers of transi-
tion strategies for government research programs thus generally attempt
to learn from industry practices and incentives, while keeping in mind
that there are significant differences between government and commer-
cial acquisitionÑfor example, with respect to mission, public purpose,planning horizon, organizational structure, acquisition practices, the na-
ture and extent of acquisition oversight, and regulation.Mission agencies have an additional interest beyond their immediatemission requirements: taking farsighted steps to realize future mission
benefits and adopting broad-based approaches to achieve broad societal
impact. (A familiar example is DODÕs thoughtful investment in the devel-opment and deployment of packet-switched networking technologies.4)4It is now well documented that this investment achieved a massive impact that wentwell beyond the immediate near-term DOD requirements.  Nonetheless, these develop-
ments did not fully anticipate their pervasive use in public networks, and thus did not
devote commensurate attention to the full spectrum of security issues.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTIt could be argued that these long-term and broad impacts can be a natu-ral consequence of a combination of factors unique to government re-
search management:¥The technologies were developed without a specific requirementto maintain proprietary constraint on the core enabling technical con-
cepts, which permitted broad scientific engagement with the ideas; and¥The technology approach was designed to be vendor-neutral andto address issues of heterogeneity and interoperation from the outset,
enabling broad participation from the vendor community.Although not unique to government, there were two important addi-tional factors:1.The research plan addressed scaling issues from the outset, in or-
der to address challenges of long system lifetimes and broad spans of
deployment (potentially scaling up to millions of users within DOD
alone); and2.Managers sustained a focus on long-term vision and impact, spin-
ning off nearer-term capabilities but without compromise to that overall
vision.WILL INDUSTRY DO IT?An assumption in government that Òindustry will do itÓ may, for
broad areas of IT challenge, be incorrect, despite the rapid pace of indus-
trial IT development.5  In industry, the return-on-investment calculations
generally preclude innovations that are fundamentally long-term in char-
acter or that have broad and nonspecific impact. In the language of eco-
nomics, many of these innovations are nonappropriableÑthe impact ofthe research results diffuses broadly into the technical community, and
cannot successfully be confined to a single sponsoring organization. That
is, the full value of the innovative ideas cannot be retained by any indi-
vidual partyÑthey create value for multiple parties. And because none ofthe parties can retain full value, their willingness to pay for the innova-
tion can diminish to zero. This is characteristic of what economists more
generally call public goods. Information technology innovations of this5See, for example, the PresidentÕs Information Technology Advisory Committee (PITAC)report (PITAC, 1999, Information Technology Research:  Investing in Our Future 
(PITAC Reportto the President), February 24, available online at <http://www.itrd.gov/ac/report/>),which observed that Òthe IT industry expends the bulk of its resources, both financial andhuman, on rapidly bringing products to market.ÓInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY TRANSITION AND PROGRAM MANAGEMENT101character include, for example, development of engineering practices thatmay lead to across-the-board improvements in reliability or foundational
steps in methodology for the development of heterogeneous distributed
systems.A good deal of IT-related innovation yields intellectual property thatcan be packaged and protected; in other words, it is appropriable. But for
a wide range of innovations, individual companies cannot make the case
for investment because the value obtained may spread widelyÑinclud-ing to competing companies. Scientific findings such as mathematical
theorems or other laws of nature are not generally considered protectable
intellectual property, and hence industry investment to develop them
will not likely be justifiable purely from a competitive or return-on-in-
vestment standpoint. Some results of this kind can be retained as trade
secrets, though secrecy may not be sustainable once they are employed in
products and services. Examples include advances in the basic concepts
of algorithm analysis, programming-language foundations, and perfor-
mance estimation and measurement techniques.Further compounding the challenge for the program manager, thetechnology sources for system integrators and consultant organizations
are generally vendors, and less often, original innovators. Competitive
advantage for a system integrator or other vendor often derives from
predictability, risk management, and process, rather than from aggres-
sive enhancement of capability. Indeed, acquisition program managers

whose principal incentive is to achieve predictability of outcome rather
than enhancement to overall mission capability may make overly cau-
tious choices that do not lead to optimal long-term outcomes.A system integratorÕs interest in research-generated innovation maythus be limited, as it represents a potentially disruptive influence on that
companyÕs way of doing business and could even undermine its competi-tive advantages.6  However, there are numerous collaborative relation-
ships between basic researchers in universities and their counterparts in
vendor organizations, for such reasons as providing the vendor with pre-

views of new technology developments or better access to educational

programs and professional talent.Universities and other research laboratories actually have a naturalshared interest with the mission organizations at the Òtop of the foodchainÓÑit is in these organizations that unmet needs (and thus interest-ing research problems) are first identified and, often, best understood.6Remarks to the committee by Clovis Landry, Vice President of Technology for LockheedMartinÕs Technology Information and Services Sector.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTIn particular, there is a natural synergy between the government mis-sion to create public goods and the role of university (and federal labora-
tory) researchers in developing and disseminating ideas and having them
evaluated and appreciated by colleagues. This synergy is reflected in the
pattern of federal agencies engaging university researchers as agents of
innovation. While there are natural processes in the supply chain that
enable university innovations to flow into government systems, program
managers can accelerate and enhance these processes by working at ap-
propriate points of leverage. For example, government can support re-
searchers in creating ÒprenormativeÓ definitions for interfaces that can
lead to standards for the delivery of new kinds of information services as
a way to stimulate innovation.The Department of Defense, for example, develops its most techno-logically aggressive concepts by engaging university and laboratory re-
search teams. If the concepts have promise and the risks of further devel-
opment and scale-up are acceptable, then the DOD will stimulate
collaboration between those research teams and vendor or integrator or-
ganizations. The DOD invests in this participation in order to Òbuy downthe riskÓ of commercial organizations committing resources, assimilating
innovations, and developing underlying technological infrastructure in
advance of concrete evidence of a market.When university researchers do develop appropriable technologies,they can follow several possible routes to achieving impact, many of
which involve moving into the marketplace. One of the most common
pathways (even in difficult economic times) is the creation of start-up
companies that provide vehicles for packaging and proving a technology
and also for evaluating its underlying value in the marketplace. Success-
ful start-up companies may be acquired by vendorsÑor, less often, growinto vendors themselves. The vendor thus acquires the packaged intellec-
tual property, as well as the experience, validation, and contacts with
early adopter customers. Alternatively, the intellectual property may be
packaged and marketed directly to vendors by a university. Regardless,
there are good reasons why a government (or private sector) research
sponsor may promote this kind of commercialization. It can accelerate the
transition of the technology into latter stages of the supply chain and thus
into practice, at lower cost, while reaping the knowledge and skills of
leading-edge researchers.Another potential point of leverage for a government agency is toestablish an organization along the lines of an incubator/venture-capital
investor that can share financial risks in identifying, developing, and dem-

onstrating new technologies. (This idea motivated the Central Intelligence
Agency [CIA] In-Q-Tel, which seeks to invest in technology areas where
both a CIA need and commercial interest exist.)Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY TRANSITION AND PROGRAM MANAGEMENT103DIMENSIONS OF RISKRisk (or, more accurately, risk exposure) may be roughly defined asthe product of the probability of an unsuccessful outcome with the extent
of loss suffered when that outcome is experienced. Thus, risk is high
when either unsuccessful outcomes are very likely, regardless of conse-
quence, or when unsuccessful outcomes are less likely, but with high
consequence of loss.These meanings are distorted slightly in the vernacular of programmanagement. A research program is often referred to as a Òhigh-risk,high-payoffÓ activity when it is attempting to achieve a major break-
through, but with uncertain likelihood of success. Long-term basic re-
search programs are generally intended to be of that type, in this positive
sense: for researchers, a Òhigh-risk, high-payoffÓ program has a higher
likelihood of failure but a larger impact if successful, while a more conser-
vative Òlow-riskÓ program
Ñfocused, perhaps, on achieving incrementalgains in an established technology area by following routine scientific
approachesÑcarries a higher likelihood of lesser impact. This notion ofrisk is almost always approached in a qualitative manner, as it is rarely
the case that probabilities of failure and consequences of success can be
usefully quantified.How can a program manager think systematically about questionsrelated to risk when very few of the variables of interest can be quantified
and when programs exhibit diverse kinds of risk? In this section, several
dimensions of risk are identified, along with some examples of strategies
that can be used to mitigate the risks and thereby move innovations closer
to adoption. This framework enables program managers to put names to
risks and strategies and to identify the risk focus at a particular stage of
program execution; addressing too many risk issues at once in a program
can compound overall program risk to unacceptable levels. On the other
hand, sequencing risks necessarily entails some Òwilling suspension ofdisbeliefÓ with respect to typical risk issues later on, such as scaling and
integration.An example of potentially high-risk investment by government is thedevelopment of new concepts for system protocols and architectural in-
terfaces. The risk derives primarily from a combination of achieving the
technical goals (for example, aggressive improvements in security and
scaling for the Internet Protocol) and achieving acceptance among stake-
holders and impact on the mission applications.  Box 4.4 illustrates how

risk emphasis changes as a technology is evolved.The sections below consider several kinds of risk issues that are rel-evant to research-program management. They illustrate the diversity of
kinds of risk issues and the need, when defining research and transitionInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTBox 4.4Risk and the Evolution of the World Wide WebAn example of how risk emphasis can shift over the course of a maturing processis the evolution of the World Wide Web from its original CERN (European Organiza-tion for Nuclear Research) design. From an orthodox IT engineering standpoint, manyresearchers have long considered the original concept and implementation of the
Web to be flawed in a number of technical respects. For example, unlike otherinstitutional information-management systems (such as digital libraries), assets aremutable and identified by location rather than by unique identifiers (i.e., links can
break). Also, HTML Web pages lack sufficient structure to enable effective structuralindexing. And issues of reliability, replication, security, and naming, for example,were not fully addressed at the outset.On the other hand, if the designers at CERN had been forced to address all theseissues early on, very likely we would have no Web at all. Instead, the initial imper-fect Web showed itself to embody a robust and compelling concept that was suc-
cessfully bootstrapped into widespread use, even though substantial evolution anddevelopment of both the concept and its realization still lay ahead. This kind ofhistory is an example of iterative development with sequenced consideration of key
risk issues. A detailed historical analysis would reveal which participants in the inno-vation supply chain addressed which aspects and when.From the standpoint of program management, all details of the trajectory of anemerging technology from concept to impact cannot be predicted or determined inadvance; the environment is just too complex and unpredictable.  However, a delib-
erate but adaptive strategy for identification and sequencing of risk issues can accel-
erate the process significantly. In the case of the Web, examples of such activitiesinclude development of the Mosaic browser at the University of IllinoisÕs NationalCenter for Supercomputing Applications and the decision by CERN to make the Web
technology freely available.1This bootstrapping is a significant program-management issue. The early accep-tance of the imperfect Web meant that many stakeholders were able to participate in
its evolution. This raised the overall cost of the evolution process, but it also distrib-uted that cost and exploited early market acceptance. Conversely, overcommitmentto particular requirements early in a process may appear to offer Òlower riskÓ than an
iterative approach, but in fact it may raise risk because designers are considering toomany issues simultaneously and so do not have appropriate intermediate evaluationpoints. Indeed, in the case of the Web, the locus of leadership and management
shifted considerably over time, ultimately diffusing into a community process.  An
additional lesson is that the imperfect Web evolved to do things that a perfect-from-the-outset Web might never have addressed.  The imperfect Web did not support

transactions (it had insufficient network privacy to carry credit cards or personaldata) but was evolved to support this capability.1The identification, separation, and sequencing of risk issues is the essence of Barry BoehmÕsÒspiral modelÓ for software development (Barry Boehm, 1986, 
ÒA Spiral Model of Software De-velopment and Enhancement,Ó ACM SIGSOFT Software Engineering Notes, August; and BarryBoehm, 1988, ÒA Spiral Model of Software Development and Enhancement,Ó IEEE Computer21(5): 61-72). BoehmÕs systematic development of this model for software development repre-sented a giant step forward for program managers. Iteration without identification of the particu-
lar risk issues being addressed can result in what some researchers now call the Òdeath spiral.ÓInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY TRANSITION AND PROGRAM MANAGEMENT105programs, to establish the particular risks to be addressed in programexecution. For each risk issue, appropriate management strategies for ad-
dressing it are identified.Evaluation RiskAs noted above, evaluation of research progress and ultimate poten-tial for impact can be problematic in early-stage or exploratory-research
programs. Indeed, some organizations may avoid long-term and explor-
atory activity altogether because they cannot adequately justify the in-
vestmentÑthey cannot provide externally verifiable measures of the po-tential for ultimate impact downstream.  This is a perennial problem, as

there are a number of good reasons why a quantitative basis for research-
program management continues to be elusive. Most obviously, many of
the variables that matter are difficult to measure, and the lag from pro-
gram conceptualization to impact in deployed systems can be very long,
exceeding a decade or longer.7 Even when considerable mission impact is
achieved, traceability from initial development of concept to mission ca-
pability may be elusive.In a number of critical technical areas, in which the measurementchallenges are particularly acute, progress may be thwarted as a conse-
quence.  These areas include software reliability, computer security, the

effectiveness of autonomous systems, and the usability of human inter-
faces.  In large-scale engineering projects, there can be considerable evalu-

ation risk with respect to life-cycle issues such as interoperation,
evolvability, and reuse. In digital-government programs in particular,
evaluation risk is present in the definition and development of infrastruc-
ture for major information and transaction portals, in the use of advanced
collaboration technologies to facilitate intragovernmental processes, and
in the development of software technologies to support and evolve highly
dependable systems.More generally, what kinds of approaches can be adopted to enableprogress despite evaluation risk? Strategies include these:¥Building measurement into research. Delaying research until mea-
sures are developed may be an inappropriate management response, be-
cause the same understanding that yields progress often also yields mea-7A mid-1980s study by the Institute for Defense Analysis examined software-engineeringtechnologies and found that it took an average of 17 years for a concept to reach maturation
and an average of 7.5 years after initial development of a technology for it to reach wide-spread availability in industry. S. Redwine and W.E. Riddle. 1985. ÒSoftware TechnologyMaturation.Ó Proceedings. 8th International Conference on Software Engineering, London, Au-gust 28-30, pp. 189-200.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTsures. Indeed, one management strategy often used is to challenge re-searchers to identify appropriate measures of their own progress as part
of the research effort, and to apply those measures on an ongoing basis to
their own and other work. This can include, of course, retrospective analy-
sis of similar projects in order to identify correlates with various aspects
of success.¥Benchmarking. In the absence of direct measures, especially in prob-
lem spaces of unknown dimensionality, benchmark data sets are useful
surrogates. This approach has been successfully used in areas such as
high-performance computing, speech recognition, image understanding,
and text management. Well-designed benchmark data sets can help re-
veal the particular elements of capability within a set of ÒcompetingÓtechnologies. Different approaches to a problemÑspeech recognition, forexampleÑmay excel in different respects, such as the handling of ambi-ent noise, use of free microphones, speaker independence, extent of sys-
tem training, and limits on vocabulary and grammatical complexity. This
identification assists potential downstream adopters because it enables
them to identify relevant evaluation criteria better.¥Testbed. Many research programs focused on achieving realism or
scale-up along various dimensions create testbed facilities for conducting
larger-scale experiments. ÒScale,Ó here, can refer, for example, to the size
of a database, the number and skills of users, the extent of distribution or
interconnectivity, robustness, performance, and other factors. Further, by
creating a facility shared by multiple research efforts, costs can also be
shared and experimental results more easily compared and evaluated.  In

addition, potential users can participate in the testbed definition and
evaluation in order to ensure realism. This approach is widely used in
major programs (e.g., DARPA Gigabit Networking and DOD Joint War-
rior Interoperability Demonstration programs). The principal risk associ-
ated with the approach is defining the testbed project in a way that
achieves realism while enabling research issues to be addressed effec-
tively.¥Gentle-slope adoptability. One risk-mitigation approach is to designprograms that offer a Ògentle slopeÓ with regard to return on invest-
mentÑthat is, increments of effort in adopting a technology yield incre-ments of impact. This approach (named by Michael Dertouzos) can en-
able researchers working with early adopters both to make midcourse
corrections and to collaborate with the adopters in defining evaluation
criteria.8 The resulting 
Òearly validationÓ can help reduce evaluation risk
even when objective measures are unavailable.8The idea first appeared in an unpublished DARPA study in which Dertouzos wrote,ÒThe gentle-slope systems will have a few key properties. First and foremost, they will giveincrementally more useful results for incrementally greater effort.ÓInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY TRANSITION AND PROGRAM MANAGEMENT107Solution-Concept RiskAnother risk issue faced by managers of a problem-directed researchprogram is the extent to which the program should commit to particular
solution approaches. Such commitments could include choices for system
architecture (e.g., business-rule framework in a three-level architecture),
measurement frameworks, technical approaches (e.g., neural networks
versus other decision frameworks), or infrastructural components (e.g.,
operating-system choice). Solution-concept risk is an issue, for example,
in areas such as improvement of information security, text-search capabil-
ity, capability to integrate databases, or support for distributed teamwork
in some operational domain. Underconstraint of solution approach can
lead to solutions that are incompatible with the target environment.
Overconstraint, on the other hand, can exclude development of innova-
tive out-of-the-box approachesÑsuch as RAID storage architecture tocomplement development of larger and denser disksÑthat may offer su-perior capability. When early projects were initiated in parallel comput-
ing, for example, a diversity of architectural approaches were considered,
which yielded a number of different options that permit a number of
different classes of problems to be tackled today.One example of solution-concept risk in the domain of digital govern-ment is the development of technologies to model and remediate un-
wanted linking of databases (e.g., to prevent revealing identities of medi-
cal-research subjects). Solution approaches could include, for example,
development of large-scale meta-models of released information, data-
dithering techniques, and creation of surrogates for zip codes as geo-
graphic identifiers. Premature commitment to any one of these could
increase risk. Computer-security research faces a similar challengeÑitcan be easy for a program to overcommit to particular threat models or
security architectures and thereby be deflected from critical technical ar-
eas and a diverse portfolio.Strategies for addressing solution-concept risk include these:¥Mixed strategy. This approach for exploratory programs is to adopt
a diverse portfolio of technical approaches. While it is an obvious re-
sponse, how to manage it for success is not so obvious, primarily because
of evaluation risk. That is, a more constrained strategy may reduce within-
program evaluation risk but increase the overall evaluation risk with re-
spect to the intended impact.¥Iceberg model. Diversity enables individual efforts to accept greater
risk while not substantially increasing overall program risk. If there is an
expectation that not all research efforts will yield impactÑif local failurescan be toleratedÑthen greater risks can be taken, leading potentially togreater levels of innovation. A supporting organizational culture is pre-Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTrequisite to success in adopting this model. DARPA and NSF, for ex-ample, have followed this model in certain critical technical areas, with
considerable success.  These agencies understand that too-aggressive

management at this stage could inhibit the exploratory nature of this
activity and prematurely eliminate promising approaches.  This approach

may be adopted by researchers as well as funding agencies: a principal
investigator may consider many possible approaches to a problem before
selecting a subset for more focused effort. This approach can be applied
iteratively, following a Òprogressive deepeningÓ strategy.
¥Avoid overmanagement. Project managers may be tempted to con-
strain solution concepts prematurely in order to obtain a more linear
program execution model with predictable milestones.  This optimization

in favor of near-term predictability may actually increase overall solution
concept risk because it compresses or eliminates the exploratory phases
critical to the invention or identification of new solution concepts. Unless
a solution concept is clearly understood in advance, program managers
need to balance visibility and predictability (and hence measurability)
with the fostering of exploratory and creative activity.Problem-Concept RiskOften the perceived gaps in capability are not the actual gaps. Anorganization may identify as a technology challenge what is in fact a
challenge in process, organizational structure, or technological-legacy
management. That is, risk is associated with the correct identification of
requirements to be addressed (validation). For example, when designing
a system to facilitate information sharing in an organization, the real chal-
lenge may in fact derive from organizational culture rather than from
technological impediment. Or, an effective solution may need to address
organizational culture factors and technological factors.Sometimes the difficulty is not in requirements elicitation but ratherin fluidity of requirements. Consider, for example, the design of com-
mand-and-control systems for use in crisis management or military op-
erations. There are important interactions between the capabilities of
available communication and collaboration technologies and the pro-
cesses and physical organization of command posts. If aggressive innova-
tion is sought in command-and-control capability, constraining the tech-
nical focus to address communications capabilities within existing
organizational and physical structures may fail to deliver sufficiently in-
novative results and may indeed reinforce older, less-effective practices.
On the other hand, an overly broad focus may not yield meaningful re-
sults. Identifying the right scope of research focus is thus pivotal in effec-
tive program design.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY TRANSITION AND PROGRAM MANAGEMENT109Examples of areas of potential problem-concept risk in digital-gov-ernment programs include new command-and-control capabilities for cri-
sis management, statistical-analysis support for nonexpert users of gov-
ernment statistical data, and database interoperation support for rapidly
linking geographical databases to support crisis response.Strategies for addressing problem-concept risk include these:¥Wizard of Oz. Even when a research challenge is appropriately
scoped, there can be significant difficulties in designing a program that
enables rapid and graceful coevolution of technology and its context of
use. In particular, naŁve iterative approaches can yield, at best, long vali-dation cycles and, at worst, divergence from goals. The so-called Wizard
of Oz approach involves the creation of system mock-ups that do not
necessarily embody real capability but that can nonetheless enable poten-
tial adopters to experiment with concepts of operation. The early valida-
tion received from experiences with the mock-ups can reduce problem-
concept risk and focus technology development efforts. The mock-ups
also help researchers communicate with potential adopters by providing
a concrete instantiation of concepts; where appropriate, they may also
serve as surrogates for formal specification of requirements or technologi-
cal capabilities. The Wizard of Oz tactic thus also addresses risks related
to evaluation, integration, and usability.¥Double Helix. As potential users gain experience with new capabili-
ties, the problem concept may shift in response to that experience. For
example, the use of collaborative-filtering technologies has had signifi-
cant effects on concepts of operation for electronic-commerce sites.  In the

Double Helix approach, a coevolution of operational concepts and tech-
nology concepts occurs. Close collaboration of technical researchers and
subject-matter experts may, after several iterations, yield simultaneous
innovation in both operational concept and underlying technology. Also,
validation can be enhanced through ongoing empirical assessment of such

coevolution. This approach has been applied with some success in the
DARPA Command Post of the Future (CPOF) program, particularly in
identifying and evaluating new approaches to visualization and collabo-
ration in midechelon military command posts.Integration and Adoption RiskCan the technologies developed within a program be effectively inte-grated into an intended systems or organizational context? Answering
this question requires consideration of issues ranging from interoperation
to usability. For example, wearable computer systems used in systems-
maintenance applications need to be integrated with evolving practicesInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.110IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTand systems for documentation management and maintenance report-ing. This could be called Òbusiness process adaptation risk.Ó While cer-
tain adoption risks must be addressed early in a research effort, address-
ing too many of them too early can multiply risk and impede
accomplishment.Integration risk is a significant factor for many (and perhaps most)digital-government research projects. Many new capabilities must be in-
tegrated with evolving commercial components as well as with custom-
integrated government IT solutions. In other words, both the target envi-
ronment and the base technological infrastructure are rapidly moving
targets.Many of the strategies mentioned above are used to address adoptionrisks. In addition, the following specific strategies apply:¥Pipeline. The pipeline model, often used in long-lived research pro-grams focused on strategic challenges, embraces a portfolio of research
efforts that span a range of levels of technological maturity. Achieving
that broad span may entail working with multiple stages of the innova-
tion supply chainÑbasic researchers, exploratory-development teams,companies developing new products, and companies integrating systems,

among others. This approach was used with success in the DARPA Stra-
tegic Computing program in the 1980s. The program followed a Òpyra-midÓ model that encompassed simultaneous work on generic enabling
technologies, multipurpose applications infrastructure, and aggressive
experimental applications.¥Producer-consumer connection. One of the features of the multiagency
High Performance Computing and Communications program (HPCC) of
the 1990s was the direct connection it established between computational
scientists and engineers and the developers of advanced high-perfor-
mance computing and communications systems. The connection enabled
system developers to get early validation and feedback from users (see
the subsection ÒEvaluation Risk,Ó above), and it enabled the users to gain
experience and assess scalability issues for emerging platforms. The pro-
gram accomplished this by seeding the marketÑÒbuying down riskÓ on
both sides, by assisting users in acquiring aggressive systems and assist-
ing developers in maturing concepts so that they could sustain external
evaluation. This is analogous to, but not the same as, the alignment of end
users and innovators in mission programs, including NSFÕs Digital Gov-ernment program. The distinction is that the producer-consumer model is
focused on building links in the supply chain, while the NSF Digital Gov-
ernment program emphasizes directly connecting the producer and con-
sumer.  Producer-consumer connection issues also arise when organiza-
Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY TRANSITION AND PROGRAM MANAGEMENT111tions seek to rapidly acquire technology to support ad hoc needs, as oc-curs in crisis response (see Box 4.5).¥Common architecture. Interoperation risk can be reduced consider-
ably by adopting common architectural frameworks and interface specifi-
cations. When the commonalities are well chosen, system- or component-
specific interoperation challenges are replaced by framework compliance.
Widely adopted frameworksÑfor example, mainstream commercial ap-plication programming interfaces (APIs)Ñcan provide significant inter-operation benefit in mission systems. Conversely, poor choices in frame-
works can result in exclusion of mainstream components, high costs of
integration and, when framework technical characteristics have not been
fully evaluated, high risks both at the component and system levels. Be-
cause of network externalities, frameworks must be evaluated on the ba-
sis of technical criteria, market acceptance, and potential trajectory.9  The
Box 4.5Using a Clearinghouse to Assimilate New IT in Crisis ResponseHow can the introduction and use of new technologies in the immediate re-sponse to a crisis be managed so as to maximize their availability and better use thetalents of emergency staff?  One idea that emerged from the committee
Õs consider-ation of crisis management is to attach a clearinghouse function to emergency oper-ations centers that are generally established to respond to crisis situations.A clearinghouse would help systematize the introduction of technology into cri-sis response activities (an effort that is frequently haphazard today) and help promoteeffective use of information technology by technical specialists and emergency man-agers during response to and recovery from disasters.  The clearinghouse would

provide a single point of contact for easy exchange of information among technologycompanies, researchers, emergency managers, and practitioners and provide acheck-in and check-out point for all technology vendors and researchers at the inci-
dent scene.   It would also help direct vendors, researchers, and observers away from
overburdened local government officials and toward the specific areas of need.  The
clearinghouse would allow for a more coherent and methodical investigation of all
disaster impacts, the gathering of ÒperishableÓ data, and the tracking of all field in-
vestigations.  It would help ensure that all areas had been thoroughly explored for
resource needs.  Further, it would facilitate documentation of findings and observa-

tions and provide all investigators with updated information on damage, throughdaily briefings and reports.  The clearinghouse should be as close to the affected area
as possible, while still providing the necessary space and support services.  It should

be located so that it affords access to the emergency operations center, althoughphysical proximity may not be as important as electronic connectivity.9These economic effects are discussed in depth in Carl Shapiro and Hal R. Varian, 1998,Information Rules: A Strategic Guide to the Network Economy, Harvard Business School Press,Cambridge, Mass.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTpoint is that the system architecture can itself be a source of risk, which isappropriate when architectural exploration is a program focus.¥Framework building. Introducing a new protocol or architectural
framework shifts emphasis in a research program from particular realiza-
tions of capability to the service interface through which it is delivered.
This approach was used in the early days of the Arpanet in order to
ensure that issues of scaling and heterogeneity were addressed from the
outset. It is a risky approach, however, because protocols, interfaces, and
other commonalities only have impact if they are widely adopted. In
order to drive down the risks of adoption, specific tactics are used. For
example, both the Internet Engineering Task Force and the World Wide
Web Consortium generally require reference implementations to exist
before a commonality can be considered for potential adoption.  Introduc-

tion of service interfaces into existing prototype systems can be a success-
ful strategy to reduce the costs and risks of entry for new participants.
This was, for example, the goal of the Defense Modeling and Simulation
Office (DMSO) when it introduced the HLA protocol in the early days of
the Defense Simulation program.  The risks of this effort were considered

acceptable because existing prototypes provided evidence of value and
capability, enabling a more direct focus on interoperation and scaling up.
In the early days of the International Organization for StandardizationÕsOpen Systems Interconnect (OSI) network architecture effort, uptake was
slowed by the absence of compelling evidence of feasibility and value.¥Scaffolding.  Interoperation risk at the system level can be addressed
through the creation of scaffolded components. In scaffolding, a common
technique in component-oriented system design, missing components are
Òstubbed outÓ with relatively trivial placeholder components that have
limited functionality. This enables partial early validation of compliance
with internal protocols and interfaces (APIs).MooreÕs Law RiskSeveral years of effort may be required to develop prototypes andevaluation systems that embody a new IT concept. Few IT implementa-
tions are insensitive to the performance of underlying technologies. Im-
provements in processor speed, network capacity, storage capacity, manu-

facturability and economies of scale, and infrastructural reliability can
enable significant new approaches, for example, to capability, architec-
ture, and usability. Researchers can anticipate the improvements likely to
occur over the lifetime of a research program by extrapolating infrastruc-
tural capability according to MooreÕs law and its analogs. If the maturedconcept is deployed 3 years after program initiation, for instance, the
conventionally deployed platforms at that future time could be more thanInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY TRANSITION AND PROGRAM MANAGEMENT113four times as powerful as those generally used when the research pro-gram was initiated.To enable researchers to anticipate these changes, research-programmanagers sometimes employ a tactic of Òliving in the future,Ó in which
unusually high-performance platforms are deployed to researchers in or-
der to enable them to gain experience with the targeted future platforms.
This is sometimes also called Òleading the receiver,Ó because of the anal-
ogy to a football quarterback throwing the ball to the expected location of
the wide receiver, even though the receiver may be far from that location
when the throw is initiated. The tactic has been applied successfully in
programs for computational science, information visualization, and ap-
plications for high-performance networking. In digital government, this
approach could be used, for example, to experiment with the use by cen-
sus takers of low-cost wireless handheld devices (now emerging in the
marketplace), with speech interfaces for use in crisis management, or
with very-high-performance network links available in rapidly deployed
field settings for crisis management.Reliability and Usability RisksMany IT applications require high levels of assurance of system avail-ability, of data confidentiality and integrity, of design compliance to laws
or regulations, or of correctness of design and implementation with re-
spect to safety or functional properties. This is particularly true for mis-
sion-specific government applications, and across a wide spectrum of
government sectors ranging from health care, social security, and statisti-
cal data to aerospace, defense, and energy. The experience of highly reli-
able systems development is that users must sacrifice capability, flexibil-
ity, interoperation, and performance in order to achieve high levels of
reliabilityÑwhich includes fault tolerance, security, robustness in the faceof component failure, and many other attributes. With improvements in
reliability practices, the extent of this sacrifice can be reduced. Conversely,

requirements for reliability can force program managers to scale back
ambitions for capability, performance, and even usability.  Usability poses

similar challenges. All Internet users have had the frustrating experience
of attempting to extract information or conduct transactions through
poorly designed Web sites. In applications in which government informa-
tion and transactions are made available to citizens, the need to provide
broad access to a widely diverse population creates enormous challenges
in achieving usable designs. Usability challenges are also faced in systems
designed for internal useÑfor example, crisis management applicationsintended for use by professionals who may be in a state of stress when
interacting with the system.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114IT RESEARCH, INNOVATION, AND E-GOVERNMENTWhen designing a research program that is addressing a particularcapability challenge, an important early decision is when and how to take
on usability issues. There is growing evidence, for example, that the over-
all architecture of a system can influence the ability to create usable hu-
man interfaces.10  In addition, poor usability may deter potential adopt-
ers even when the underlying technology has considerable merit.Early attention to these issues may not be enough, however. Certainproduct attributes, especially those related to reliability and usability, are
multifaceted issues that must be considered at every stage of the engi-
neering process. Reliability in particular must be addressed during sys-
tem conceptualization, design, development, evaluation, integration, and
evolution.Planning RisksThis section on ÒDimensions of RiskÓ has illustrated and partially
enumerated the dimensions of risk that might be addressed in a mission-
focused research program and some of the strategies and tactics conven-
tionally used to address them. Of course, these and other kinds of risks
may be present to different degrees, depending on the particular research
challenges being addressed. Regardless, it is clear that successful pro-
gram designs incorporate, if only tacitly, an identification of the critical
risk elements, indicating which ones are the primary drivers and which
others can be safely deferred for later consideration. A full identification
of risks does not imply that they should all be addressed in the scope of a
programÑrather, it can help a manager understand, and later communi-cate, how transition steps might be taken by others once results start to
emerge from the program.In addition to identification of the risks, the sequencing of risks to beconsidered can also be a risk issue: an overambitious program design that
takes on too many risk dimensions at once effectively multiplies overall
program risk and lessens the chance of overall success. This challenge of
sequencing the risks may best be addressed by drawing on experience in
research, engineering, evaluation, and operational settings, where the full
range of risk issues can be best identified. Questions include how the risk
dimensions interact, and which risk issues can be addressed in parallel
and which must be done sequentially.10Leonard J. Bass and Bonnie E. John. 2001. ÒSupporting Usability Through SoftwareArchitecture,Ó IEEE Computer 34(10):113-115.
Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY TRANSITION AND PROGRAM MANAGEMENT115SUMMARYWhile there can be no recipes for success in program management,this chapter suggests some models and principles that may be usefully
applied by a program manager in seeking innovation in government ap-
plications.  Most importantly, a program manager may benefit from un-

derstanding the challenge of achieving a particular innovation in the
framework of the two principal models identified in this chapterÑthesupply chain model and the risk-identification model. This understand-
ing may be developed and applied in a process that includes, for example,
steps such as the following:¥Identify the desired innovation and the stakeholders in success-fully achieving it.¥Identify the horizon (time available to achieve the operational im-pact) and the overall risk tolerance for the effort.¥Map out the full set of participants in the supply chain that linksoperational end users with innovators.  This includes, for example, un-

derstanding the readiness of the potential participants and the natural
opportunities for collaboration.¥Identify the principal risk issues at each stage and consider appro-priate strategies for addressing those risks.¥Identify critical points of leverage in the supply chain. Understandthe timing considerations and other factors regarding the opportunities
so identified.¥Take action according to the understanding gained in the previoussteps in order to stimulate appropriate participants in the supply chain to
achieve the innovation goals.  Example actions: Invest to stimulate explo-

ration or buy down risk, stimulate collaboration, and facilitate new stan-
dards.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AppendixesInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.119AppendixAE-Government ScenariosE-GOVERNMENT AND THE DAILY LIFE OF THE CITIZENOnline interactions between citizens and governmentÑlocal, state,and federalÑare becoming increasingly common as more people and
government organizations connect to the Internet and the World Wide
Web. Individuals are already doing many different things via the Internet,

such as renewing vehicle registrations, filing tax returns and paying taxes,
exchanging messages with their childrenÕs teachers, sending e-mail to
their congressional representatives and to the president, getting informa-
tion on their social security benefits, and even paying for pet licenses.
Some of these activities, such as vehicle registration, have simply become
more convenient with the advent of online transactions; others, such as
accessing government information, have been so greatly facilitated that
they have changed from being very unusual to being commonplace. Such
availability of government information, transactions, and people has just
begun, however.  For a glimpse of the potential impact of a truly digital

government on the everyday life of an average citizen, consider the fol-
lowing hypothetical case.Margaret Jackson had been quite satisfied with the local public schoolsfor her two children, but one morning at breakfast as she was scanning
her personalized summary of the news, she noticed that the school super-
intendent had announced that French classes were going to be eliminated
at the high school because of budgetary pressures. Both of her children
were currently taking French and were enjoying it, and she had beenInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120APPENDIX Apleased to see them beginning to develop some fluency in another lan-guage. She was sufficiently upset by this announcement that she decided
to look into it further.The first thing that Margaret did was to learn the actual cost of theFrench classes by looking up the budget on the schoolÕs Web site; thistype of statistical information was available for all aspects of local, state,
and federal government, and could be retrieved using queries expressed
in simple English (and several other languages). She then quickly worked
out how much this represented in terms of dollars per year for every local
taxpayer with children. Next, for comparison, she found out how much
was spent on foreign-language instruction in similar school districts
throughout the country.Margaret then submitted a general query to all government and newssources for recent stories or reports on the state of foreign-language edu-
cation in the United States. Included in the searchÕs results were a coupleof news stories in which the secretary of commerce had cited a report
indicating that the lack of fluency in foreign languages was making it
harder for American companies to compete with those in the European
Union. The search also returned the original report that contained this
information. Armed with the dollar figures and the report, Margaret con-
sulted state and federal portals to determine which people in government
have an interest in this issue. Her query returned the names of three
individuals: one in the state government who was responsible for pro-
moting exports, one in the U.S. Department of Education, and a promi-
nent U.S. senator who had taken the issue on as a personal concern. She
immediately sent mail about her local schoolÕs decision to all of thesepeople, copying the school superintendent, the high school principal, and
the state and federal representatives of her district.That evening, Margaret received replies from the staff of the stateofficial and the senator. They directed her to some new state and federal
programs that were designed to support education initiatives and that
also, in some cases, included foreign-language education. The senatorÕsstaff also mentioned that a pending bill being reviewed by a House com-
mittee would focus on providing support for foreign-language education.
She reviewed this material and found that one of the state programs
might apply to her local school district. She also read a summary of the
pending federal legislation and sent a message to the chair of the House
committee indicating her strong support and giving some of the details of
what was happening in her school district. She sent messages as well to
the superintendent and principal, pointing out the existence of the state
program. She then went to bed, pleased that her actions that day might
have made a difference in her childrenÕs education.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A121CRISIS MANAGEMENTScientists have predicted that there is roughly a 70 percent likelihoodthat a major earthquake will occur in the San Francisco Bay area before
2030.1 Further compounding the situation, many residents of the Bay area
have no direct experience with major earthquakes, since more than 1
million people have moved to the region since the 1989 Loma Prieta quake.

What might be possible with aggressive harnessing of information tech-
nology capabilities for responding to such a crisis?At 5:45 p.m. on December 14, 2010, an earthquake occurs withoutwarning. The severe event, measuring over 7 on the Richter scale, causes
30 seconds of intense shaking and extensive damage to the built environ-
ment. A poll of sensors located in homes throughout the region obtains
information on the intensity and distribution of the quake and indicates
where the communications infrastructure has been disrupted. Highway
camera and sensor data show that dense rush-hour traffic is severely
snarled and indicate that 900 roads and many off-ramps and overpasses
are impassable. The retrofitted and recently opened eastern span of the
Bay Bridge does not collapse, but the eastern approach is impassable.
Numerous landslides in the hills severely damage buildings; neighbor-
hood roads; and water, gas, and electric lines along the Hayward fault.
Hundreds of people die immediately. Several thousand must be rescued,
and thousands are seriously injured. The Oakland airport is closed. The
San Francisco and San Jose airports are open, but there is no way to travel
to them. Railroads are also severely damaged.Sarah Janello is trapped in a Berkeley parking structure, but she has awireless mobile communications device with her. Though the voice cir-
cuits are jammed with calls, she is able to send a text message informing
the emergency dispatch center of her location, that her leg is pinned down
by a supporting beam, and that other people appear to be trapped under
the concrete. A system linking all the information from local govern-
ments, state agencies, and businesses tracks the numerous damage and
emergency reports, including SarahÕs, and matches response capabilitieswith these needs. The priority list is fluid, updated automatically as new
data arrive. Several other people in the Berkeley structure also report that
they are trapped, so this location receives a high priority and a rescue
team is quickly dispatched. To minimize the risk to the human rescuers,1U.S. Geological Survey (USGS). 1999. ÒMajor Quake Likely to Strike Between 2000 and2030.Ó USGS Fact Sheet-152-99. USGS, U.S. Department of the Interior, Washington, D.C.
Available online at <http://quake.wr.usgs.gov/study/wg99/index.html>.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122APPENDIX Arobots are used to locate the buried people and to bring them water andother needed supplies.While Sarah Janello awaits rescue, she is able to locate other familymembers. She finds that her husband and children are stuck on the Bay
Bridge but unharmed, and they learn in turn that she is being rescued.
Sarah feels a sense of relief in the darkness as she waits to be rescued.
Afterward, she is located by her family at a nearby hospital.Using sensors and atmospheric models, the Emergency OperationsCenter tracks the dispersal of toxic fumes from the numerous fires that
are burning. When a hazardous situation is identified, the populations at
risk are notified of individually tailored evacuation and shelter options
through a Òreverse 911Ó system that employs both wired and wireless
communications.These sorts of scenarios play themselves out thousands of timesthroughout the Bay Area that day and in the disasterÕs aftermath.CITIZEN ACCESS TO FEDERAL STATISTICSIndividuals want access to federal statistical data. They wish to learn,for example, about where and who people are, the demographics of dif-
ferent areas (e.g., information about schools, cost of living, recreation),
what is going on in business and agriculture, what is driving prices in a
particular area, or what to expect with regard to inflation and interest
rates.How far have we come today toward realizing this vision? FedStatsprovides a single portal for federally collected data sets and for docu-
ments based on them. Data sources and documents are organized topi-
cally and geographically across all the federal statistics agencies. In many
cases, the available data are constrained, owing to confidentiality protec-
tion, but summary information and reports may be available. Still, one
cannot make such queries as, How many people will be displaced if an
evacuation at the 100-year flood line for Manhattan, Kansas, is required?
Or, what would be the economic impact of locating a particular new
business in my town?Imagine asking FedStats 2020 the latter question. This might trigger aseries of questions back to the user not only to acquire more details about
that business but to learn more about that user:  his or her quantitative/

scientific literacy and visual/verbal/textual/cognitive abilities. Then, the
relevant data, complemented by additional data sources where needed,
would be ÒcrunchedÓ with the aid of models and simulations. A response
containing the requested information both fully and in user-friendly form
would quickly be returned to the individual making the query.To realize this vision requires IT innovation on several fronts, such asInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A123representation of information, archiving and searching, modeling andsimulation, and information integration. Subtle but important issues, such
as the underlying integrity of responses, will also become key. For ex-
ample, when the same basic question is asked by people of varying de-
grees of quantitative sophistication, answers must be consistent.Taking the scenario one step further: imagine being able to get asecond opinion.  The local chamber of commerce has contracted with a

small economic modeling company to give you access to a model that
uses a different set of assumptions.  Running this model using a portal to
the company offered by the chamber, the model accesses the same under-
lying census and economic data that were used in the governmentÕsmodel.  The modeling company
Õs software is able to access the underly-ing government databases directly, using an application programming
interface offered by the government to allow nongovernment computer
programs to analyze the data in new or different ways.CENSUS 2020The decennial census is carried out, pursuant to constitutional man-date (Article 1, Section 2), to conduct a precise snapshot of the national
population every 10 years. This information is required for apportioning
congressional seats and establishing the boundaries of political jurisdic-
tions. Many other government programs depend on census data. For ex-
ample, the Voting Rights Act of 1965 requires data on race and ethnic
origin at a very fine level of geographic detail. Although one could con-
template obtaining such information from other sources, no comparable
or practical alternative now exists. How might the census be conducted in
2020?Postal address might no longer be a reliable source in 2020 for locat-ing and contacting the population because other means of communica-
tion and identifiers (wireless telephone numbers and e-mail and other
Internet addresses) predominate. New geocodes would be used to re-
place the Master Address List used today to find the population. Satellite
imagery, coupled with ground-based reporting using global-positioning-
system data, could be used to locate, geocode, and define every structure
in the United States and its territories. That is, a determination of build-
ings inhabited by humans, along with a distinction between business and
living quarters, could be made.Once the geocodes were available, the age, sex, race, and ethnic com-position of each geocoded household would need to be determined. As-
suming that geocodes could be used to link to government administrative
recordsÑfor example, records on federal taxes, welfare, property taxes,or social securityÑone could retrieve information from these governmentInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124APPENDIX Arecords and follow up with more traditional enumeration for householdswithout complete information. Also, the linking of this information would
immediately identify the government services used by these individuals.
An unresolved challenge is what methods might be used to obtain infor-
mation on homeless and other groups that could not be readily identified
or located by any of the methods described above.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.125AppendixB July 2001 Letter Report to the
National Science FoundationJuly 9, 2001Lawrence E. Brandt, Ph.D.Program Manager, Digital Government ProgramDirectorate for Computer & Information Science and EngineeringNational Science Foundation
4201 Wilson BoulevardArlington, Virginia 22230Dear Dr. Brandt:To obtain input that could help inform planning for future e-govern-ment innovation programs, you requested on June 16, 2001, that theCommittee on Computing and Communications Research to Enable Bet-ter Use of Information Technology in Government provide an interim
assessment of the potential role of computer science research in theseefforts.  The committee was established by the National Research
CouncilÕs Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB) to
examine how information technology (IT) research can enable improvedand new government services, operations, and interactions with citizens.The study is funded through the National Science FoundationÕs (NSFÕs)
Digital Government program, which supports joint research programsbetween academic researchers and government agencies.The first phase of the committeeÕs study featured workshops exam-ining two illustrative application areasÑcrisis management and federalInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.126APPENDIX BstatisticsÑand concluded with the publication of two summary reports.1The second phase of the project, which is currently being completed,synthesizes what was learned in the two workshops, information gleaned
from other published work examining IT research and e-government,and inputs gathered in the course of two data-gathering meetings and
supplemental individual interviews.This letter is based on the committeeÕs two previously publishedworkshop reports, as well as other relevant CSTB publications on the
evolution and impacts of computer science research and the applicationof IT in government.2  The committee
Õs findings based on this work areas follows:1.Realizing the potential of e-government that has been demon-
strated in early efforts will require addressing implementation issues,
resolving shorter-term technology issues, and conducting research onlonger-term challenges.2.While government can in many cases build on technology devel-
oped for the commercial sector, targeted computer science research isneeded where government leads demand or has special requirements.3.Providing a sound foundation for e-government and other appli-
cations of information technology throughout society will depend onensuring a continuing, broad federal computer science research program.4.Challenging computer scientists to address real-world problems
in the government sphere can stimulate interactions benefiting research-ers, who need access to computer and information artifacts and realisticcontexts, and government agencies, which gain expertise and insights
that can inform and improve their IT acquisition and management andresearch results that can be applied in government and elsewhere.These findings are developed below.1Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council,  1999,
Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis Management, NationalAcademy Press, Washington, D.C.; and Computer Science and Telecommunications Board,
National Research Council, 2000,  Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Researchfor Federal Statistics, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.2This letter report was reviewed by individuals chosen for their diverse perspectives andtechnical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the National Research
CouncilÕs (NRCÕs) Report Review Committee.  We wish to thank the following individuals
for their participation in the review of this report: John H. Gibbons, Former Assistant to the
President for Science and Technology and Former Director, Office of Science and Technology
Policy; Bruce W. McConnell, McConnell International, LLC; Arati Prabhakar, U.S. Venture
Partners; and Robert Sproull, Sun Microsystems Laboratories.  The review of this report was

overseen by Samuel H. Fuller, Analog Devices, and William G. Howard, Jr., independent
consultant.  Appointed by the NRC, they were responsible for making certain that an inde-

pendent examination of this report was carried out in accordance with institutional proce-
dures and that all review comments were carefully considered.  Responsibility for the final

content of this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the NRC.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B1271. REALIZING THE POTENTIAL OF E-GOVERNMENT THAT HASBEEN DEMONSTRATED IN EARLY EFFORTS WILL REQUIREADDRESSING IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES, RESOLVINGSHORTER-TERM TECHNOLOGY ISSUES, AND CONDUCTINGRESEARCH ON LONGER-TERM CHALLENGES.The emergence of the Internet and other technologies for electroniccommerce has given rise to the concept of Òdigital governmentÓ or 
Òe-governmentÓÑthe application of information technology (IT) and asso-ciated changes in practices to foster a more informed, engaged citizenryand more efficient, accountable government operations.  Among the key
features envisioned for e-government are increasing access to govern-
ment information, facilitating transactions with government agencies,making access to information and transactions ubiquitous, better meet-ing the needs of specific groups of users, increasing peopleÕs participa-tion in government, and meeting expectations for advances in govern-ment-unique areas.3  Constituencies include citizens, businesses, non-
profit organizations, and the diverse agencies of federal, state, and local
government.Ideas from early e-government experiments have contributed bothto technology development and to the improvement of governmentÕsbusiness practices.  Among the most visible enhancements have been
aggregated cross-agency portals.  These Web sites provide users with
access to information and services organized by broad topic and user
constituency rather than by specific government departments or agen-cies, and often are task-oriented.4  Computer-based tax-filing and in-
quiry-response services provided by multiple agencies are other publicly
visible illustrations of positive changes in the way government does itsbusiness.  Also apparent
Ñin news accounts from across the countryÑare difficulties experienced by government agencies seeking new capa-
bilities.53A 1996 report based on a series of CSTB projects examining needs at the Internal RevenueService suggested similar goals, stating that Òbased on its work of the past 5 years, thecommittee strongly believes that the modernization of the IRS, including both business re-
engineering and advanced automation, is extremely important.  Modernization is necessary

to improve taxpayer service and to allow the IRS to operate within an increasingly auto-
mated society, both of which ultimately ensure that taxes can be collected efficiently.Ó  (Com-
puter Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  1996.  
ContinuedReview of Tax Systems Modernization at the Internal Revenue Service.  National Academy Press,
Washington, D.C., p. 3.)4One of the earliest portals, fedstats.gov, is discussed in Computer Science and Telecom-munications Board, National Research Council, 2000, Summary of a Workshop on InformationTechnology Research for Federal Statistics, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.5For example, CSTBÕs 1996 review of IRS modernization efforts cautioned that Òthe IRShas had serious technical capability problems that, in the committeeÕs view, cast doubt on theoverall success of TSM if they are not solved.Ó (Computer Science and Telecommunications
Board, National Research Council.  1996.  
Continued Review of Tax Systems Modernization at theInternal Revenue Service.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., p. 4.)
Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128APPENDIX BIn its examination of IT for crisis management and the collection,analysis, and dissemination of federal statistics, the committee identified
a number of challenges to the governmentÕs effective exploitation of IT.These include ensuring the interoperation and integration of diverse sys-tems used by different departments and agencies with multiple stake-
holders and a significant legacy base; accommodating existing organiza-tional structures that are difficult to rework to enable exploiting newopportunities afforded by IT; improving trustworthiness, including guar-
antees of information systems security as well as assurances regardinguser privacy and system availability; bridging significant gaps betweencurrent practice and best available practices; and meeting specific tech-
nology needs related to government missions (see finding 2, below).Each challenge incorporates a mix of implementation, management,short-term technical challenges, and long-term research needs.Technology transition is an important consideration when researchis needed to achieve desired capabilities.  The work of researchers may
focus primarily on inventing a new capability, but implementation must
address the additional challenges of enabling the translation of that in-vention into a reliable, working product or service.2. WHILE GOVERNMENT CAN IN MANY CASES BUILDON TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPED FOR THE COMMERCIALSECTOR, TARGETED COMPUTER SCIENCE RESEARCH ISNEEDED WHERE GOVERNMENT LEADS DEMAND OR HASSPECIAL REQUIREMENTS.Although it can generally build on the technologies and servicesemerging in the commercial e-business marketplace, government leads
demand in some areas.  Research in these areas could help government
agencies to better accomplish their missions.  Moreover, properly man-
aged research in areas of leading demand can stimulate commercial in-
terest and development and thus enable government to move more rap-idly away from acquisition of expensive custom systems, whose fulllife-cycle costs government must bear, to the use of off-the-shelf com-
mercial capabilities.  As a result of this process, government now can
make use of commercial operating systems with process separation,multimedia databases, and packet-switched networking gear, among
other capabilities.Important Areas of Leading DemandUbiquity.  Governments must provide services to all citizens
Ñthey can-not, in general, opt to serve only the easiest-to-reach customers or par-ticipate only in particular market segments.  Nor can citizens choose
which government they will deal with.  Breadth of service encompasses

the range of individualsÕ physical, cognitive, and language abilities as
Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B129well as their education, income, and geographic location.  Near-ubiqui-
tous service is provided today primarily through in-person, telephone,
and postal mail interactions, but e-mail, the Web, public kiosks, andother IT-based approaches are providing new opportunities to expandaccess toÑand the accessibility ofÑservices.  Government, which must
comprehensively address the needs of its citizens, has been a leader inexploring how to make technologies accessible, whereas industry has theoption of focusing selectively to maximize returns.  Research in areas

such as human-computer interaction, information retrieval, languagetranslation, and speech recognition and synthesis can help to increasethe ubiquity of information and services.  Achieving usability and acces-

sibility requires that systems be used, and government applications mayprovide a range of contexts in which researchers can frame their efforts.6Trustworthiness.  Citizens expect government to provide assurances ofsecurityÑwhich includes confidentiality (protection of personal andbusiness information), integrity of information and systems, and avail-
ability of information and systems
Ñthat are generally stronger than
those expected of the private sector.  But what is desired may be beyond
what the technology and practice can actually offer.  Conventional busi-
ness practice incorporates risk management, in which the costs of imple-menting security measures are balanced against the consequences of nothaving themÑa calculation that certain levels of exposure can be toler-ated for certain applications.  Government agencies, however, are ex-
pected to adhere to a higher standardÑno improper disclosure of per-sonal information contained in statistical data, tax filings, social security
records, and the likeÑeven though government is also charged withreleasing certain kinds of information, which may be derived from sensi-tive personal or corporate information that it collects, and making it
uniformly available to all.Trust in public systems is essential for public compliance with gov-ernment mandates (e.g., paying taxes, completing census forms); equally
critical is trust in the safety and reliability of systems on which lives maydepend.  In military applications, requirements for trustworthiness have
led to efforts to promote Òhigh-assuranceÓ 7 technologies for critical sys-
6ÒProgress toward developing improved [every-citizen interfaces] will require basic re-search in theory, modeling, and conceptualization; experimental research involving build-
ing, evaluating, and testing of artifacts; and empirical social science research assessing seg-
ments of the population and how people actually work with different systems.  In all cases,

data, methodology, and tools are themselves targets for research or research support.Ó (Com-
puter Science and Telecommunications Board.  National Research Council.  1997.  
More ThanScreen Deep. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., p. 2.)7See Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, 1997,Review of the Past and Present Contexts for Using Ada Within the Department of Defense,  NationalAcademy Press, Washington, D.C.; and Computer Science and Telecommunications Board,
National Research Council, 1999, Realizing the Potential of C4I: Fundamental Challenges, Na-
tional Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.130APPENDIX Btems, and similar requirements apply to IT for transportation and health8applications, areas in which government is often in partnership with theprivate sector.  Addressing issues related to trustworthiness involves
intermingled considerations of policy, organizational behavior and cul-ture, and technology.  Computer science research could contribute tools

and approaches for facilitating dissemination of information withoutcompromising confidentiality9 as well as for designing and developing
systems that provide appropriate, comparatively high overall levels of
trustworthiness.10Coping with Structural and Legal Constraints in Government.  Government,like business, has been working to create portals for information andtransactions to meet the needs of particular groups of users.  Frequently,
this requires spanning organizational boundaries.  Difficult in any set-

ting, the associated modification of processes and organizational struc-ture in government is often significantly constrained by legal and admin-istrative strictures and may be further complicated by the involvement
of state and local governments as well as federal agencies.  Also to be
considered are information-sharing barriers established legislatively toprotect citizen privacy.  IT capabilities such as trusted lightweight inter-

mediaries that aggregate for the customer while dispatching componentsof the aggregate query or transaction to the various government entitiesinvolved in responding can help provide a usable interface to citizens
despite the array of overlapping, partly interconnected agencies found ingovernment.Large-scale Systems.  Making IT Better 
discussed a multitude of problemsassociated with large-scale systems, including delays, unexpected fail-ures, and inflexibility in coping with changing needs, and it observed
that notable examples of such systems and problems exist in govern-ment.11  Many of the publicly acknowledged failures have occurred in
government systems, such as those of the Internal Revenue Service and
the Federal Aviation Administration at the federal level and numeroussystems at the state and local level.  This situation reflects both the large
scale of some of those systems and the shortages of IT expertise chronic
in government.  The problem is growing with expanding use of the
8Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  2000.
Networking Health.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
9This tension is discussed in more detail in Computer Science and TelecommunicationsBoard, National Research Council, 2000, Summary of a Workshop on Information TechnologyResearch for Federal Statistics, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.10Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council. 1999.Trust in Cyberspace.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.11Computer Science and Telecommunications Board.  2000.  
Making IT Better.  National
Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B131Internet, which has fostered proliferating interconnected systems.  And
the importance of the problem is also growing as people come to depend
more on such systems.  Making IT Better points to the need for research toaddress deep interactions among system components and intersystemdependencies, unintended and unanticipated consequences of system
alteration, emergent behaviors in systems with large numbers of compo-nents and users, unstable behaviors, properties of federated systems,and other phenomena.  In addition to these systems engineering issues,

research must address operational engineering issues such as how errorsare corrected, how security breaches are detected and corrected, andhow backups or other robustness measures are executed.  Making ITBetter concludes that a research program including case studies of par-
ticular systems and methodology research on architecture, techniques,and tools is needed to address the difficult technical (and nontechnical)
challenges posed in realizing these systems.Examples of Government Activities Posing Technical ChallengesOutside the Commercial SectorÕs Normal PurviewCrisis Management.12  Crises include natural disasters such as hurricanes,
earthquakes, floods, or fires and man-made disasters such as industrialaccidents, infrastructure failures, or terrorist attacks.  Crisis management

encompasses crisis responseÑthe actions taken immediately in the wakeof a disasterÑas well as consequence management, which encompassesthe longer-term activities associated with addressing disasters past,
present, and future, including planning, preparedness, mitigation, andrecovery efforts.Computer science research can address the critical need for timely,authoritative, and relevant information in crisis response and manage-ment efforts.  Meeting this need requires (1) a robust, high-performance
communications infrastructure; (2) the ability to quickly deploy tempo-
rary but robust infrastructure when extensive damage has occurred; (3)the ability to access and compose information and communications sys-tems operated by government at all levels and by nongovernmental or-
ganizations, sometimes on an ad hoc basis; (4) support for effective deci-sion making and coordination in the face of uncertainty and stress; (5)tools to help overcome language and other barriers to communicating
with citizens; (6) enhanced means of warning populations at risk, espe-cially by providing information targeted to local circumstances faced byindividuals or neighborhoods; and (7) means for adapting e-commerce12Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council. 1999.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Crisis Management, NationalAcademy Press, Washington, D.C.; and Computer Science and Telecommunications Board,
National Research Council. 1996, Computing and Communications in the Extreme, NationalAcademy Press, Washington, D.C.Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132APPENDIX Btechnology and practices to accommodate handling the exceptions in-herent in crisis situations.Collection, Processing and Analysis, and Dissemination of Federal Statistics.13Federal statistics play a key role in a wide range of policy, business, andindividual decisions that are based on statistics about population charac-teristics, the economy, health, education, crime, and other factors.  These
decisions affect the allocation of federal funding to state and local gov-
ernments; the apportionment of legislative districts; and adjustments towages, retirement benefits, and other spending.  The necessary informa-tion is collected from a large number of respondents and at a level of
detail sometimes significantly greater than that queried for in privatesurveys.  The federal statistical agencies are characterized not only by
their mission of collecting statistical information but also by their inde-
pendence and their commitment to a set of principles and practices aimedat ensuring the quality and credibility of the statistical information theyprovide.14The tasks of protecting confidentiality and ensuring trustworthinessbecome more complex when information based on individual records ismade public and information records are linked across multiple statisti-
cal data sets.  Linking, or the use of information integration technologies,
enables answering complex aggregate queries, a capability that can beimportant to domains ranging from crisis response to epidemiology.  But

linking also enables the use of multiple databases to obtain informationthat, by policy, should not be divulged because, for example, privacyrules are violated.In addition to IT confidentiality protection, the federal statisticalagencies also lead in demand for IT that can effectively support userswith diverse interests and capabilities in retrieving, integrating, and in-
terpreting information drawn from the diverse and heterogeneoussources of data that statistical agencies provide, and for technologies thatcan support the scope and complexity of data collection efforts associ-
ated with surveys and the decennial census.  In addition, government
has a strong interest in and may lead demand for relating various kindsof data to geographical information.  Accordingly, the Digital Govern-

ment program has supported work in geospatial information systems.Management of National-Interest Electronic Collections in the Digital Age.The federal government is responsible for three major libraries that play13Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council. 2000.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Federal Statistics.  National Acad-emy Press, Washington, D.C.14Committee on National Statistics, National Research Council.  2001.
  Principles and Prac-
tices for a Federal Statistical Agency, Second Edition.  Margaret E. Martin, Miron L. Straf, and
Constance F. Citro, editors.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B133a leadership role within the national system of libraries and in the inter-national context as well:  the Library of Congress, the National Library of

Medicine, and the National Agricultural Library.  CSTB
Õs review of theLibrary of CongressÕs information systems strategy15 pointed to signifi-
cant unsolved research challenges related to the LibraryÕs mission, in-cluding how to construct a massive-scale, decentralized, robust collec-tion and how to deal with preservation of Òborn digitalÓ and digitized
materials whose format and contents are dynamic rather than fixed.  The

federal government faces substantially similar challenges in the task ofarchiving government records, an effort led by the National Archivesand Records Administration, which has itself turned to a computer sci-
ence research team for help in planning for its long-term digital archivingand preservation needs.16  These and other governmental bodies play a
key role in preserving national history and heritage, and computer sci-
ence research can help with such aspects as the development of suitablesystems architectures, automatic indexing, and retrieval of informationin multiple media.  That opportunity is reinforced by the multiagency

support for the Digital Libraries program coordinated by NSF.  Related
and equally challenging needs arise in the management of massive datasets used for scientific research in areas ranging from genome research to
space science.3. PROVIDING A SOUND FOUNDATION FOR E-GOVERNMENTAND OTHER APPLICATIONS OF INFORMATIONTECHNOLOGY THROUGHOUT SOCIETY WILL DEPEND ONENSURING A CONTINUING, BROAD FEDERAL COMPUTERSCIENCE RESEARCH PROGRAM.CSTBÕs Evolving the High Performance Computing and CommunicationsInitiative to Support the NationÕs Information Infrastructure17 examined the
payoff and key lessons learned from federal investment in computing
research.  The study concluded that the sustained, broad federal invest-
ment in IT research has profoundly affected the development of com-puter technology and ultimately led to many commercially successful15Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council. 2000.LC21:  A Digital Strategy for the Library of Congress.  
National Academy Press, Washington,D.C.16Moore, Regan.  2001.  
ÒFinal Report for the Research Project on Application of Distrib-uted Object Computation Testbed Technologies to Archival Preservation and Access Re-
quirements,Ó San Diego Supercomputer Center, San Diego, Calif.
17Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  1995.
Evolving the High Performance Computing and Communications Initiative to Support the NationÕs
Information Infrastructure.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.  An expanded discus-
sion of the lessons from history is provided in Computer Science and Telecommunications
Board, 2000, Funding a Revolution,  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.134APPENDIX Bapplications.  Many IT research programs not only reached their in-
tended mission or science goals but also yielded long-term benefits real-
ized in commercial products, companies, and industries and also in thetraining of a cadre of capable researchers.  Ideas were often transferred to
the commercial sector through employment or entrepreneurship.  The

history of federally funded IT research shows that problems motivatedby government needs, such as networking and parallel processing, whensuitably framed in a carefully designed research program, proved to
have wide commercial application (as evidenced by the Internet, distrib-uted transaction processing, and data mining).  Broad goals were often
pursued in order to infuse new thinking into the technology supply
chain of vendors and technology developers for a mission agency.  Ex-
amples of the success of this approach include process separation forsecurity in operating systems (DARPA in the 1970s and 1980s), computa-
tional science (NSF, DOE, and NASA in the 1980s), and custom verylarge scale integrated circuit chip design (DARPA in the 1970s and 1980s).The 1990s saw the evolution of computer science research programsto embrace a broadening set of applications and users.  CSTB
Õs 1997project examining every-citizen interfaces to the nationÕs informationinfrastructure underscored the opportunity and challenge of developing
technology that could be used easily and effectively by all.18  Emphasis
has also increased considerably on what CSTBÕs Making IT Better termedÒsocial applications.Ó  That study committee observed that emerging
demand for Òmore and better use of IT in ways that affect [peopleÕs] livesmore intimately and directly than the early systems did in scientific andback-office business applicationsÓ presents 
Òissues with which the tradi-tional IT research community has little experience.  Successful work on
the social applications of IT will require new computer science and engi-neering as well as research that is coupled more extensively and effec-
tively to other perspectivesÑperspectives from other intellectual disci-plines and from the people who use the end results, that is, the goods,services, and systems that are deployed.Ó1918Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  1997.
More Than Screen Deep. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.19Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  2000.
Making IT Better.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., p. 201.
Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B1354. CHALLENGING COMPUTER SCIENTISTS TO ADDRESSREAL-WORLD PROBLEMS IN THE GOVERNMENT SPHERE CANSTIMULATE INTERACTIONS BENEFITING RESEARCHERS,WHO NEED ACCESS TO COMPUTER AND INFORMATIONARTIFACTS AND REALISTIC CONTEXTS, AND GOVERNMENTAGENCIES, WHICH GAIN EXPERTISE AND INSIGHTS THATCAN INFORM AND IMPROVE THEIR IT ACQUISITION ANDMANAGEMENT AND RESEARCH RESULTS THAT CAN BEAPPLIED IN GOVERNMENT AND ELSEWHERE.Working on government IT problems offers researchers a number ofpotential benefits, an important one being access to the artifactsÑcom-puter systems, software, and data setsÑthat are needed in experimentalcomputer science research.20  For example, addressing the challenges of
large-scale systems can be facilitated by studying real examples of such
systems found in government,21 and research depending on large, di-
verse information data sets can tap the wealth of public informationresources generated or held by government agencies.  A government

setting gives researchers access to applications with a richness and tex-ture typically lacking in the laboratory, and it diminishes the likelihoodof constraints stemming from proprietary considerations that typify work

in the private sectorÑironically one of the reasons that the private sectorcan benefit from research on government problems, too, since the resultswill be publicly available.  In 
Making IT Better, the study committee citedNSFÕs Digital Government program as contributing to the kind of re-searcher-end-user interaction that has become increasingly important toprogress in IT, and observed that the government setting also lends itself
to the recommended project-based organization of research work.For government agencies, benefits stemming from research can ex-tend beyond the research results themselves.  CSTB
Õs work on IT mod-ernization efforts at the Department of Defense, Internal Revenue Ser-vice, Social Security Administration, and Library of Congress have allpointed to the critical need for technology expertise and leadership.22While there is no substitute for in-house information technology talent,20Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  1994.
Academic Careers for Experimental Computer Scientists and Engineers.  National Academy Press,
Washington, D.C.21Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  2000.
Making IT Better.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.22This situation was summarized as follows in CSTBÕs 2000 report on expanding IT re-search:  ÒThe difficulties experienced in getting these systems right show the limitations ofcurrent technology and of the skill base in industry.  Government agencies would save money

and improve their productivity and service quality if there were a better understanding of
ways to reliably and efficiently design, operate, maintain, and upgrade large-scale systems
and social applications of IT.  Research based on government systems would undoubtedly

improve the knowledge base for private-sector systems as well.Ó  (Computer Science and
Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, 2000, Making IT Better, NationalAcademy Press, Washington, D.C., p. 203.)Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136APPENDIX Bthose studies have all suggested interactions with researchers as a meansof tapping additional technical expertise, especially top-caliber research
talent that is unlikely to be obtainable in-house or through the usualcontract mechanisms.  Thus, e-government provides an unusual oppor-
tunity for mutual benefit.CONCLUSIONThis letter provides an overview of key issues and illustrations ofhow computer science research can contribute to e-government initia-
tives.  Technical problems arising from government operations have the
potential to inspire important computer science research, and a well-managed research program focused on these problems can have an im-
pact not only in helping to achieve e-government capabilities, but alsomuch more broadly.  The broadening of the computer science research
agenda to encompass user needs and social computing issues argues for
researcher involvement with the sorts of real-world problems found ingovernment.  In bringing together computer scientists and government
agencies to tackle problems of mutual interest, the NSF Digital Govern-
ment program has begun to demonstrate that potential.Looking forward, a key question is how to leverage the research-management expertise of organizations such as the NSF, as well as mis-
sion agency research organizations (such as DARPA and NASA Ames)Ñand the results of the research they supportÑto meet e-governmentrequirements.  Making IT Better noted particularly that the leadership
role provided by the NSF is essential for preserving the emphasis onlong-term research and impact that is needed to engage top computerscientists and meet future needs.  Government agencies, like businesses,
have real operating needs that often demand short-term fixes, and theseare not generally an appropriate target for government-funded research.Such problems, addressed in typical systems integration projects in
which the problems and risks are better understood and managed, differcritically from broader, deeper challenges that can be addressed mosteffectively through collaboration with computer science researchers.
Needs of an unprecedented character are most effectively addressedthrough programs that are carefully managed to engage computer sci-ence researchers in advancing the state of the art and participating in the
development of solutions that are both realistic and appropriately ag-gressive with respect to the likely trajectory of emerging technologies.Moving rapidly to address these unprecedented needs requires astrategy that incorporates not only the development of requirements andthe invention of new technologies but also technology transition, organi-zational culture, and acquisition processes.  Carefully designed research
efforts can often anticipate these process issues and develop new con-cepts that are more likely to succeed as they are brought into govern-ment systems through acquisition, development and integration, deploy-Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B137ment, and evolution.  Finally, finding the right mechanisms for
transitioning technology from research to government IT systems is an
important practical challenge that must be addressed to reap the fullbenefits of research.  The committee
Õs final report will expand on theseresearch management issues (and the other points discussed in this let-
ter) in greater detail.Sincerely,William L. Scherlis, ChairCommittee on Computing and Communications Research to EnableBetter Use of Information Technology in GovernmentInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138AppendixCWorkshops Convened for This Project:
Agendas and ParticipantsWORKSHOP ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYFOR CRISIS MANAGEMENTAgendaTuesday, December 1, 19987:30 a.m.Registration and Continental Breakfast
8:30Welcome and Overview
William Scherlis8:45Keynote 1
G. Clay Hollister, Chief Information Officer, FederalEmergency Management Agency9:15Break
Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C1399:45Panel 1: Case Studies on Crisis Management
Panelists:Nuclear/Industrial Scenario: Albert GuberEarthquake: David KehrleinFlash Flood: Eve GruntfestHurricane: William Miller
Moderator: Eve Gruntfest12:00 p.m.Lunch

12:30Panel 2: Analysis of Information Technology Issues
in the Case StudiesPanelists: Avagene Moore, Thomas OÕKeefe, Jack Harrald,James Morentz
Moderator: David Kehrlein
1:30Panel 3: Information Technology Context
Panelists:Information Management: Barry LeinerDatabases: David MaierComputing/Storage: Paul H. Smith
Communications/Wireless: Philip Karn
Form Factors and Wearables: Daniel Siewiorek
Moderator: David DeWitt
3:00Task for Discussion Sessions
William Scherlis3:15Break

3:45Focused Breakout Sessions
Information as Needed (information integration,information management/retrieval, digital libraries,
geographical and spatial information, . . .)
Session leaders: Bruce Croft and David DeWittParticipants: Paul Bryant, Elliot Christian, GerraldGalloway, Valerie Gregg, David Gunning, Sally Howe,
David Jensen, David Kehrlein, David Maier, Robert
Neches, Edie Rasmusen, Tom Usselman, Lou Walter,
Robert WinokurInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.140APPENDIX CInformation for People (information services at theuser level, human-computer interaction,
visualization, collaboration, wearable computing,
sensors and robots, . . .)
Session leaders: Susan Dumais and William EddyParticipants: Eileen Collins, Mark Deputy, Wayne Gray,Eve Gruntfest, Ronald Larsen, Avagene Moore, Thomas
OÕKeefe, Jean Scholtz, Daniel SiewiorekCommerce and Transactions (electronic commerce,transactions, security, privacy, . . .)
Session leaders: Cliff Neuman and Michael NelsonParticipants: Peter Bloniarz, Larry Brandt, MelvynCiment, Stephen Crocker, Cathryn Dippo, Clay Hollister,
Frank Jaffe, Angienetta Johnson, Michael Swetnam,
Douglas TygarSystems and Network Infrastructure; Modeling andSimulation (software composition and assurance,
middleware and infrastructure services, system
integration and architectural issues, . . .)
Session leaders: Karen Sollins and Sallie Keller-McNultyParticipants: Richard Beckman, Albert Guber, Philip
Karn, Barry Leiner, Joe Lombardo, Cathy McDonald,
Avagene Moore, James Morentz, Paul Smith, Carl Staton,
John Toole6:00Reception

7:00 p.m.Demonstrations
Emergency Information Infrastructure PartnershipVirtual Forum, Avagene MooreTransportation Simulation, Richard BeckmanWednesday, December 2, 19987:30 a.m.Continental Breakfast
8:30Focused Breakout Sessions (continued)

10:15Break
Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C14110:30Keynote 2
Henry Kelly, White House Office of Science andTechnology Policy11:00 a.m.-Panel 4: Principal Information Technology Research
12:30 p.m.Opportunities
Panelists: Bruce Croft, Sally Keller-McNulty, CliffNeuman, Susan Dumais
Moderator: William Scherlis12:30Lunch

1:30Panel 5: Achieving an Impact in the Crisis
Management CommunityPanelists: Ronald Larsen, Earnest Paylor, Albert GuberModerator: Bruce Croft2:30Panel 6: Lessons for Digital Government
Panelists: John Toole, Bruce McConnell, Michael NelsonModerator: Michael Nelson3:30Concluding Remarks
William Scherlis4:00 p.m.Adjourn
PARTICIPANTSRichard Beckman, Los Alamos National LaboratoryPeter Bloniarz, Center for Technology and Government, StateUniversity of New YorkLawrence Brandt, National Science Foundation
Paul Bryant, Federal Emergency Management Agency
Elliot Christian, U.S. Geological Survey
Melvyn Ciment, Potomac Institute for Policy Studies
Eileen Collins, National Science FoundationInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.142APPENDIX CStephen Crocker, Steve Crocker AssociatesW. Bruce Croft, University of Massachusetts at Amherst
Mark Deputy, Montgomery County Urban Search and Rescue
David DeWitt, University of Wisconsin at Madison
Cathryn S. Dippo, Bureau of Labor Statistics
Susan Dumais, Microsoft Research
William Eddy, Carnegie Mellon University
Gerrald Galloway, International Joint Commission
Wayne Gray, George Mason University
Valerie Gregg, National Science Foundation
Eve Gruntfest, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
Albert Guber, Department of Energy/Bechtel Nevada
David Gunning, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
John R. Harrald, George Washington University
G. Clay Hollister, Federal Emergency Management Agency
Sally E. Howe, National Coordination Office for Computing,Information, and CommunicationsKay Howell, National Coordination Office for Computing, Information,and CommunicationsFrank Jaffe, Bank of Boston
David Jensen, University of Massachusetts at Amherst
Angienetta Johnson, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Philip Karn, Qualcomm Inc.
David Kehrlein, State of California, GovernorÕs Office of EmergencyServicesSallie Keller-McNulty, Los Alamos National Laboratory
Henry Kelly, Office of Science and Technology Policy
Ronald Larsen, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
Barry Leiner, Corporation for National Research Initiatives
Joe Lombardo, Applied Physics Laboratory, Johns Hopkins University
David Maier, Oregon Graduate Institute
Bruce McConnell, Office of Management and Budget
Cathy McDonald, National Coordination Office for Computing,Information, and CommunicationsWilliam Miller, U.S. Geological Survey
Avagene Moore, AV/PM Inc., Lawrenceburg, Tennessee
James Morentz, Essential Technologies Inc.
Michael R. Nelson, IBM
Clifford Neuman, University of Southern California
Thomas OÕKeefe, California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection
Earnest Paylor, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Edie Rasmusen, University of Pittsburgh
William Scherlis, Carnegie Mellon UniversityInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C143Jean Scholtz, Defense Advanced Research Projects AgencyDaniel Siewiorek, Carnegie Mellon University
Paul Smith, Department of Energy
Karen Sollins, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Carl P. Staton, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Michael Sullivan, BBN Corporation
Michael Swetnam, Potomac Institute for Policy Studies
John C. Toole, National Center for Supercomputing Applications,University of Illinois at Urbana-ChampaignWilliam Turnbull, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Douglas Tygar, University of California at Berkeley
Tom Usselman, National Research Council
Louis Walter, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Robert S. Winokur, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Rich Wojcik, Applied Physics Laboratory, Johns Hopkins UniversityWORKSHOP ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH FORFEDERAL STATISTICSAgendaTuesday, February 9, 19997:30 a.m.Registration and Continental Breakfast
8:30Welcome
William Scherlis8:45Keynote Address
Thomas Kalil, National Economic Council9:15Panel 1: Case Studies
Panelists:
National Health and Nutrition ExaminationSurveys: Lewis Berman
American Travel Study: Heather ContrinoCurrent Population Survey: Cathryn DippoNational Crime Victimization Survey: Denise Lewis
Moderator: Sallie Keller-McNulty
Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.144APPENDIX C11:00Panel 2: Information Technology Trends and
Opportunities
Panelists: Gary Marchionini, Tom Mitchell, Ravi S.
Sandhu, William Cody, Clifford Neuman (moderator)
12:30 p.m.Lunch

1:30Panel 3: Study Design, Data Collection, and Data
Processing
Panelists: Martin Appel
, Judith Lessler, James Smith,William Eddy (moderator)3:00Break

3:30-5:00Panel 4: Creating Statistical Information Products
Panelists: Michael Levi, Bruce Petrie, Diane Schiano,
Susan Dumais (moderator)
6:00-7:30Reception

5:30-8:00 p.m.Exhibits
TIGER Mapping System, Mable/Geocorr; U.S.
Gazetteer; Census FERRET; CDC Wonder; National
Center for Health Statistics Mortality Mapping
Exhibit, Display, and Demo; Westat Blaise;
Consumer Price Index CAPI; Census CAPI; FedStatsWednesday, February 10, 19997:30 a.m.Continental Breakfast
8:30Keynote Address
Katherine Wallman, Office of Management and Budget9:00Panel 5: The Consumer
Õs PerspectivePanelists: Virginia deWolf, Latanya Sweeney, Paul
Overberg, Michael Nelson (moderator)
10:30Break

10:45Breakout Sessions
1.Data management, survey technique, process,
systems architecture, metadata, interoperationInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C1452.Data mining, inference, privacy, aggregation and
sharing, metadata, security3.Human-computer interaction, privacy,

dissemination, literacy11:45Report Back from Breakout Sessions

12:15 p.m.Adjourn
ParticipantsRichard Allen, U.S. Department of Agriculture, National AgriculturalStatistics ServiceMartin Appel, Census Bureau
Don Bay, U.S. Department of Agriculture, National AgriculturalStatistics ServiceLinda Bean, National Center for Health Statistics
Lewis Berman, National Center for Health Statistics
Tora Bickson, RAND Corporation
Larry Brandt, National Science Foundation
Cavan Capps, Census Bureau
Lynda Carlson, Energy Information Agency
Dan Carr, George Mason University
William Cody, IBM Almaden
Eileen Collins, National Science Foundation
Frederick Conrad, Bureau of Labor Statistics
Heather Contrino, Bureau of Transportation Statistics
Robert Creecy, Census Bureau
W. Bruce Croft, University of Massachusetts at Amherst
Marshall Deberry, Bureau of Justice Statistics
David DeWitt, University of Wisconsin at Madison
Virginia DeWolf, Office of Management and Budget
Cathryn Dippo, Bureau of Labor Statistics
Susan Dumais, Microsoft Research
William Eddy, Carnegie Mellon University
Jean Fox, Bureau of Labor Statistics
John Gawalt, National Science Foundation
Jim Gentle, George Mason University
Valerie Gregg, National Science Foundation
Jane Griffith, Congressional Research Service
Eve Gruntfest, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
Carol House, U.S. Department of Agriculture, National AgriculturalStatistics ServiceInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.146APPENDIX CSally Howe, National Coordination Office for Computing, Information,and CommunicationsTerrence Ireland, Consultant
Thomas Kalil, National Economic Council
David Kehrlein, GovernorÕs Office of Emergency Services, State ofCaliforniaSallie Keller-McNulty, Los Alamos National Laboratory
Nancy Kirkendall, Office of Management and Budget
Bill Larocque, National Center for Education Statistics, Department ofEducationFrank Lee, Census Bureau
Judith Lessler, Research Triangle Institute
Michael Levi, Bureau of Labor Statistics
Robyn Levine, Congressional Research Service
Denise Lewis, Census Bureau
Gary Marchionini, University of North Carolina
Patrice McDermott, OMB Watch
Tom M. Mitchell, Carnegie Mellon University
Sally Morton, RAND Corporation
Krish Namboodiri, National Coordination Office for Computing,Information, and CommunicationsMichael R. Nelson, IBM
Clifford Neuman, Information Sciences Institute, University of SouthernCaliforniaJanet Norwood, Former Commissioner, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
Sarah Nussar, Iowa State University
Leon Osterweil, University of Massachusetts at Amherst
Paul Overberg, USA TodayBruce Petrie, Statistics Canada
Linda Pickle, National Center for Health Statistics
Joseph Rose, Department of Education
Charlie Rothwell, National Center for Health Statistics
Alan Saalfeld, Ohio State University
Ravi Sandhu, George Mason University
William L. Scherlis, Carnegie Mellon University
Diane Schiano, Interval Research
Paula Schneider, Census Bureau
James Smith, Westat
Karen Sollins, National Science Foundation
Edward J. Spar, Council of Professional Associations on FederalStatisticsPeter Stegehuis, WestatInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C147Latanya Sweeney, Carnegie Mellon UniversityRachel Taylor, Census Bureau
Nancy Van Derveer, Census Bureau
Katherine Wallman, Office of Management and Budget
Linda Washington, National Center for Health Statistics
Andrew White, National Research CouncilInformation Technology Research, Innovation, and E-GovernmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.