DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/10545Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and theFuture of the Research University97 pages | 7 x 10 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-08640-0 | DOI 10.17226/10545Panel on the Impact of Information Technology on the Future of the ResearchUniversity, National Research CouncilPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Panel on the Impact of Information Technologyon the Future of the Research UniversityPolicy and Global AffairsTHE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSWashington, D.C.www.nap.eduInformation Technology and the 
Future of the Research UniversityPREPARING FOR THE
REVOLUTIONPREPARING FOR THE
REVOLUTIONPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS ¥  500 Fifth Street, N.W.  ¥ Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE:  The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing
Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the
councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of
Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.  The members of the committee
responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard
for appropriate balance.This material is based upon work supported by the Woodrow Wilson NationalFellowship Foundation, the National Science Foundation (Grant No. EIA-0102264),
the W.K. Kellogg Foundation (Grant No. P0085457), and the National Research
Council. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this
publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
organizations or agencies that provided support for the project.International Standard Book Number 0-309-08640-XAdditional copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press,500 Fifth Street, N.W., Lockbox 285, Washington, DC 20055; (800) 624-6242 or
(202) 334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area); Internet, http://www.nap.edu
Copyright 2002 by the National Academy of Sciences.  All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of AmericaPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society
of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated
to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare.Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academyhas a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and
technical matters.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts is president of the National Academy of
Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter
of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstandingengineers.  It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members,
sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the
federal government.  The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineer-
ing programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research,and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers.  Dr. Wm. A. Wulf is

president of the National Academy of Engineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the
examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public.  The Institute acts
under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congres-sional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative,
to identify issues of medical care, research, and education.  Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg
is president of the Institute of Medicine.The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sciences
in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with theAcademyÕs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government.Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the
Council has become the principal operating agency of both the National Academyof Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in providing services to thegovernment, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities.  The

Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine.Dr.Bruce M. Alberts and Dr. Wm. A. Wulf are chair and vice chair, respectively, of
the National Research Council.www.national-academies.orgPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vPANEL ON THE IMPACT OF INFORMATIONTECHNOLOGY ON THE FUTURE OF THE
RESEARCH UNIVERSITYJAMES J. DUDERSTADT (Chair), President Emeritus andMillennium Project Director, The University of MichiganDANIEL E. ATKINS, Professor of Information and ComputerScience, and Executive Director of the Alliance forCommunity Technology, The University of MichiganJOHN SEELY BROWN, Chief Scientist, Xerox Corporation
MARYE ANNE FOX, Chancellor, North Carolina StateUniversityRALPH E. GOMORY, President, Alfred P. Sloan Foundation
NILS HASSELMO, President, Association of AmericanUniversitiesPAUL M. HORN, Senior Vice President for Research, IBM
SHIRLEY ANN JACKSON, President, Rensselaer PolytechnicInstituteFRANK H. T. RHODES, President Emeritus and Professor,Cornell UniversityMARSHALL S. SMITH, Professor, School of Education,Stanford University and Program Officer for Education,
Hewlett FoundationLEE SPROULL, Professor, Leonard N. Stern School ofBusiness, New York UniversityDOUG VAN HOUWELING, President and CEO, UniversityCorporation for Advanced Internet Development/Internet2ROBERT WEISBUCH, President, Woodrow Wilson NationalFellowship FoundationWM. A. WULF, President, National Academy of Engineering
JOE B. WYATT, Chancellor Emeritus, Vanderbilt UniversityPrincipal Study Staff:
RAYMOND E. FORNES, Visiting Senior Scientist/StudyDirector, and Professor of Physics, North Carolina State
University (on sabbatical during 2000-2001)THOMAS ARRISON, Director, Forum on InformationTechnology and Research UniversitiesPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viDAVID BRUGGEMAN, Research Associate, Forum onInformation Technology and Research UniversitiesEDVIN HERNANDEZ, Senior Program Associate,Government-University-Industry Research RoundtableSTEVEN J. MARCUS, Science Editor/WriterPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSviihis report has been reviewed in draft form by indi-viduals chosen for their diverse perspectives and
technical expertise, in accordance with proceduresapproved by the National Research CouncilÕs ReportReview Committee. The purpose of this independent review is to
provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institu-tion in making its published report as sound as possible and toensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity,
evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. The reviewcomments and draft manuscript remain confidential to protectthe integrity of the deliberative process. We wish to thank thefollowing individuals for their review of this report:Ruth Dickstein, University of ArizonaJames L. Flanagan, Rutgers UniversityRobert Gallagher, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Gary Miller, Pennsylvania State UniversityGregory Moses, University of WisconsinJudy Ozbolt, Vanderbilt University
Matthew Pittinsky, Blackboard, Inc.Douglas Seefeldt, University of VirginiaMelanie Sturgeon, State of ArizonaAlthough the reviewers listed above have provided manyconstructive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to
endorse the conclusions or recommendations nor did they see thefinal draft of the report before its release. The review of this reportwas overseen by William G. Howard, Jr., Independent Consultant,
and John D. Wiley, University of Wisconsin-Madison. Appointedby the National Research Council, they were responsible forPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTIONviiimaking certain that an independent examination of this reportwas carried out in accordance with institutional procedures andthat all review comments were carefully considered. Responsibil-ity for the final content of this report rests entirely with the
authoring committee and the institution.Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACEixExecutive Summary1
Introduction5
Context for the Study, 8Technology Futures13
An Extraordinary Evolution, 15An Internet-Drive Economy, 17 Implications for the Research University21
Education in Tune with the Times, 24
Research Unbounded, 30
Preserving and Communicating Knowledge, 33
Impact on the Form, Function, and Financingof the University, 35Impact on the Higher-Education Enterprise, 38˘Choosing the Future: Findings and Options45
Significant Findings, 47
Discovering Options: The Need for ContinuedDialogue, 49Breathtaking Implications, 53Endnotes55
References59
Appendixes Project Chronology67
ˇ January 22-23, 2001 Workshop Agenda69
ˆ Panel Member Bio Sketches73
CONTENTSPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSxiPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY1eflecting their broad interest in the health ofAmericaÕs research enterprise, the National Academies
launched a study in early 2000 on the implications ofinformation technology for the future of the nationÕsresearch universityÑa social institution of great importance to
our economic strength, national security, and quality of life.The premise of this study was a simple one. Although therapid evolution of digital technology will present numerous
challenges and opportunities to the research university, there isa sense that many of the most significant issues are not wellunderstood by academic administrators, faculty, and those who
support or depend on the institutionÕs activities.The studyÑorganized under the Policy and Global AffairsDivision of the National Research Council, and undertaken dur-
ing the past two yearsÑhad two major objectives:¥To identify those information technologies likely to evolve
in the near term (a decade or less) that could ultimately havemajor impact on the research university.¥To examine the possible implications of these technologies
for the research universityÑits activities (teaching, research,service, outreach) and its organization, management, andfinancingÑand the impacts on the broader higher-education
enterprise.In addressing the second point, the panel examined thosefunctions, values, and characteristics of the research universitymost likely to change as well as those most important to preserve.In pursuit of these ends, a panel was formed that consistedof leaders drawn from industry, higher education, and founda-tions with expertise in the areas of information technology, thePreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION2research university, and public policy. The study process
included several meetings and site visits, a major workshop,and communication by conference call and e-mail (seeAppendixes A and B).Drawing on its own information-gathering activities, as wellas on the growing literature that deals with higher educationand information technology, the panel reached several conclu-
sions that should help guide the future efforts of the researchuniversity and its stakeholders:1.The extraordinary pace of information-technology evolu-
tion is likely not only to continue for the next several decadesbut could well accelerate. It will erode, and in some cases
obliterate, higher educationÕs usual constraints of space andtime. Institutional barriers will be reshaped and possibly trans-formed.2.The impact of information technology on the research
university will likely be profound, rapid, and discontinuousÑjust as it has been and will continue to be for our other social
institutions (e.g., corporations and governments) and theeconomy.3.Digital technology will not only transform the intellectual
activities of the research university but will also change how theuniversity is organized, financed, and governed. The technologycould drive a convergence of higher education with IT-intensive
sectors such as publishing, telecommunications, and entertain-ment, creating a global Òknowledge and learningÓ industry.4.Procrastination and inaction are dangerous courses for
colleges and universities during a time of rapid technologicalchange, although institutions will also need to avoid makinghasty responses to current trends. Just as in earlier periods of
change, the university will have to adapt itself to a radicallychanging world while protecting its most important values andtraditions, such as academic freedom, a rational spirit of inquiry,
and liberal learning.5.Although we are confident that information technology
will continue its rapid evolution for the foreseeable future and
may ultimately have profound impacts on human behavior andsocial institutions such as the research university, it is far moredifficult to predict these impacts with any precision. Neverthe-
less, higher education must develop mechanisms to at leastPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY3sense the potential changes and to aid in the understanding of
where the technology may drive it.6.It is therefore important that university strategies include:
the development of sufficient in-house expertise among faculty
and staff to track technological trends and assess various coursesof action; the opportunity for experimentation; and the ability toform alliances with other academic institutions as well as with
for-profit and governmental organizations.Although the studyÕs discussions and workshops exploreda number of policy issuesÑsuch as the changing environmentsfor funding and intellectual-property protectionÑthat affect howthe research university can best utilize information technology,
the panel concluded that to offer recommendations for specificpolicy changes would be premature. Digital technology is evolv-ing so rapidly that an overly prescriptive set of conclusions and
recommendations would be in danger of becoming irrelevantsoon after the reportÕs publication.Given that the foreseeable future will be marked by greatuncertainty, the panel instead recommends that the researchuniversity and its stakeholders develop a continuing dialogue,with national and grassroots components, to help research insti-
tutions and the broader higher-education enterprise understandthe advances in information technology and address theirpotential impacts. The dialogue should involve monitoring
specific technological changes and the resulting scholarly, edu-cational, and social shifts; identifying crucial issues, challenges,and opportunities; stimulating awareness on the campuses; and
identifying action items for further study.Briefly put, the dialogue should grapple with the manyaspects of the question: How will the research university define
and fulfill its missions in a twenty-first century characterized byubiquitous and rapidly evolving digital technology?The ultimate goal is to expand and strengthen the researchuniversityÕs intellectual resources and institutional infrastruc-ture not only to manage the anticipated transformation but tolead it. This will require a commonality of understanding among
members of the university community (administrators, faculty,students), between disciplines, and between the university andits key external constituents (governing bodies, state govern-
ments, federal agencies, and foundations). Such a dialogue canPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION4help the research university not only to survive the coming eraof rapid change as a vital American institution but to fulfill itstraditional roles of education, research, and service more effec-tively and in as yet undreamed-of ways.Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION5ur society is now being reshaped by rapid advancesin information technologiesÑcomputers, telecommu-
nications 
networks, and other digital systemsÑthathave vastly increased our capacity to know, achieve,and collaborate (Attali, 1992; Brown, 2000; Deming and Metcalfe,
1997; Kurzweil, 1999). These technologies allow us to transmitinformation quickly and widely, linking distant places anddiverse areas of endeavor in productive new ways, and to create
communities that just a decade ago were unimaginable.Of course, our society has been through other periods ofdramatic change before, driven by such innovations as the steam
engine, railroad, telephone, and automobile. But never beforehave we experienced technologies that are evolving so rapidly(increasing in power by a hundredfold every decade), altering
the constraints of space and time, and reshaping the way wecommunicate, learn, and think.The rapid evolution of digital technologies is creating notonly new opportunities for our society but challenges to it aswell,1 and institutions of every stripe are grappling to respond
by adapting their strategies and activities. Corporations and
governments are reorganizing to enhance productivity, improvequality, and control costs. Entire industries have been restruc-tured to better align themselves with the realities of the digital
age. It is no great exaggeration to say that information tech-nology is fundamentally changing the relationship betweenpeople and knowledge.Yet ironically, at the most knowledge-based entities of allÑour colleges and universitiesÑthe pace of transformation hasbeen relatively modest in key areas. Although research has in
many ways been transformed by information technology, and itPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION6is increasingly used for student and faculty communications,other higher-education functions have remained more or lessunchanged. Teaching, for example, largely continues to follow aclassroom-centered, seat-based paradigm.Nevertheless, some major technology-aided teaching experi-ments are beginning to emerge, and several factors suggest thatdigital technologies may eventually drive significant change
throughout academia (Newman and Scurry, 2000; Hanna, 2000;Noble, 2001). Because these technologies are expanding by ordersof magnitude our ability to create, transfer, and apply informa-
tion, they will have a profound impact on how universitiesdefine and fulfill their missions. In particular, the ability ofinformation technology to  facilitate new forms of human inter-
action may allow the transformation of universities toward agreater focus on learning.2American academia has undergone significant change before,beginning with the establishment of secular education duringthe 18th century (Rudolph, 1991). Another transformation
resulted from the Land-Grant College Act of 1862 (Morrill Act),
which created institutions that served agriculture and industries;academia was no longer just for the wealthy but charged withproviding educational opportunities to the working class as
well. Around 1900, the introduction of graduate education beganto expand the role of the university in training students forcareers both scholarly and professional. The middle of the twen-
tieth century saw two important changes: the G. I. Bill, whichprovided educational opportunities for millions of returningveterans; and the research partnership between the federal
government and universities, which stimulated the evolution ofthe research university. Looking back, each of these changesseems natural. But at the time, each involved some reassessment
both of the structure and mission of the university (Wulf, 1995).Already, higher education has experienced significanttechnology-based change, particularly in research,3 even though
it presently lags other sectors in some respects. And we expectthat the new technology will eventually also have a profoundimpact on one of the universityÕs primary activitiesÑteachingÑby freeing the classroom from its physical and temporal boundsand by providing students with access to original sourcematerials (Gilbert, 1995). The situations that students will
encounter as citizens and professionals can increasingly bePreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION7simulated and modeled for teaching and learning, and newlearning communities driven by information technology willallow universities to better teach students how to be criticalanalyzers and consumers of information.The information society has greatly expanded the need foruniversity-level education; lifelong learning is not only a pri-vate good for those who pursue it but also a social good in terms
of our nationÕs ability to maintain a vibrant democracy andsupport a competitive workforce.But while information technology has the capacity to enhanceand enrich teaching and scholarship, it also appears to posecertain threats to our colleges and universities (Duderstadt,2000a; Katz, 1999) in their current manifestations. We can now
use powerful computers and networks to deliver educationalservices to anyoneÑany place, any time. Technology can createan open learning environment in which the student, no longer
compelled to travel to a particular location in order to partici-pate in a pedagogical process involving tightly integrated studiesbased mostly on lectures or seminars by local experts, is evolving
into an active and demanding consumer of educational services.4Similarly, facultyÕs scholarly communities are shifting fromphysical campuses to virtual ones, globally distributed in
cyberspace. And technological innovations are stimulating thegrowth of powerful markets for educational services and theemergence of new for-profit competitors, which could also help
reshape the higher-education enterprise (Goldstein, 2000; Shea,2001).Technological change also has the potential for transform-ing how the research university accomplishes its social mission.In an increasingly global culture linked together by technology,with no single cultural context to provide a Òfilter,Ó the role of
traditional disciplinary canons is changing.It is clear that the digital age poses many questions foracademia. For example, what will it mean to be ÒeducatedÓ in
the twenty-first century? How will academic research be orga-nized and financed? As the constraints of time and space arerelaxed by information technology, how will the role of the
universityÕs physical campus change?In the near term it seems likely that the campus, a geo-graphically concentrated community of scholars and a center of
culture, will continue to play a central role, though the currentPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION8manifestations of higher education may shift. For example,students may choose to distribute their college experience amongresidential campuses, commuter colleges, and online (virtual)universities. They may also assume more responsibility for, and
control over, their education.5 The scholarly activities of faculty
will more frequently involve technology to access distantresources and enhance interaction with colleagues around the
world. The boundaries between the university and broadersociety may blur, just as its many roles will become ever morecomplex and intertwined with those of other components of the
knowledge and learning enterprise (Brown and Duguid, 1996).Thus we must take care not simply to extrapolate the pastbut instead to examine the full range of options for the future,
even though their precise impacts on society and its institutionswill be difficult to predict. In any case, we must be ready fordisruption. Just as these technologies have driven rapid, signifi-
cant, and frequently discontinuous and unforeseen change inother sectors of our society, so too will they present universitydecision makers not only with exciting prospects but a decidedly
bumpy ride.CONTEXT FOR THE STUDYGiven their mandate from Congress to advise the federalgovernment on scientific and technological matters, thepresidents of the National Academies (National Academy of
Sciences, National Academy of Engineering, and Institute ofMedicine) acted on the above concerns. They launched a projectin early 2000, through the National Research Council (NRC), to
better understand the implications of information technologyfor the research university. This institution is a key element ofthe national research enterprise, a prime mover of the economy,
and a critical source of scientists and engineers. Its wide rangeof academic functions also makes it an important model foranalysis, with broad applicability elsewhere in the university
community.Primary support for the National Academies project wasprovided by the National Research Council, with additional
support from the W.K. Kellogg Foundation, the National ScienceFoundation, and the Woodrow Wilson Fellowship Foundation.¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION9The project was organized under the Policy and Global AffairsDivision of the NRC, with staff and program support from theGovernment-University-Industry Research Roundtable.The premise of this study was simple. Although the rapidevolution of digital technology will present numerous chal-lenges and opportunities to the research university, there is a
sense that many of the most significant issues are not wellunderstood by academic administrators, their faculty, and thosewho support or depend on the institutionÕs activities.The study had two objectives:¥ To identify those information technologies likely to evolve
in the near term (a decade or less) that could ultimately havemajor impact on the research university.¥ To examine the possible implications of these technologies
for the research universityÑits activities (teaching, research,service, outreach) and its organization, management, andfinancingÑand the impacts on the broader higher-educationenterprise.Box 1-1: What is a Research University?The Carnegie Foundation, in its 1994 classification system of colleges anduniversities, defined a research university as follows:¥Offers a full range of baccalaureate programs.
¥Is committed to graduate education through the doctorate.

¥Gives high priority to research.

¥Awards 50 or more doctoral degrees a year.

¥Receives at least $15.5 million a year in federal support.
In its updated 2000 classification, redefined solely on the basis of degreesawarded, the Carnegie Foundation listed 261 doctoral/research universities.
As of fall 1998, these institutions enrolled over 4.24 million students (about
28% of total enrollment nationwide). These universities were also the recipients
of over $10 billion in federal research funding in FY 1998 (about 88% of all
federal research funding for higher-education institutions).Source: Compiled by NRC staff from Carnegie Foundation, 2001; Duderstadt,1999; Kushner, 2001; Chronicle of Higher Education, various issues.Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION10In addressing the second point, the panel examined thosefunctions, values, and characteristics of the research universitymost likely to change as well as those most important to preserve.In pursuit of these ends, a panel was formed consisting ofleaders from industry, higher education, and foundations withexpertise in the areas of information technology, the researchuniversity, and public policy. Since first convening in February
2000, the Steering Committee has held a number of meetingsÑincluding site visits to major technology-development centerssuch as Lucent (Bell) Laboratories and IBM Research Laborato-
riesÑto identify and discuss trends, issues, and options. Themajor themes addressed by these activities were:¥ The pace of evolution of information technology.¥ The ubiquitous character of the Internet.¥ The relaxation of the conventional constraints of space,
time, and institution.¥ The pervasive character of information technology (the
potential for near-universal access to information, education,
and research).¥ The changing ways in which we handle digital data, infor-
mation, and knowledge.¥ The growing importance of intellectual capital relative to
physical or financial capital.In January 2001 a two-day workshop was held at the NationalAcademiesÑwith the invited participation of about 80 leadersfrom higher education, industry, and governmentÑto explorepossible strategies for the research university and its variousstakeholders and to provide input on possible follow-upinitiatives. The presentations and discussions of the workshop
were videotaped and broadcast on the Research Channel, andthey are currently being videostreamed from its web site(programs.researchchannel.com) to help stimulate public dis-
cussion. Members of the panel also participated in a discussionof the project at the June 2001 meeting of the Government-University-Industry Research Roundtable.This report, finalized through a series of conference callsand email exchanges during the second half of 2001, discusseswhat the panel learned during the study process. Chapter 2
describes the likely near-future of information technology;Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION11Chapter 3 discusses the implications of this technology for theresearch university; and Chapter 4 summarizes the panelÕs find-ings and calls for a continued dialogue between the researchuniversity and its stakeholders on these issues.The panel has tried to maintain a clear and focused presenta-tion of the issues. In a number of places, it makes assertionsbased on its collective judgment, while taking care to alert readers
and appropriately qualify those assertions. Where possible, thereport references the growing literature on information tech-nology and education in order to complement the panelÕsopinions. Yet change is occurring so rapidly there is high riskthat any specific assertion made by individual experts or a panelsuch as this one may be proved wrong within a few years.
Indeed, a central theme of the report is that the researchuniversity must be prepared to cope with constant shifts andcontinued uncertainty regarding information technology and
its implications.In addition, while this report focuses on the 261 U.S.doctoral/research universities, one of the inevitable conse-
quences of the march of information technology is that theseuniversities will become much more interconnected with therest of higher education. Therefore much of the discussion deals
with the broader academic context, of which the research uni-versity is but one component.However, in seeking to gain a broad view of the issuesfacing the research university and information technology, thepanel was unable (given the available time and resources) toexamine several issues in the depth it would have liked. There-
fore some important topics, such as the service mission of theuniversity, are discussed but briefly.Finally, although its original charge was to provide specificconclusions and recommendations on a range of policy issuesÑincluding some, such as the altered funding environment forthe research university and the changes to intellectual-property
protection wrought by the digital revolution that are spurringlegislative actions, roiling campuses, and finding their way tocourtÑthe panel ultimately decided that specificity at this pointwould be inappropriate and premature. Digital technology isevolving so rapidly that an overly prescriptive set of conclu-sions and recommendations would be in danger of becoming
irrelevant soon after the reportÕs publication. However, thePreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION12priorities for action that the panel identified are in areas thatinstitutions and the overall higher-education enterprise can
themselves consider and begin to address. And academia mightget some assistance in that regard. The digital revolution will
undoubtedly create barriers and opportunities that permit newfederal and state approaches to provide significant leverage inhelping the research university anticipate and manage change.Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY FUTURES13he role of digital technology in the evolving knowl-edge society is comparable to that of the railroad
during the Industrial Revolution (Attali, 1992). Withthe aid of information-technology ÒtracksÓÑhigh-speed computer and telecommunications systemsÑnow inter-
connecting so much of the world, reaching into the marketplace,government, and our homes and lives, we often learn aboutevents virtually as soon as they occur and we are able to process
the information in a myriad of increasingly useful ways.This extensive network is bringing peoples and culturestogether and creating new social dynamics in the process. It is
leading to the formation of closely bonded, widely dispersedcommunities of people united by their interest in doing businessor in sharing experiences and intellectual pursuits. New forms
of knowledge accumulation are developing, as are computer-based learning systems that open the way to innovative modesof instruction and learning (Brown, 2000). And new models of
libraries are exploiting vast amounts of digital data in physicallydispersed computer systems that can be remotely accessed byusers over information networks (National Research Council,
2000a).A major frontier over the next one or two decades is certainto be the Òuser interfaceÓ for complex information systems.
How can it become a more natural environment that transcendslimitations of keyboard, mouse, and screenÑmoving toward animmersive environment in which attributes of human face-to-
face exchange can essentially be captured? Ultimately, Òvirtualenvironments,Ó in which we respond to lifelike simulations thatare replete with artificially created sights, sounds, and other
stimuli, may liberate us from physical restrictions; current targetsÒWe are going to havea huge shift in the
way people accessinformation. . . .Billions of people
worldwide aresuddenly able to affordbasically the same
access that we in thisroom typically enjoy.ÓÑStuart Feldman,
Workshop on theImpact of InformationTechnology on
the Future of theResearch University,January 22-23, 2001,
Washington, D.C.(programs.researchchannel. com)Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION14for application include medicine as well as distance education(Olsen, 2000; Young, 2000b).Information technology thus presents significant opportuni-ties for those in the higher-education enterprise who seek new
and better approaches to teaching and learning, research, andpublic service (National Education Association, 2000; Carr,2000b; Mendels, 1999). However, the effective use of knowledge
in such forms may well require a rethinking of many currentassumptions about education in general and the researchuniversity in particular (Hanna, 2000; Wulf, 1995).This chapter is intended to provide an overview of
information-technology advances that the panel expects to seeover the next decade. Two caveats should be kept in mind. First,
the focus of the chapter is on anticipated hardware advances.Yet equivalent advances will be necessary in software develop-ment. We face major challenges in cracking the ÒcomplexitybarrierÓ in software and developing software systems that diag-
nose, repair, and protect themselves (National Research Council,2002 and 2000b). TodayÕs large, complex, and critical informationsystems may involve hundreds of thousands of computers, bebased on millions of lines of code, and operate almost continu-ously, making them more difficult to design and maintain, and
vulnerable in unexpected ways. For example, a growing numberof large-scale projects have either been cancelled without beingdeployed or have experienced significant problems in service
(National Research Council, 2000b).The second caveat is to not confuse technological feasibilitywith commercial and social reality. Changes in technology will
be enormous over the next 10 years (not to mention the next 20),and the rate of change is increasing. But individuals, as well as
social institutions like the university, cannot rapidly change
their behaviors. The fact that we are approaching a time inwhich communication and access to a great deal of the worldÕsinformation will be possible in an instant and at near-zero cost
does not necessarily mean that education, or other sorts ofÒknowledge work,Ó will have changed at the same rate. While
information technology does hold out the promise of enabling
advances in the educational, research, and service functions ofthe research university, realizing this promise will require timeand considerable institutional adaptation.One of the universityÕs greatest challenges, in fact, will bemanaging the great discrepancy between technological andPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY FUTURES15institutional change and exploiting the new technologicalcapabilities as best it can, while recognizing that the ability toretrieve data is not the same as knowledge and technical facilityis not the same as wisdom. Such challenges are addressed in
Chapter 3.AN EXTRAORDINARY EVOLUTION
It is difficult to appreciate just how quickly informationtechnology is evolving. Five decades ago ENIAC, one of theearliest computers, stood 10 feet tall, stretched 80 feet wide,
included more than 17,000 vacuum tubes, and weighed about30 tons. Today you can buy a musical greeting card with asilicon chip that is 100 times faster than ENIAC (Huey, 1994).
Moreover, the time between such improvements is rapidlyshrinking. A $1,000 notebook computer now has more com-puting horsepower than a $20-million supercomputer of the
early 1990s.This extraordinary pace of information-technology evolutionis not only expected to continue for the foreseeable future but
could well accelerate. For example, the newest supercomputersare capable of performing over 35 trillion calculations per second(Normile, 2002; Reuters, 2002). And computers yet a thousand
times faster are currently under development for applicationssuch as the analysis of protein folding (McDonald, 2001).For the first several decades of the information age, theevolution of digital technology followed the trajectory predictedby ÒMooreÕs LawÓÑa 1965 observation by Intel founder GordonMoore that the density of transistors on a chip doubles every
18months or so, thereby making it twice as powerful as before
(or, alternatively viewed, half as costly). Although this ÒlawÓwas intended to characterize silicon-based microprocessors
alone, it turns out that almost every aspect of digital technologyhas advanced at an exponential rate, with some technologiesmoving forward even faster (Wulf, 1995). For example, disk
areal densityÑthe number of bits per square inch that can beput on a diskÑhas been doubling every 12 months in recentyears and is expected to continue at that rate over the near
future.6In recent years, information technology has been mostdramatically driven not by the continuing increase in computing¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION16power but rather by the extraordinary growth of bandwidthÑthe rate at which we can transmit digital data (Feldman, 2001).In the mid- to late 1980s, 300 bit-per-second modems were inwide use; now the local-area networks in our offices and homes
communicate at 10-100 megabits per second and the backbonesystems for linking regional networks together typically run atgigabit-per-second speeds. With the rapid deployment of fiber-
optic cables and optical switching, terabit-per-second networksare just around the corner (Kahney, 2000). According to onemarket forecast of the next five years, fiber-optic cable will be
installed throughout the world at an equivalent rate of thousandsof miles per hour, despite the severe spending slump afflictingthe telecommunications industry at the time this report was
being prepared.7 Meanwhile, researchers are already experi-
menting with moving data at speeds of petabits per second.IBM reports success in the lab with communications in the8- to 10-petabit range, and plans are already being made tomove such bandwidths into the marketplace (McGarvey, 1999).Some Internet service providers expect to be employing them in
perhaps three to five years for their internal traffic. For globalcommunications, intercontinental bandwidth has recently
increased from a relatively sclerotic 45 megabits to 88-100 giga-
bits, made possible by new fiber-optic cable laid under themajor oceans.8From the average userÕs point of view, the exponential ratedictated by MooreÕs Law will drive increases of 100 to 1,000 incomputing speed, storage capacity, and bandwidth everydecade. At that pace, todayÕs $1,000-notebook computer will, bythe year 2020, have a computing speed of 1 million gigahertz, amemory of thousands of terabytes, and linkages to networks atdata transmission speeds of gigabits per second.Box 2-1: Prefixes Used in this ReportMega- = 106, or a millionGiga- = 109, or a billionTera- = 1012, or a trillionPeta- = 1015, or a quadrillionPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY FUTURES17Put another way, that notebook computer will haveastounding processing and memory capacities. Except its elec-tronics will be so tiny as to be almost invisible, and it willcommunicate with billions of other computers and devices
through wireless technology and global networksÑwhat Lucent(Bell) Laboratories calls a Òglobal communications skinÓ (Lucent,
2000).AN INTERNET-DRIVEN ECONOMY
While hardware advances are occurring on a clear trajectory,predictions about future applications are more problematicÑthey have almost always proven to be either too optimistic or
too pessimistic. Still, we can be sure that the nature of humaninteraction with the digital worldÑand with other humansthrough computer-based networksÑis certainly evolving. Newscreen displays, such as one that places nine megapixels on theequivalent of a two-page spread, provide resolutions noticeablybetter than paper. ItÕs no longer a question of enduring mediocreÒIÕll put up with this screenÓ resolution, but one of superlative
ÒI would really like to have itÓ quality. Advances are being
made in other products as well. Thin, readable, and flexible
electronic books, for example, are considered Òin-the-bagÓ tech-
nology for broad commercialization over the next few years, asare Òcomputers on a wristwatchÓ and 
Òknowledge in yourpocket.Ó For example, the Apple iPod already has a 20 gigabyte
drive the size of a quarter.All the while, we are moving beyond the simple text inter-actions of electronic mail and electronic conferencing to graphicaluser interfaces (e.g., the Mac or Windows) to voice to video, andnext-generation interfaces may use retinal displaysÑin whichlasers paint images directly on the retina of the eye to portray360-degree immersive environments. With the rapid develop-ment of sensors and robotic actuators, touch and action at a
distanceÑalready a reality in robot-assisted surgeryÑmay soonbe generally available as well.Thus the world of the user could be marked by increasingtechnological sophistication. With virtual reality, individualsmay routinely communicate with one another through simu-lated environments, or Òtelepresence,Ó perhaps delegating their
¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION18own digital representationsÑÒsoftware agents,Ó or tools that
collect, organize, relate, and summarize knowledge on behalf oftheir human mastersÑto interact in a virtual world with thoseof their colleagues. As communications technology increases in
power by 100 fold (or more) each decade, such digitally medi-ated human interactions could take place with essentially anydegree of fidelity desired.Predictions like these may seem like fantasy, but considerthe record: the penetration of digital technology into our societyhas proceeded at a remarkable pace. In less than a decade, the
Internet has evolved from a relatively obscure research networkto a commercial infrastructure now actively utilized by 61 per-cent of U.S. households and essentially all of our schools and
businesses (Gartner Group, 2001). On the global level, theInternet already connects hundreds of millions of people withone another, and estimates are that by the end of the decade this
number could grow into the billionsÑa substantial fraction ofthe worldÕs population.9 Such growth is expected to continue
despite, or perhaps as a result of, the recent rude awakenings of
e-business investors to the realities of the marketplace.More uncertain than the technological trajectory is the statusof the business environment, which will greatly influence when
advanced capabilities reach the marketplace. Specific forecastsshould be treated with skepticism. For example, forecasts of the2004 worldwide e-commerce market made in early 2001 ranged
from $1.4 trillion to $10 trillion (Butler, 2001). In addition, theoverall U.S. and world economies experienced significant slow-downs during the year prior to publication of this report. Still,
even revised market forecasts predict continued growth ininformation-technology-related industries, and this growth isexpected to accelerate as business conditions improve. Although

the exact pace is difficult to predict, the clear trend is that muchof the growth in business-to-business commerce will be Internet-driven.Access to computers and the Internet, and the ability to usethis technology, are thus becoming increasingly important tofull participation in our nationÕs economic, political, and sociallife. Furthermore, the transition from phone links to broad-bandÑand, eventually, fiber opticsÑwill transform the currentdrippy faucet of modem connectivity to a deluge of gigabits-
per-second into our homes, schools, and places of work.Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY FUTURES19According to several estimates, by 2004 the number ofInternet-enabled devices in the world, including mobile phones,personal digital appliances (e.g., Palm Pilots), and other devices,
will approach or exceed one billion, and these devices will be
Òasymptotically cheapÓÑcosting only tens, not thousands, ofdollarsÑand inexorably getting cheaper yet (Feldman, 2001; In-Stat/MDR, 2002). Put another way, over the next decade we
could move from ÒgigaÓ technology (in terms of computer
operations per second, storage capacities, and data-transmissionrates) to ÒteraÓ and then 
ÒpetaÓ technology
Ñpetabit networks,petabyte databases, and petaflop (quadrillion instructions persecond) computing for those applications that need it. We willdenominate the number of computer servers in the billions,
digital sensors in the tens of billions, and software agents in thetrillions.In effect, we will evolve from Òe-commerce,Ó Òe-government,Óand Òe-learningÓ to just about 
Òe-everythingÓ as digital devices
increasingly become the primary interfaces not only with ourenvironment but with other people.Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPLICATIONS FOR THE RESEARCH UNIVERSITY21re these the shadows of the things that will be, or
are they the shadows of the things that may be?Ó
Thus did a terrified Ebenezer Scrooge (in CharlesDickensÕ A Christmas Carol) beseech his super-natural guide after a vision of the ÒfutureÓ that included the
worst-case scenario of his own graceless demise.Scrooge of course came to learn, as we all eventually do, thatwhile it is hard to predict the future with any accuracy, one can
actively work to help shape it. Projections are merely possibilities,some more plausible than others, but all depend on how anenormous set of variablesÑmany of them not quantifiableÑ
actually play out, with and without our intervention.In Chapter 2, we described some of the information-technology
advances that the panel anticipates over the next decade or so.
Here, we note that while certain trends in the evolution oftechnology are apparent, it is difficult to assess their impact onsocial institutions such as universities with any accuracy. Still,
we must try to project, and allow for significant variation inwhat we can and cannot directly affect, as best we can.This chapter provides an overview of the unprecedentedtechnology-driven challenges currently being faced by highereducation, and by the research university in particular. Thesechallenges are sufficiently great that even the worst-case
scenarioÑthe end of the university, an institution that has existedfor a millennium and truly become Òan icon of our socialfabricÓÑappears to some to be a distinct possibility. The reason-
ing behind such an extreme prediction is that although theuniversity has survived earlier periods of technology-drivensocial change with its basic role and structure more or less
intact, the changes being induced by information technologyare different because they alter the fundamental relationshipÒCan an institutionsuch as the university,
which has existed fora millennium andbecome an icon of our
social fabric, disappearin a few decadesbecause of technology?
Of course. If you doubtit, check on the stateof the family farm.Ó
ÐWm. A. Wulf(Wulf, 1995)Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION22between people and knowledge. Thus the technology couldprofoundly reshape the activities of all institutions, such as theuniversity, whose central function is the creation, preservation,integration, transmission, or application of knowledge.The panel believes that while the university as a physicalplace is not in danger of disappearing any time soon, it isnevertheless critical for the higher-education community to
prepare itself for change.10 And it must begin to do so by recon-
sidering the academic culture that sometimes allows the demandfor consensus to thwart action and in which consultation is
often defined as consent.It is encouraging that some challenges of informationtechnology are already being addressed by the higher-education
enterprise. For example, regular sections on information tech-nology and distance education have been features of TheChronicle of Higher Education for some time. In addition, the long
list of references for this report and the involvement of not-for-profit education providers (see examples in Box 3-1), as well asfor-profit entities, indicate that a great deal of activity has
occurred and is continuing. Universities are also workingtogether and with industry in the area of technology standardsto enable the broader changes advocated in this report.11However, experts within and outside academia observe thatthere is still a great deal of complacency in the research univer-sity, and that more intensive and structured communication at
the national and campus levels is necessary.12 The university
could fare better in the future if it develops mechanisms to sensethe changes being wrought by information technology,
speculates broadly on possible effects, and then respondsaccordinglyÑwith carefully considered strategies backed byprudent investmentsÑnot just to avoid extinction but to activelycultivate opportunity.Learning and scholarship do require some independencefrom society. The research university in particular provides a
relatively cloistered environment in which people can deeplyinvestigate fundamental problems in the natural sciences, socialsciences, and humanities, and can learn the art of analyzing
difficult problems. But the rapid and substantial changes instore for the universityÑnot only those related to informationtechnologyÑrequire that academics work with the institutionÕsmany stakeholders to learn of their evolving needs, expecta-tions, and perceptions of higher education. For example,Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPLICATIONS FOR THE RESEARCH UNIVERSITY23Box 3-1: Organizations and activities related to informationtechnology and the research universityEDUCAUSE (www.educause.edu) is a nonprofit association whose mission is toadvance higher education by promoting the intelligent use of information
technology. Membership is open to academic institutions, corporations serving
the higher-education information-technology market, and other related associa-
tions and organizations.The Forum For The Future of Higher Education (emcc.mit.edu/forum),consisting of academic leaders and scholars from across the country who
convene annually, facilitates shared inquiry and collaboration on issuesÑprimarily in economics, strategy, and technology and learningÑlikely toinfluence the future of higher education. The Forum sponsors research, presents
findings, and disseminates information throughout the higher-education commu-
nity. It is an independent, nonprofit organization affiliated with Yale University.Vision 2010 (www.si.umich.edu/V2010/home.html) is a project, hosted at theUniversity of Michigan, that is concerned with how higher education might be
transformed by information technology.The Futures Project (www.futuresproject.org/), hosted by Brown UniversityÕsA. Alfred Taubman Center for Public Policy and American Institutions, aims to
stimulate an informed debate on the role of higher education in the new global
society. It is particularly interested in the opportunities and dangers of a global
market for higher education, and in the development of policies that ensure a
skilled use of market forces to enhance opportunities while minimizing the
associated risks.The Knight Higher Education Collaborative (www.irhe.upenn.edu/knight/knight-main.html), sponsored by the John S. and James L. Knight
Foundation, is composed of institutions and state systems of higher education that
work together on policy issues of broad interest and importance. The Collabora-
tive is ÒhousedÓ administratively at the University of PennsylvaniaÕs Institute forResearch on Higher Education (IRHE) and builds on the work started by the Pew
Charitable Trust Higher Education Roundtable. The IRHE, headed by Dr. Robert
Zemsky, publishes the widely read Policy Perspectives series, and has convenedor facilitated over 250 roundtables since 1986.OpenCourseWare (OCW) (ocw.mit.edu/index.html/) is an MIT project inwhich the university will make nearly all materials from its courses freely avail-
able on the World Wide Web for noncommercial use. Depending on the
particular class or style in which the course is taught, this could include materials
such as lecture notes, course outlines, reading lists, and assignments. More
technologically sophisticated content will be encouraged.Source: Compiled by NRC staff from organization web sites.Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION24universities may be obliged to place a far greater emphasis onforming alliances that allow individual institutions not to try tobe all things to all people but to focus instead on their uniquestrengths.Universities will have to function in a highly digital environ-ment along with other organizations as almost every academicfunction will be affected, and sometimes displaced, by modern
technology. The ways that universities manage their resources,relate to clients and providers, and conduct their affairs willhave to be consistent not only with the nature of their own
enterprise but also with the reality of Òe-everything.Ó As
competitors appear, and in many cases provide more effectiveand less costly alternatives, universities will be forced to embrace
new techniques themselves or outsource some of their functions.In any case, the panel believes that universities should striveto become learning organizations by systematically studying
the learning process and re-examining their role in the digitalage. This would involve encouraging experimentation with newparadigms of education, research, and service by harvesting the
best ideas, implementing them on a sufficient scale to assesstheir impacts, and disseminating their fruitful results.Such self-examination and self-improvement by the researchuniversity in particular should include the following issues,each of which is analyzed furtherÑnot as prognostication but inthe spirit of Òshadows of the things that may beÓÑin theremaining sections of this chapter:¥ The university
Õs fundamental activities of education andresearch.¥ The preservation and communication of scholarly knowl-
edge.¥ The universityÕs basic form, function, and financing.¥ The effect of a changing university on the higher-education
enterprise generally.EDUCATION IN TUNE WITH
THE TIMESThe explosive march of hardware capability outlined inChapter 2 is not being matched by related uses in higher educa-
tion. One indicator of this gap is the reality that more space onÒMost organizationsdo a considerableamount of researchabout their ownfunctioning.IÕm sure that IBM,to take an arbitraryexample, spends atremendous amount ofmoney thinking aboutIBM and how IBMmight function better.Not the university.ÓÑDon Norman,Workshop on theImpact of InformationTechnology on theFuture of theResearch University,January 22-23, 2001,Washington, D.C.(programs.researchchannel.com)¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPLICATIONS FOR THE RESEARCH UNIVERSITY25the typical undergraduateÕs hard drive is likely to be devoted toMP3 music-audio files than to material related to classes. Still,the Napster phenomenon, which focused on university studentsÕand other young adultsÕ predilection to collect popular-music
recordings at little or no cost, showed the potential power ofleveraging todayÕs commodity hardware capabilities. One futuretest of success for academia is whether it is able to tap this latent
power for educational ends.But although it has been slow in coming, weÕre beginning tosee the impact of information technology on teaching, and it
seems to be driven not so much by faculty or administrators butby the learners themselves. A good number of todayÕs youngpeople have spent their early lives amid visual electronic media
such as video games, and they often approach learning as aÒplug-and-playÓ experience. They expect
Ñindeed, demandÑinteraction; and they are unaccustomed to learning sequentially
(e.g., to reading the manual). Instead, theyÕre inclined simply tojump in.It is, of course, important to distinguish between learningfacts and learning concepts, between answering simple factualquestions and making difficult judgement calls. Just becauselearning and teaching environments utilize information tech-
nology does not mean that pedagogy and the substance of whatis being taught are any less important. While many of todayÕsÒdigital generationÓ of media-savvy students are open to new
approaches, they will still need to think critically when engag-ing the materials they encounter, whether surfing the Web orscanning the library stacks.13Other students are less comfortable with information tech-nology; indeed, some would see a threat in any challenge to thedeeply engrained notion that Òtrue learningÓ must occur in a
traditional classroom environment. Incorporating new technol-ogy into teaching will thus require accommodation to variedlearning styles (Passig and Levin, 1999).Yet we envision a future, enabled by information technologyand driven by learner demand, in which two of the major (andtaken-for-granted) ways of organizing undergraduate learning
will recede in importance: the 55-minute classroom lecture andthe common reading list. That digital future will challenge facultyto design technology-based experiences based primarily on
interactive, collaborative learning. Although these newapproaches will be quite different from traditional ones, theyPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION26may be far more effective, particularly when provided througha media-rich environment (Hanna, 2000). At the same time,information technology can actually enhance traditional normsof higher educationÑfor example, through the Òliving-learningÓparadigm made possible by Web communities that grow aroundon-line courses (Young, 2002b).Such changes also imply a different student-faculty relation-ship than has traditionally been the case. Students may be moreinvolved in the creation of learning environments, workingshoulder to shoulder with the faculty just as they do when
serving as research assistants. In that context, student and pro-fessor alike are apt to be experts, though in different domains.The faculty member of the twenty-first century universitycould thus become more of a consultant or coach than a teacher,less concerned with transmitting intellectual content directlythan with inspiring, motivating, and managing an active learn-
ing process.14 That is, faculty may come to interact with under-
graduates in ways that resemble how they interact with theirdoctoral students today.Higher education is already heavily wired, with 90 percentof four-year-college students going online at least once a day(Greenfield Online, 2000). But in keeping with the academyÕscustomary taste for incremental change, it was natural that theearliest applications of information technology on campusshould involve the enhancement of traditional courses. For
example, electronic mail and computer conferencing were usedto augment classroom discussions, while the Internet providedaccess to original source materials. Meanwhile, the first applica-
tions of computer-aided-instruction technology attempted toautomate the more routine aspects of learning.In other words, consistent with its early applications of othertechnologies, higher education tended to use digital networkssimply to repurpose the traditional lecture course for onlineaccess (Newman and Scurry, 2000). Similarly, multimedia net-
works were used simply as an Internet extension of correspon-dence or broadcast courses to enhance distance learning.The most dramatic impacts on university education are yetto comeÑwhen learning experiences are reconceptualized tocapture the power of information technology. Although theclassroom is unlikely to disappear, at least as a place where
students and faculty can regularly come together, the tradi-tional lecture format of a faculty member addressing a group ofPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPLICATIONS FOR THE RESEARCH UNIVERSITY27relatively passive students is threatened by powerful new toolssuch as the simulation of physical phenomena, gaming technol-ogy, telepresence, and teleimmersion (the ability of geographi-cally dispersed sites to collaborate in real time). Sophisticated
networks and software environments can be used to break theclassroom loose from the constraints of place and time to makelearning available any place, any time, and to any one. The
outlines of what will be possible can even now be seen in thereal-time collaboration and project-management tools that arebecoming common in the corporate environment.The attractiveness of computer-mediated distance learning,or Òdistributed learning,Ó is obvious to adult learners whose
work or family obligations bar their routine presence on con-
ventional campuses. But perhaps a more surprising applicationof computer-based distance learning is the degree to whichmany on-campus students are now using it to augment their
traditional education.15 Broadband digital networks and
multicasting can be used to enhance the multimedia capacity ofhundreds of classrooms across campus and link them with resi-
dence halls and libraries. Electronic mail has already alteredfaculty-student interactions in fundamental ways; professorsare now much more accessible to their students, as well as to the
wider world, than was the case just a few years ago. The apparentdownside for some is a decline in informal interactions duringoffice hours and other face-to-face settings (Connolly, 2001).Meanwhile, online learning enrollments are reportedlygrowing at a 33 percent annual rate, and are expected to reach2.2 million by 2004.16  Despite the well-publicized failure of
several e-learning initiatives, 150 institutions now offer onlineundergraduate degrees and an even greater number offergraduate degrees; and a recent report anticipates that the U.S.
e-learning market will recover from the dot.com bust and growto a size of nearly $14 billion by 2004 (Booz Allen Hamilton,2002). Little wonder that there has been explosive activity in the
commercial sector to create both the content and technologythat support this enterprise. While the report points out thatcorporate and specialized professional training present the
greatest growth prospects, it also notes the opportunities forcompanies that help universities expand e-learningÕs role incampus-based instruction.Developing and deploying high-quality distributed-learningcurricula can be difficult and expensive, however. CreatingPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION28online courses is considerably more complex than simply post-ing lecture notes or PowerPoint presentations on the Web orvideostreaming the Òtalking headsÓ of lecturing professors
(Young, 2000a). Nevertheless, faculty around the country are
gaining expertise in how to turn traditional courses into distance-learning courses (Carnevale, 2000a and 2000b) and how to blendtraditional and on-line elements (Young, 2002b), and they are
reaping significant rewards.But there are barriers to such innovation as well. Youngfaculty members who may have the best skills to develop new
information-technology approaches to teaching are concernedthat this work will not be taken into account in tenure andpromotion decisions, although this policy may be changing at
some institutions (Young, 2002a). With competing demands ontheir time, even tenured faculty members may not have sufficientincentive to devote time to utilizing information technology in
creative ways. In addition, the question of whether individualfaculty or the institution owns Òcourseware,Ó and other
intellectual-property issues, are being raised. These are discussed
further below.Meanwhile, universities are increasingly outsourcing muchof the technology and expertise necessary for distributed learn-
ing from commercial providers, such as Blackboard and WebCT,which produce course-management systems. They alsodistribute content in partnership with several educational pub-
lishers.17 These activities are, of course, still evolving. Questions
such as who is responsible for changing material as the fieldevolves and the extent and type of instructional interaction
required will be answered over time. Issues such as theapparently higher attrition rates for Web-based  (as opposed to
traditional) courses also need to be addressed (Carr, 2000a).The development of effective ÒedutainmentÓ by educational
institutions in partnership with the entertainment industry, usingprofessional actors and production methods, is another future
possibility. Given the buying power of the target audience, 18-to 25-year-olds with high income potential, the developmentcould be underwritten by commercial sponsors. In a scenario
that seems extreme today, large parts of the general under-graduate curriculum could join college football and basketballas commercialized edutainment, facing university leadership
with challenges similar to those now being encountered withregard to sports (Duderstadt, 2000b).Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPLICATIONS FOR THE RESEARCH UNIVERSITY29Actually, we are beginning to see the emergence of a wholenew type of institutionÑthe virtual university. These entitiesexist only in cyberspace, without campus or perhaps evenfaculty, solely to provide distributed-learning opportunities.
Unburdened by most of the usual academic constraints, suchvirtual universities can experiment with a variety of new forms.Some, such as Michigan Virtual University (www.mivu.org),
serve only as brokers, providing marketing channels that allowtraditional colleges and universities to be ÒsuppliersÓ of educa-
tional services to a distributed marketplace. Others, such as the
University of Phoenix, attempt to provide a more completearray of higher-education offerings, including instruction, librarysupport, and administrative services. Its continuing success in
transferring its profitable model of part-time education forworking adults into cyberspace constitutes an example to otherentities (for-profits and non-profits) seeking to reach the same
audience.There are examples of companies creating online universi-ties by disaggregating the overall production of educational
programs and selectively outsourcing each component.18 They
hire research-university faculties (to determine content),cognitive scientists (to develop pedagogy and courseware), and
instructors (to guide students and develop assessment tools tomonitor learning). Similarly, the commercial functions of market-ing and distribution can also be disaggregated and outsourced.By whatever route, distributed learning based on computer-mediated paradigms allows universities to push their campusboundaries outward to serve diverse types of learners. It also
facilitates new forms of pedagogy more responsive to a knowl-edge-based societyÑin which learning becomes a pervasive,lifetime need. Thus the traditional paradigm of Òjust-in-caseÓdegree-based education may be augmented, or replaced, byparadigms of Òjust in timeÓ and customized 
Òjust-for-youÓÑwhereby learners will have increased responsibility to select,
design, and control the learning environment.But even as the number of students, institutions, and com-mercial organizations participating in distance education grows,
it is not clear which business models or structures will ulti-mately succeed. During the time that the panel was completingthis study, several for-profit distance-education subsidiaries
launched by universities either went under or showed clearsigns of stress (Carlson and Carnevale, 2001; Blumenstyk, 2001;ÒOur traditional wayof thinkingÑthat oncewe have the students
on our campus theyÕrea captive audienceÑfrom my point of view
is dead. We havestarted pursuing newand ambitious
collaborations withother universities.ÓÑRichard Larson,Workshop on theImpact of InformationTechnology on the
Future of the ResearchUniversity,January 22-23, 2001,
Washington, D.C.(programs.researchchannel.com)Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION30Shea, 2001). One criticism of current initiatives is that they ofteninvolve merely putting classroom offerings online withoutfundamentally rethinking their approaches (Young, 2001b).Clearly, the notion that distance education through the Internet
would generate substantial revenues quickly and easily hasbeen dispelled. At the same time, there is growing institutionalinterest in fostering creation of nonproprietary, open-course
content and management tools (Young, 2001a; Carr, 2001).In that spirit, it is important to note that in evaluating theprogress of information-technology utilization in the research
university, the role of distance learning by itself should not beoveremphasized. As the discussion at the beginning of thissection indicates, the integration of computer and communica-
tions technologies into traditional academic structuresÑand thecreation of new structures, as MITÕs OCW initiative is attempt-ingÑmay have more long-term impact than the distance-education industry per se.The flood of new initiatives in this area launched in the1999Ð2000 period has given way to a shakeout during 2001Ð2002, as some universities have been shuttering or scaling backtheir dedicated online units. At this point, it appears that theinitiatives likely to survive are those that had been established
in the mainstream of the university with a clear mission to helpmodernize the institution.RESEARCH UNBOUNDEDSo, too, is information technology changing the nature ofresearch. The earliest applications, often limited by computer
capacity, were directed at relatively simple mathematical prob-lems in science and engineering. Today, available processingpower is much less of a constraint; problems that used to require
the computational capacity of rooms full of supercomputers cannow be tackled with laptop machines.The rapid evolution of this technology is also enablingscientists to address previously unsolvable problemsÑcustom-designing new organic molecules, analyzing the complexdynamics of the global climate, or simulating the birth of the
universe, just to cite a few. In fact, the use of information tech-nology to simulate natural phenomena has created a fourthmodality of research, on a par with observation, theory, and¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPLICATIONS FOR THE RESEARCH UNIVERSITY31experimentation. Moreover, there is erosion in the conventionalunderstanding that some types of research are more amenableto information-technology contributions than others; new data-base and modeling tools, for example, are unexpectedly chang-
ing fields that had previously made little use of computingpower.New types of research organizations, such as ÒcollaboratoriesÓ(far-flung networks of researchers and laboratories) are appear-ing that could not have existed without this new technology(National Research Council, 1993 and 2001a). Recognizing that
information technology is a crucial enabler of advances across awide range of scientific and engineering fields, both new andestablished, the National Science Foundation is developing a
Cyberinfrastructure Initiative to better integrate instruments,sensors, supercomputers, and high-speed communications net-works (Trimble, 2001). Such efforts may make it possible for
collaboratories to attack large-scale science and engineeringproblems requiring diverse, multidisciplinary talent.Actually, some of the most powerful applications of infor-mation technology have already begun occurring in thehumanities, social sciences, and the arts. Scholars now use digitallibraries such as JSTOR (www.jstor.org) or ArtSTOR to access,
search, and analyze complete collections of scholarly journals orworks of art (Mellon Foundation, 2001). Archeologists aredeveloping virtual-reality simulations of remote sites and
original materials, such as papyrus manuscripts, that can beaccessed by colleagues throughout the world.Meanwhile, social scientists are using powerful softwaretools to analyze massive data sets of materials collected throughinterviews and field studies. And practitioners of the visual andperforming arts are applying technologies that merge various
mediaÑfine art, music, dance, theatre, architectureÑand exploitall the senses (visual, aural, tactile, even olfactory) to create newart forms and experiences.Other, more subtle changes in scholarship are occurring thatcan be related to emerging information technology, whichinherently leverages and enhances intellectual span. The process
of creating new knowledge is shifting from the solitary scholarto teams of scholars, often spread over a number of disciplines.This technology also provides the toolsÑbased on artificialintelligence or virtual reality, for exampleÑto even augmentthe production of knowledge itself. For example, the inter-ÒCan the researchuniversity survive the
locomotive of the ITrevolution? I think amuch better way to
frame the question is:how can the highlyvalued mission of
scientific, technological,humanistic-productivity,and human-capital
growth enabled by theresearch university bestbe augmented and
turbocharged by theIT revolution?ÓÑTim Killeen,Workshop on theImpact of InformationTechnology on the
Future of theResearch University,January 22-23, 2001,
Washington, D.C.(programs.researchchannel.com)Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION32disciplinary field of automated scientific discovery is receivingmore attention as the number and accessibility of large data-basesÑe.g., the human genomeÑincreases (Darden, 1997). Andtheorem-proving software is now commercially available
(www.transpowercorp.com). Less restricted to the analysis ofwhat has been, we may effectively create what has never been
Ñdrawing rather more on the creative experience of the artist
than on the analytical skills of the scientist.Of all the research-university roles examined in this chapter,research would appear to be the one that institutions are best
prepared to adapt to new realities. Indeed, federally fundeduniversity research has played a critically important role increating and nurturing the very technologies discussed here
(National Research Council, 1999). But while the researchuniversity may face relatively greater information-technologychallenges in teaching, outreach, and management than in
research, the research-related challenges are not trivial. Main-taining the federal-government/university partnership as adriver in the pursuit of fundamental knowledge and as an engine
of U.S. and global innovation will require strong commitmentfrom both partners. New modes of cooperation across agencies,institutions, and departments may be needed to fund and
effectively utilize the cyber-infrastructure that will enabletomorrowÕs breakthroughs.Engaging industry as a partner in research is also an issue.As discussed below, the university research enterprise hasbecome more focused on commercialization and the launch ofnew ventures than in years past. The new thinking about infor-
mation technology occurring in the university environmentcould be an additional magnet for industry interest.These and other issues have global implications. Given theintensely international nature of todayÕs research, with growingcollaboration across distance enabled by information technology,the way that the U.S. research university harnesses new tech-
nology in the service of science and engineering is critical notonly at home. It is bound to affect scholars and institutionsaround the world.Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPLICATIONS FOR THE RESEARCH UNIVERSITY33PRESERVING ANDCOMMUNICATING KNOWLEDGE
The preservation of scholarly knowledge is one of the mostrapidly changing functions of the university. The computer, or
more precisely the Òdigital convergenceÓ of various media
Ñfrom print to graphics to sound to sensory experiences throughvirtual realityÑmay ultimately have a greater impact on knowl-edge than the printing press.Throughout the centuries, the intellectual focal point of theuniversity has been its library, its collection of written works
preserving the knowledge of civilization. Today such knowl-edge exists in numerous formsÑincluding almost literally inthe ether, distributed in digital representations over worldwide
networksÑand it is not just the prerogative of the privilegedfew in academe but is accessible to many.For example, the hypertext link is overshadowing the printbibliographic citation, making original source materials avail-able to all via their own computers. But this is only the tip of theiceberg. The distinction between the book and the library may
itself become blurred as the Internet evolves into a seamlessmesh for probing the worldÕs Òcollection.Ó Similarly, because
knowledge is not inherently compartmentalized, some disci-
plinary boundaries may actually devolve. Even without theInternet, Albert Einstein maintained that many of the mostcritical research challenges lay at the intersections of disciplines.
Technology is now increasingly in hand for exploring thoseintersections.The library is thus becoming less of a collection house andmore of a center for knowledge navigation, a facilitator of infor-mation retrieval and dissemination. In addition to utilizing thenew Òlibrary without walls,Ó scholars and students are increas-
ingly able to access sources directly. As with learning, newelectronic media allow the formation of spontaneous communi-ties of unacquainted users, linked together in the many-to-many
topology of computer networks. Researchers can now followthe work in their specialization on a day-by-day basis throughweb sites.These new realities are giving rise to new challenges as well.The archiving of digital materials is one example. Scholars have¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION34found themselves in the odd position of being able to readcentury-old journal articlesÑthe archived originalsÑyet unableto read their own manuscripts written with obsolete word-processing software or stored on an obsolete storage medium.
The management and preservation of information from short-lived magnetic recording media to ensure future accessibilityhas not yet been comprehensively addressed. Other issues
include potential intellectual distortions resulting from the factthat only relatively recent materials (e.g., journal articles) areavailable online, and the need for universities to carefully man-
age heightened demand for access to some paper collectionsstimulated by electronic access.Scholarship is still characterized and constrained by thepublication of research findings, though this system is fast get-ting competition as a result of new information technologies(Odlyzko, 2000). The resulting confusion has not yet been
resolved: traditional scholarly publication, through established(and extraordinarily costly) journals characterized by peerreview, is being challenged by less formal Net-based communi-
cation that links scholars essentially instantaneously. The centralchallenge will be to preserve the benefits of the old system, inwhich the review process provides cohesion to a given field,
while taking advantage of the speed and ease of access prom-ised by new media.But here too, the technology is evolving. For example, websites are increasingly serving as portals to integrate material ofvalue to particular scholarly pursuits.19 Ultimately, the most
profound changes will involve software agents (Bradshaw, 1997),

though such developments lie some years down the road.The business environment of academic publishing is also animportant factor. Publishers have consolidated and sought to
create a business model in which online access to journals willdrive profits, but they are faced with several high-profile effortsto expand free online access (Vaidhyanathan, 2001). A coalition
of research libraries, universities, and other organizations knownas the Scholarly Publishing and Academic Resources Coalition(SPARC) is one group seeking to develop common approaches
(www.arl.org/sparc).
Meanwhile, our capacity to reproduce and distribute digitalinformation with perfect accuracy at essentially zero cost has
shaken the very foundations of copyright and patent law, and itpromises to affect notions of intellectual-property ownershipPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPLICATIONS FOR THE RESEARCH UNIVERSITY35altogether. A Princeton professorÕs lawsuit to ensure the abilityto publish research about unscrambling encrypted digital musicillustrates how changing notions of ownership and academicfreedom are coming into conflict (Foster, 2001). The Uniform
Computer Information Transactions Act (UCITA), a contract-law statute for software developed by the National Conferenceof Commissioners on Uniform State Laws and adopted by
several states, has sparked opposition from a range of groups(Foster, 2000).Indeed, the legal and economic management of universityintellectual property is rapidly becoming one of the most criticaland complex issues facing higher education (National ResearchCouncil, 2001d). Intellectual-property concerns are often men-
tioned as a barrier to greater faculty activity in developing newuses of information technology, along with the perceived under-valuing of such efforts in tenure evaluations (Carnevale and
Young, 1999).IMPACT ON THE FORM, FUNCTION,
AND FINANCING OF THEUNIVERSITYJust as new forms of teaching, researching, and preservingknowledge are being stimulated by rapidly evolving informa-
tion technology, so too will the universityÕs organization,management, governance, and relationships between students,faculty, and staff require serious reevaluation and almost-certain
change. For example, the new tools of scholarship and scholarlycommunication will erode conventional disciplinary boundaries,likely extending the intellectual interests and activities of faculty
far beyond traditional academic units such as departments orschools (National Research Council, 2001a). This blurring ofdisciplinary boundaries does not necessarily contradict the grow-
ing need for institutions to build and maintain unique strengths,
pointed out earlier in this chapter. These core strengths may bein new fields that combine insights from several traditional
disciplines.Beyond driving a restructuring of the intellectual disciplines,information technology could force a significant disaggregation
of many traditional university services, ranging from studenthousing to health care to teaching itself (Massy, 2001; Newman,¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION362001; Weiland, 2000). Colleges and universities will increasinglyface the question of whether they should continue their fullcomplement of activities or outsource some functions to lower-cost and frequently higher-quality providers.This will pose a particular challenge to faculty, long accus-tomed to controlling the design of curriculum and supervisingthe learning environment. Higher education as a cottage indus-
try, in which individual courses are made to order by individualfaculty, may not be able to compete much longer in either costor quality with commodity educational products (Newman and
Couturier, 2001).Similarly, universities will face a major challenge in retain-ing instructional ÒmindshareÓ among their most accomplished
faculty. Higher education adapted long ago to the reality offaculty members negotiating release time and very substantialfreedom with regard to research activities. There may be new
challenges as instructional content becomes a valuable com-modity in a for-profit education marketplace (Thompson, 1999).Some would argue that faculty members should be free to
contract with outside organizations in developing instructionallearningware; such activity is deemed analogous to scholarsauthoring textbooks and retaining the royalties. Others maintain
that institutions have an ownership interest in such intellectualproperty. Could policies to restrict such activity be acceptable,or enforceable, in the highly competitive marketplace that exists
for leading faculty?It is possible that weÕll ultimately see an ÒunbundlingÓ of
faculty and students from the university, with faculty members
acting as freelance consultants, selling their services andknowledge to the highest bidder; and students acting as mobile
consumers, able to procure educational services from a highly
competitive marketplace (Brown, 1996). Even short of thisextreme vision, information technology will likely allow atleast some research-university and other higher-education
functions to be unbundledÑand, where useful, rebundled innew ways.Movement toward this model would pose a number ofchallenges to institutions. For example, a student is now consid-ered officially educated when he or she has taken the requiredcredits. But the panel believes that significant learning happens
in the Òwhite spacesÓ between courses and classes
Ñin the headyÒI would allege that thechange weÕre facing istruly discontinuousÑinorganizations adaptedto small, incremental,continuous change.It isnÕt as if theuniversities have notchanged. But whenthereÕs a newtechnology of themagnitude thatweÕre discussing,discontinuity putsadditional stresses onthe institutions.ÓÑMarye Anne Fox,Workshop on theImpact of InformationTechnology on theFuture of theResearch University,January 22-23, 2001,Washington, D.C.(programs.researchchannel.com)Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPLICATIONS FOR THE RESEARCH UNIVERSITY37atmosphere of scholarship and debate that permeates the
research university. Transcripts of courses taken thus under-estimate a studentÕs education. This problem is apt to beexacerbated as we (correctly) push for more flexibility in how,
when, and where we learn.In contrast to the image of Òfree agentÓ professors reaping
profits from their learningware, there is an alternative scenario
in which incentives for faculty to create new information-technology-based approaches to education are too weak.  If the
business environment for educational software and contentware

is not as favorable as some have anticipated, a gifted youngprofessor might be committing professional suicide by spend-ing large amounts of time creating it. This is a particular risk in
the research university, where such activities are not currentlyan advantage in gaining tenure.The university faces a particular challenge not only inrewarding the creation of new learning environments but alsoin ensuring a technology-literate faculty in the first place. Somefaculty members have not kept pace with technologyÕs evolu-tion, and they are unprepared for the new plug-and-playgeneration of students. According to a recent survey of seniorinformation-technology administrators by the Campus Com-
puting Project, 40 percent cited Òincorporating technology intothe classroomÓ as the most important issue they face; yet only
14percent said that technology had improved instruction to

date (Carlson, 2000).In earlier times, we would simply wait for a generation ofprofessors to retire before an academic unit could evolve. But in
todayÕs fast-paced world, when the doubling time for technologyevolution has collapsed to a few years or less, we must look foreffective ways to reskill the faculty members whose careers are
far from over.Actually, almost all of a university
Õs adultsÑfaculty, staff,administrators, whomeverÑneed to be reskilled in appreciatinghow todayÕs student is so effortlessly digital across all bound-aries (which are rapidly fading). This issue seldom gets seriousattention, even though the ubiquitous presence of computers
and other electronic devicesÑhand-held digital assistants andportable telephones, for exampleÑaffects student life at least asmuch as it does academic programs. In fact, students often
make little distinction between the two; they see technology as aPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION38fundamental aspect of their lives, seamlessly affecting all of itsparts, and they take it for granted just as they do the air theybreathe. Woe to the university that doesnÕt grasp this.But understanding the need is one thing, and paying for it isanother. Thus another major challenge to the university isfinancial. The bill for information technology is growing fasterthan those of other categories (Olsen, 2001b). For a very large
campus, it can amount to hundreds of millions of dollars peryear.20 It is paradoxical that institutions are spending more and
more as a given level of hardware capability becomes less and
less costly. This trend underlines not only the special challengesfaced in higher education but the difficulty that virtually allorganizations have experienced in utilizing information tech-
nology to improve productivity (Massy and Zemsky, 1995).Historically, universities have seen technology as a capitalexpenditure to serve only a select few, and more or less as an
experimental tool. It is often paid for with year-end savings andother Òbudget dustÓ (Olsen, 2001a). Though times have changed,
most universities still do not have a modern and sustainable
financial model for investing in information technology; theirplanning is largely limited to long-term faculty appointmentsand even longer-term physical facilities. Trying to satisfy con-
stituentsÕ needs for information-technology infrastructure
requires very rapid turnover in large-scale investments, andthus an agility not usually found in a budgeting culture.Nevertheless, some universities are beginning to realizesignificant cost savings in administrative areas such as purchas-ing through the effective use of information technology (Olsen,
2002). This shows that it is possible to invest wisely in newcapability that delivers concrete benefits. Not surprisingly, thekey to meeting this challenge appears to be the creation and
careful management of an organizational structure for tappingthe new technology.IMPACT ON THE HIGHER-
EDUCATION ENTERPRISE
Coupled with new societal needsÑubiquitous adult educa-tion, for exampleÑand economic realities such as erosion ofpublic support (Hebel, 2001; Healy, 1999; Hebel, Schmidt and
Selingo, 2001), information technology is likely not only to¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPLICATIONS FOR THE RESEARCH UNIVERSITY39transform individual institutions, whether research universityor non-research university, but to drive a massive restructuringof the whole higher-education enterprise (Duderstadt, 1999).Judging from the makeovers in other sectors of the economy,
such as health care, transportation, communications, and energy,we should expect to see mergers, acquisitions, new competitors,and new products in higher education as well. More generally,
we may well see the rise of a global Òknowledge and learningÓindustry, in which the activities of traditional academicinstitutions converge with those of other knowledge-intensive
organizations such as telecommunications, entertainment, andinformation-services companies.Such convergence is being driven by the increasing impor-tance of human capital to our knowledge-based economy, whichdepends so heavily on brainpower, ideas, and entrepreneurship(National Research Council, 2001c). Although the employment
and economic situation is weak as this report goes to press, it isclear to many business leaders that obtaining, training, andretaining skilled workers are still critical long-term priorities
(ITAA, 2001).The panel agrees with the general assertion that theemergence of Òknowledge workÓ and 
Òknowledge workersÓ is
crucial to the future development of the global economy andsociety (Drucker, 1999 and 2001). This notion of ÒknowledgeworkÓ encompasses more than activity directly related to infor-
mation technology per se; it implies a riseÑin nearly all sectorsof todayÕs workforceÑof professionals who depend on andmanipulate information almost exclusively.A key factor at present in pushing higher education towardrestructuring is the emergence of aggressive for-profit educa-tion providers intent on satisfying this information demand
(Goldstein, 2000). Most of these new entrants, such as the Uni-versity of Phoenix21 and Jones International University,
22 are
now focusing on the adult-education market as well as corpo-
rate training (Hanna, 2000). But they also have more expansivegoals in mind.Having invested heavily in sophisticated instructionalcontent, pedagogy, and assessment tools, these providers arewell positioned to offer broader educational programs, both atthe undergraduate level and in professional areas such as engi-
neering and law. Thus the initial focus of new for-profit entrantson basic adult education is misleading; in the foreseeable future,Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION40their capacity to compete with traditional colleges and universi-ties in some areas could be formidable indeed.To be sure, some forecasts of demand for distance learningin areas such as business education have proven overly
optimistic, at least for the near term (Mangan, 2001; Shea, 2001).But clearly the university will lose its monopoly on students,faculty, and resources, and in the absence of bold commercial
alliances it is likely to lose market share to for-profit competitorsin its traditional areas of strength.The research university will face particular challenges inthis regard. Although rarely acknowledged, the research uni-versity relies heavily on cross-subsidies from low-cost, high-profit instruction in general education (e.g., large lecture courses)
and low-cost professional training (such as in business adminis-tration and law) to support graduate training and research inthe science and engineering fields (Newman, 2000; Newman
and Couturier, 2001). These high-profit programs are, notcoincidentally, very attractive targets for technology-based, for-profit competitors. Their success in the higher-education market-

place could therefore undermine the current business model ofthe research university and imperil its core activities. This couldbe a politically explosive issue for some of the state universities
as they try to maintain and increase public support from statelegislatures.Further, as a knowledge-driven economy becomes ever moredependent on new ideas and innovation, there will be growingpressures to commercialize the universityÕs intellectual assetsÑits faculty and students, its capacity for basic and applied
research, and the knowledge generated through its scholarshipand instructionÑwhich become ever more valuable (Olcott andSchmidt, 2000). Public policy, through federal actions such as
the Bayh-Dole Act of 1980, has encouraged the transfer of knowl-edge from campus to marketplace. But because knowledge canbe transferred not only through formal mechanisms such as
patents and licensing but also through the migration of facultyand students, there is a risk that the rich intellectual assets of theuniversity will be depleted as support for graduate education
and research erodes.Even with faculty and students remaining in academia, theresearch university faces particular conflicts in the commercial-
ization arena. While transforming knowledge into public benefithas long been a major component of its mission, expectationsPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPLICATIONS FOR THE RESEARCH UNIVERSITY41for university contributions to regional and national economicdevelopment are growing. Universities are thus forming anarray of ambitious partnerships with industry, and are doingmore to support faculty entrepreneurship (GUIRR, 2000 and
2001).Yet some decry the growth of commercial forces and incen-tives on campus (Press and Washburn, 2000) as a threat to the
basic values of the university. Moreover, societyÕs experience sofar with market-driven, media-based enterprises has not beenaltogether positive. The experience of the broadcasting and pub-
lishing industries suggests that a narrow focus on short-termfinancial results can lead to mediocrity.One can imagine a scenario, for example, in which the campusdoes not disappear but, because of the escalating costs of resi-dential education, becomes priced beyond the range of all butthe most affluent. Much of the population would then be limited
to lower-cost education via nonresidential learning centers orcomputer-mediated distance learning. Indeed, critics see theexpansion of distance education as the leading edge of a move-
ment to commercialize higher education and ÒdeprofessionalizeÓthe faculty (Noble, 2001).While the commercial model of the newer for-profit institu-tions may be a very effective way to meet the workplace-skillneeds of many adults, the committee believes that it is notÑorat least, not yetÑa paradigm suitable to many of the otherpurposes of the university, including the educational value ofdirect interaction with excellent teachers. Also, the traditionalbrick-and-mortar campus has provided a desirable social envi-
ronment that contributes substantially to student maturationand to growth into participative citizenship.Thus even though we must be mindful of market forces andwilling to respond to them as creatively and substantially aspossible, the panel believes that they should not be allowed todominate and reshape the higher-education enterprise all by
themselves. Otherwise, we could well find ourselves facing aÒbrave new worldÓ in which some of the most important values
and traditions of the university have fallen by the wayside.As we assess these emerging market-driven learning insti-tutions, we must bear in mind the importance of preserving theability of the university to serve a broader public purpose. While
universities teach skills and convey knowledge, they also pre-serve our cultural heritage and convey it from one generation toPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION42the next, perform the research necessary to generate new knowl-edge, serve as constructive social critics, and provide societywith a broad array of knowledge-based services such as tech-nology transfer and health care.So what should a university of the twenty-first centuryÑone that serves the needs of a knowledge-driven societyÑbelike? In particular, what will be the research universityÕs role inthe changing higher-education infrastructure? It would beimpractical and foolhardy to suggest precise models; the greatand ever-increasing diversity of the U.S. citizenry and workforce
makes it clear that there will be many forms of education andmany types of institutions serving our country. But a number ofthemes will almost certainly factor into the higher-education
enterprise.In a series of reports prepared during the latter half of the1990s, the Kellogg Commission on the Future of State and Land-
Grant Universities charted a future course for an importantsubset of AmericaÕs research universities (Kellogg Commission,2001). The Commission examined the range of internal changes
and external forces shaping the future of state and land-grantuniversities, and did not focus particularly on informationtechnology. In recasting the traditional land-grant missionsÑeducation, research, and extensionÑas learning, discovery, andengagement, it urged universities to re-engage with society andplay a more extensive role than in the past.Information technology can clearly help universities realizethe Kellogg CommissionÕs vision. One important area, whichthis present study was not able to examine comprehensively, is
emphasis on the extension (or ÒengagementÓ) mission. Examplesof how this may occur can be seen in fields such as social work,where universities are experimenting with new ways to assist
practitioners in the field through information technology(Ouelette, 2001).The panel believes that just as other social institutions havedone, universities must become more focused on those theyserve. They must transform themselves from faculty-centeredto learner-centered entities, becoming more responsive to what
students need to learnÑwhenever, wherever, and however theywish to learn itÑrather than simply cater to what faculties wishto teach. This will become a bigger challenge than ever before as
information technology greatly increases the size and enhancesthe diversity of universitiesÕ student bodies, and as more students
Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPLICATIONS FOR THE RESEARCH UNIVERSITY43gain access to computers and reliable networks. In this environ-ment, the Internet has the potential to be a ÒdemocratizingÓforce, extending educational opportunities to those currentlyunderserved by traditional colleges and universities.To meet the needs of a knowledge-driven society, it is clearthat very broad access to education is a high priority. One of theimportant challenges of the research-university community will
be to sustain, intellectually and financially, a Òculture ofexcellenceÓ with the required selectivity of faculty and students
while at the same time providing the foundation for universal
education.The research university will undoubtedly play a role inmeeting the growing demand for cost-effective educational
opportunities. This may involve increased cooperation withother components of the higher-education system such as stateuniversities and community colleges, which have long been
accomplished providers of affordable education.In an age of knowledge, lifelong learning is especially criti-cal. The concept of student and alumnus will merge. Our highly
partitioned schooling system may well blend increasingly into aseamless web, in which primary and secondary education; un-dergraduate, graduate, and professional education; on-the-job
training and continuing education; and lifelong enrichmentbecome a continuum. In this vision of the future, people will becontinually surrounded by and absorbed in learning experiences.Information technologies are now providing not only themeans to create growth-inducing environments throughout thelives of learners; the technologies themselves will be able to
learn and grow throughout their own service lives. Increasinglydriven by artificial intelligence and genetic algorithms, suchsystems will be capable of evolving to serve humanityÕs chang-ing educational needs.In all, information technology is rapidly becoming a liberat-ing force in our society, not only freeing us from the mental
drudgery of routine tasks but also creating new types of learn-ing communities and, more generally, connecting us with oneanother in ways we never dreamed possible. Higher education
must define its relationship with these emerging trends of thedigital age in order to adapt, grow, and continue to excel.
Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHOOSING THE FUTURE: FINDINGS AND OPTIONS45nformation technology clearly poses many challengesfor higher education in general and the research
university in particular. But while the challenges aresignificant, so too are the opportunities to enhancethe important social role of these institutions. The panel
endeavored to reflect that spirit in this study.As noted in Chapter 2, we can expect enormous technologicalchanges over the next 10 years, and with an ever-increasing
rateof change. Yet Chapter 3 observes that individual humanbeings cannot modify their behaviors with respect to technologyas rapidly as the technology itself is changing. Social institu-
tions such as the law and the university have an even greaterinertia with respect to exploiting new technology.23 Academia
sgreatest challenge, therefore, will be to resolve this great and
growing discrepancy. In order to avoid squandering resources,exhausting faculty, and disappointing students, the higher-education communityand particularly the research universityneeds to develop agile processes for experimenting with andassessing alternative courses of action.Some might argue that while other societal institutions havebeen transformed or made obsolete by information technology,this is no guarantee that the same will happen to the researchuniversity. After all, given the important role of this institution
in society and the economy, and its political strength at thestatehouse and national levels, it has proven able to resist ordeflect outside pressures in the past. For example, some might
argue that inexhaustible demand for the research universitysdegree-granting, or credentialing, role will ensure a steady
stream of students regardless of the intrinsic educational quality
it offers.Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION46Although the panel is not in a position to prove its argumentsbeyond all doubt, we note that a significant number of experts,both panel members and others of diverse outlooks, predict thathigher education will undergo significant change as a result of
information-technology advances (Collis, 2000; Duderstadt,2000a; Gilbert, 1995; Katz, 1999; Newman and Scurry, 2000;Noble, 2001).In addition, Chapter 3 discussed several trends affectinghigher education that may not trace their origins to digitaltechnology but that the panel expects will be catalyzed by

technological change to further transform institutions and edu-cational processes. For example, there is a growing demand foruniversal, lower-cost, lifelong education tailored to the needs of
learners, as contrasted with the more exclusive, expensive,traditionally structured approaches that the research universityand other elite institutions have been accustomed to determin-
ing themselves and uniquely providing. The panel expects thisgrowing demand will be met in part, perhaps in large part,through the expansion of current for-profit educational providers
or the success of new entrants. In any case, technology is helpingto enable this shift.Another trend that has spurred some controversy is thegrowing linkage between the research university and thecommercial world. Concerns raised about this linkage generallyfocus on the potential compromising of academic research
activities (Press and Washburn, 2000). But some critics worrythat the recent rush by universities to establish for-profit sub-sidiaries specializing in distance education is a mechanism for
deprofessionalizing the faculty (Noble, 2001). This movement,
they suggest, could presage a future in which education isdelivered by information technology and courses are created
by teams of adjunct faculty, contract lecturers, and technicalhelpers rather than by tenured professors, with the coursesowned by the university (Noble, 2001).Whether or not one shares these particular concerns, it isclear that a range of futures is possible for the research univer-sity. The panel believes that institutions, working with their
constituents, can develop and fulfill a vision for the future inwhich information technology is a vehicle for sustaining andexpanding their core values and missions. The research univer-
sity can be more effective in education, teach in entirely newways, reach a wider segment of the U.S. population, and meetPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHOOSING THE FUTURE: FINDINGS AND OPTIONS47the lifelong learning needs of its students. It can create newknowledge at an accelerating rate through new forms ofcollaboration across institutional and disciplinary lines, whilemaintaining diversity of thought and academic freedom. It can
be more effective at traditional service functions, and makeentirely new contributions to the broader society. It can becomeeven more central to the intellectual and social life of our com-
munities and the nation as a whole than it has been before.Given the pace of technological change, and the non-technological pressures mentioned above, the next decade will
be a critical time for individual institutions and for the higher-education enterprise as a whole. While the transformation of theresearch university is more or less inevitable, it is important that
the changes be proactive and the result of serious self-examination. The aforementioned rush to establish for-profitdistance-learning subsidiaries, some of which have already
expired while others are in trouble, is an example of changehastily undertaken by institutions in reaction to trends of themoment and the fear of being left behind. We can learn a
great deal by examining this experience.SIGNIFICANT FINDINGSGiven this context, the panels main findings are as follows:The extraordinary pace of information-technologyevolution is likely not only to continue for the next severaldecades but could well accelerate. It will erode, and in somecases obliterate, higher educations usual constraints of spaceand time. Institutional boundaries will be reshaped and possiblytransformed.The impact of information technology on the researchuniversity will likely be profound, rapid, and discontinuousjust as it has been and will continue to be for our other socialinstitutions and the economy. There are likely to be major
technological surprises, comparable in significance to thepersonal computer in the late 1970s and the Internet browser in1994, but at more frequent intervals. The future is becoming less
predictable.Digital technology will not only transform the intellectualactivities of the research university (teaching, research, outreach)¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION48but will also change how the university is organized, financed,and governed. The technology could drive a convergence ofhigher education with IT-intensive sectors such as publishing,telecommunications, and entertainment, creating a global
knowledge and learning industry.Procrastination and inaction are dangerous courses forthe university during a time of rapid technological change,
although institutions will also need to avoid making hastyresponses to current trends. Just as in earlier periods of change,the university will have to adapt itself to a radically changing
world while protecting its most important values and tradi-tions, such as academic freedom, a rational spirit of inquiry, andliberal learning.For at least the near term, meaning a decade or less, theresearch university will continue to exist in much its presentform. But it must devote itself during this interval to anticipating
the needed changes, developing appropriate strategies, andmaking adequate investments if it is to prosper thereafter.Over the longer term, the basic character and structure ofthe research university may be challenged by the technology-driven forces of aggregation (new alliances, for example, andthe conversion of the academic marketplace into a global
industry) and disaggregation (such as restructuring of the
academic disciplines, detachment of faculty and students fromparticular universities, and decoupling of research and
education).Although we are confident that information technologywill continue its rapid growth for the foreseeable future and
may ultimately have profound impacts on human behavior andsocial institutions such as the research university, it is far moredifficult to predict these impacts with any precision. Neverthe-
less, higher education must develop mechanisms to at leastsense the potential changes and to aid in the understanding of
where the technology may drive it.It is therefore important that university strategies include:the development of sufficient in-house expertise among facultyand staff to track technological trends and assess various courses
of action; the opportunity for experimentation; and the ability toform alliances with other academic institutions as well as withfor-profit and governmental organizations.Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHOOSING THE FUTURE: FINDINGS AND OPTIONS49DISCOVERING OPTIONS: THE NEEDFOR CONTINUED DIALOGUEAlthough part of its charge was to make policy recommen-dations, the panel ultimately decided not to do so in this first
phase of activity. One factor in this decision was that informa-tion technology is evolving so rapidly that any prescriptive setof conclusions and recommendations could quickly become out-
dated. Also, the panel was unable to examine the numerousissues bearing on the topic (such as the state and federal fund-ing environment for higher education, intellectual property laws
and practices, regulatory and certification issues, informationprivacy, and information security) with the depth needed forrecommending policy changes. The focus of our examination of
needs and priorities for action was on what institutions them-selves and their broader constituencies (which definitely includesstate and federal governments) need to monitor, explore, learn,
and understand at this time.The panel believes that the higher-education communityshould create ongoing mechanisms for: Monitoring technological changes and the consequent
scholarly, educational, and social shifts. Identifying crucial issues, challenges, and opportunities
for the research university and the broader higher-education
enterprise. Stimulating awareness on the campuses. Making recommendations for actions or further studies.The National Academies has been awarded funding tolaunch such an effort through the Government-University-
Industry Research Roundtable. This process will address theneed for monitoring and expanded dialogue not only on campusbut at the national level. It will involve technology specialists as
well as experts in higher education and state and federal policymakers. Of course, it will also involve faculty from thehumanities, social sciences, natural sciences and engineering,
and students themselves.¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION50Box 4-1: Examples of key questions and issues that might beaddressed through continued national and campus-baseddialogueFor Institutions1.How will e-learning environments affect the need for traditional teacher-
centered instruction? How will the residential campus experience be
affected? What are the implications for graduate training in the research
university, where graduate-student assistants carry a large share of the
teaching load?2.How will information-technology advances affect the ways in which
universities tackle major research problems? What new partnerships among
institutions and other constituents (e.g., federal agencies, state governments)
are needed for efficient development of the necessary tools?3.How can the research university become more effective in the planning,
procurement, and management of IT infrastructure? What operational and
management changes are needed? How can the needs of diverse campus
constituencies be better anticipated and addressed? What roles should be
played by faculty, students, and administrators?4.What new policiesÑfor example, on intellectual property, copyright,
instructional-content ownership, and faculty contractsÑdoes the research
university need to reconsider in light of evolving IT?For the Higher-education Enterprise and its Public Stakeholders1.How should the research university address the rapidly evolving commercial
marketplace for educational services and contentÑincluding, in particular,
the for-profit and dot.com providers? How should universities grapple with
the forces of aggregationÑand disaggregationÑassociated with
technology-driven restructuring of the higher-education enterprise?
What new alliances are necessary? Will universities be forced to merge
into larger units, as the corporate world has done (though not always with
great success)? Will they find it necessary to outsource or spin off existing
activities?2.What are the state and national interests in keeping the universities in step
with evolving information technology? What changes in state and federal
policies, programs, and investments are necessary in order for highereducation to flourish in the digital age?Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHOOSING THE FUTURE: FINDINGS AND OPTIONS51Why is such an an intensive, expanded dialogue necessary?One reason is the complexity and broad range of issues relatedto information technology and the research university. Thispanel took a broad look at the technological, institutional, and
policy issues. Given the time and resources available, it was ableto cover considerable ground but was unable to delve intoissues at great depth. Some important topics, such as the impact
of information technology on the service and outreach missionsof the research university, were treated only superficially. Anexpanded national dialogue will allow a deeper examination of
the broad range of issues.A second reason for a continuing dialogue is that the researchuniversity itself, its internal component groups, and its key
external constituents come to the issues with different interestsand perspectives. This report has touched on some of thosedifferences. Effective communication and better common under-
standing will be necessary to effectively manage the consensualchange processes in higher education.Administrators, faculty, and students, for example, come tothe issues with different experiences, expectations, and con-cerns. University governing bodies and state governments arecharged with ensuring effective management of the university
and responsiveness to the public interest, yet this oversight isnecessarily colored by their respective political and institutionalinterests. Federal agencies, foundations, industry, and the
various higher-education associations are key research-university constituents with their own particular perspectives.In this regard, several nonprofit groups and university-based
institutes that are focused on the future of higher education orthe use of information technology may contribute a great deal tothe discussion.A third reason for a continuing dialogue on informationtechnology and the research university is that the activity canserve as an ongoing mechanism to track technological changes
and their implications for universities. Individual institutionswould be unlikely to do this systematically on their own.What would the continued dialogue consist of, and whatcould it accomplish? One model for the National Academiesactivity is the Stresses on Research and Education at Collegesand Universities project that was undertaken during the 1990s
by the National Science Board and the Government-University-Industry Research Roundtable (NSB-GUIRR, 1994 and 1998;Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION52Texas A&M University, 1994). This effort consisted of severalnational colloquia and linked campus-based dialogues to exploreand address the new stresses on university-based research thatappeared in the early 1990s.Campus dialogues will be an important grass-roots-levelcomponent of the new activity. For example, participating insti-tutions will organize structured dialogues to bring together
faculty, students, and administrators to discuss challenges andopportunities presented by digital technology and formulatepossible responses. Serving as precedent is the Stresses project,
in which several of its campus dialogues unexpectedly catalyzedlonger-term strategic planning and change exercises at the par-ticipating institutions (Texas A&M University, 1994). In this
new activity, therefore, building an infrastructure for continuedcampus dialogue and change will be consciously built into itsown exercises.Periodic national conferences and workshops will beemployed for proposing strategies. Standing subgroups mightbe formed to develop follow-up strategies and actions (includ-
ing possible alliances). In addition, the Internet will be used tofacilitate the dialogues themselves (through the provision ofcollaborative space on the projects web site) and to encourageregular exchange among the participating institutions and thebroader public.Additional dialogues will be organized among institutionalleaders, such as deans, university trustees, and top faculty, andlinks will be forged with state and national policy makers andindustry leaders. The panel believes that the policy dimension is
crucial, although it also believes that public discussions andthinking have not advanced to the point where specific policyissues could be addressed in this present report.24Such sustained activity would be aimed at producing specificinitiatives and demonstration projects to help research universi-ties develop appropriate strategies for the digital age. Examples
include the use of very-high-bandwidth networks (e.g., Internet2)to support new activities such as multicasting and telepresence,novel approaches to using technology to enhance teaching and
learning, and innovative approaches to sustainable financing ofinformation-technology infrastructure.As a result of this three-year project, we expect that theintellectual community studying issues related to informationtechnology and the research university will be enlarged andPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHOOSING THE FUTURE: FINDINGS AND OPTIONS53strengthened; dialogue across institutions, disciplines, and func-tions will be enhanced; governmental leaders and key founda-tions will be engaged; and new approaches to change at thecampus and national levels will be taking shape.BREATHTAKING IMPLICATIONS
There is little doubt that the status quo in higher educationcannot, and should not, be maintained as this disruptive digital
technology finds its way into every corner of our society, and in
ever more significant ways. Yet while the challenges to theresearch university will be great, so too will be the potential toenhance the important social role of this institution.Academics should approach issues and decisions on infor-mation technology in that spiritnot as threats but as opportu-nities. Creative, visionary leaders can respond by guiding their
institutions in new directions that reinforce and augment theirmost critical roles and values. They can use information tech-nology to help their students learn more successfully, their
faculty members become better scholars and teachers, and theirinstitutions serve society inclusively and to ever greater effect.We are on the threshold of a revolution that is making theworlds accumulated information and knowledge accessible toindividuals everywhere. It has breathtaking implications for usall, but the challenge is particularly great for the academic
community. Our missionour responsibilityis to develop astrategic framework that enables us to understand this extra-ordinary technology and shape its impact with skill and imagi-
nation. If we are successful, the research university can remain amajor source of sustenance for a free and spirited democracy, avibrant intellectual life, a healthy economy, and other national
values.¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENDNOTES55CHAPTER 11.One example is the increased ability to disseminate misinformation over
the Internet. At the same time, the success of Snopes.com, a web site that
debunks urban legends, illustrates how the Internet can aid in establishing the
accuracy or inaccuracy of information. In the academic world, information
technology tools have been developed to facilitate and thwart plagiarism
(Foster, 2002).2.This is not to imply that institutions and their faculty do not currently
value learning. Still, at research universities the relative importance put onresearch and publishing in tenure decisions is significant, and anecdotalevidence indicates that the emphasis on research may be growing (Wilson,2001). Nevertheless, the potential for change is illustrated by the emergenceof courses in which students from several institutions in different parts of the

world learn collaboratively (Cogburn, Levinson, Atkins, and Wielbut, 2001).3.University researchers in a range of fields have been, and continue to be,
Òlead usersÓ of new technology (Benner, 2001); the Internet, for example,

first emerged as a research application of information technology. Similarly,computer networks are used to enhance librariesÕ intellectual resources,simulate physical phenomena, and link researchers worldwide in virtual
laboratories, or ÒcollaboratoriesÓÑadvanced, distributed infrastructures thatuse multimedia networks to relax the constraints on distance, time, and even
reality (Kiernan, 1999; National Research Council, 1993 and 2001; National
Science Board, 2000). In addition, university management and administrativeprocesses have become heavily dependent on information technology.4.There are many uncertainties about whether and how online students
learn differently from face-to-face students (Koch, 1998).
5.StudentsÕ greater responsibility and control may be a mixed blessing.
For example, under certain conditions online learning may lead to a greater

emphasis on the productÑthe diplomaÑas opposed to the education
process (Lerych, 2001).CHAPTER 26.At the time this report went to press, an illustrative chart could be found
on the IBM web site (www.storage.ibm.com/hdd/technolo/grochows/g02.htm).
Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION567.Fiber-optic market consultant KMI Research predicts that carriers will
bury over 344  million kilometers (or 214 million miles) of fiber-optic cable

over the 2002-2006 period. Dividing this by the number of hours in fiveyears (43,800) yields a rate of nearly 5,000 miles per hour. See KMI Research,
2002.8.See Teleography, Inc., 2001. The study indicates that trans-Pacific
bandwidth capability increased from 14 gigabits to 244 gigabits per second bythe end of 2000, with trans-Atlantic capability at about 550 gigabits per
second, and U.S.-Latin American bandwidth capability at about 290 gigabitsper second. Bear in mind, however, that this is all backbone cable, and notwhat anyone could dial into.9.The July 2001 survey by the Internet Software Consortium located over
125 million unique computer ÒhostsÓ on the Internet. According to Matrix
Net Systems, if the same rate of growth of recent years is sustained, theInternet will cross the 1-billion-host mark in 2005 (Internet SoftwareConsortium, 2001; Matrix Net Systems, 2000).CHAPTER 310.Newman (2000) provides an overview of the challenges that are facing the

universities and forcing change, including advances in information technology.
11.For example, the IMS Global Learning Consortium is developing and
promoting open specifications for facilitating online distributed-learning
activities such as locating and using educational content, tracking learnerprogress, reporting learner performance, and exchanging student recordsbetween administrative systems (www.imsproject.org). The Advanced
Distributed Learning initiative is a university-industry-government effortlaunched by the Department of Defense in 1997 to develop e-learning
standardization (www.adlnet.org).12.The discussion at the January 22-23, 2001 Workshop on the Impacts of
Information Technology on the Future of the Research University
(www.researchchannel.com) includes perspectives from several experts.
13.Another cohort of learners pushing for change is employed adults.
14.In this area, information technology can help institutions and faculty
move in a direction that they are already exploring. (King, 1993; Grasha,1994)15.At some institutions, the distinction between adult learners and on-
campus students is becoming increasingly blurred as more full-time studentsblend face-to-face and on-line coursework in order to balance work, family,
and academic obligations.16.See Pethokoukis (2002) who cites proprietary reports from International
Data Corp. and Bear Stearns.17.See www.blackboard.com and www.webCT.com.
18.Unext is an education company that provides online business education
and other e-learning products in collaboration with several universities
(including Stanford and Columbia). Courses include targeted training pro-grams and professional development, as well as business education. UnextPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENDNOTES57operates an accredited online university, Cardean University, that offersbusiness-related courses and an MBA degree.19.An example of such a portal is Stanford
Õs Highwire Press(highwire.stanford.edu).20.Michael McRobbie (2001), Indiana University
Õs Chief Information Officer,notes that he operates with a $100 million annual budget and is implementinga $200 million five-year strategic plan for IT.21.The University of Phoenix (www.phoenix.edu) is a private, for-profit
entity that provides high-quality education to working adult students.Through innovative avenues such as distance-education technologies, the
University is accessible to working adults regardless of their geographicallocation. It has 107 campuses in the United States and Canada.22.Jones International University (www.jonesinternational.edu) is a com-
pletely online university that offers undergraduate and graduate degrees aswell as certificate programs. Started in 1995, it was accredited in 1999 by theHigher Learning Commission, a member of the North Central Association.CHAPTER 423.But the half-life of students
Õ basic technology is diminishing as technological
change accelerates. For twenty years or more the entering college freshmanbought and used a typewriter. In the late 1980s and early 1990s it was apersonal computer. In the mid-1990s e-mail usage grew. The late 1990s sawthe advent of the World Wide Web and Napster. Currently, instantmessaging is the ÒhotÓ technology.
24.Other groups are examining policy issues related to the future of
research universities. For example, in 2000 the Kellogg Commission on theFuture of State and Land-Grant Universities proposed a ÒMillenium Partner-
ship InitiativeÓÑa renewed Òpartnership of federal and state government,colleges and universities, and the private sector to build the technologyinfrastructure needed to educate and train the twenty-first century
workforce.ÓPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REFERENCES59Attali, Jacques. 1992. Millennium: Winners and Losers in the Coming World Order.New York: Times Books.Barua, Anitesh, Pinnell, Jon, Shutter, Jay and Andrew B. Whinston. 1999.ÒMeasuring the Internet Economy: An Exploratory Study.Ó Austin, Texas:Center for Research in Internet Commerce, School of Business Adminis-tration, University of Texas at Austin. (cism.bus.utexas.edu/works/
articles/internet_economy.pdf)Benner, Jeffrey. 2001. ÒA Grid of Supercomputers.Ó Wired News. August 9.Blumenstyk, Goldie. 2001. ÒTemple U. Shuts Down For-Profit Distance-Education Company.Ó The Chronicle of Higher Education 47 (45) July 20.Booz Allen Hamilton. 2002. Re-Learning e-Learning. June. (www.boozallen.com).
Bradshaw, Jeffrey M. ed. 1997. Software Agents. Cambridge, Massachusetts:
MIT Press.Brown, John Seely. 2000. ÒGrowing Up Digital,Ó Change 32 (2) March: 10-20.Brown, John Seely and Paul Duguid. 1996. ÒUniversities in the Digital Age,ÓChange 28 (4) July: 11-19.Butler, Steve. 2001. ÒThe eCommerce: B2B Report.Ó eMarketer. February.Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. 2001. The CarnegieClassification of Institutions of Higher Education. Menlo Park, California.Carnevale, Dan. 2000a. ÒTurning Traditional Courses Into Distance Courses.ÓThe Chronicle of Higher Education 46 (48) August 4.Carnevale, Dan. 2000b. ÒIndiana U. Scholar Says Distance Education RequiredNew Approach to Teaching.Ó The Chronicle of Higher Education 46 (27)
March 10.Carnevale, Dan and Jeffrey R. Young. 1999. ÒWho Owns On-Line Courses?Colleges and Professors Start to Sort it Out.Ó The Chronicle of HigherEducation 46 (16) December 17.Carlson, Scott and Dan Carnevale. 2001. ÒDebating the Demise of NYUonline.ÓThe Chronicle of Higher Education 48 (16) December 14.Carlson, Scott. 2000. ÒCampus Survey Finds That Adding Technology toTeaching Is a Top Issue.Ó The Chronicle of Higher Education 47 (9) October 27.
Carr, Sarah. 2001. ÒMIT Will Place Course Materials Online.Ó The Chronicle ofHigher Education 47 (32) April 20.Carr, Sarah. 2000a. ÒAs Distance Education Comes of Age, the Challenge IsKeeping the Students.Ó The Chronicle of Higher Education 46 (22) February11.Carr, Sarah. 2000b. ÒMany Professors Are Optimistic on Distance Learning,Survey Finds.Ó The Chronicle of Higher Education 46 (43) July 7.Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION60Cogburn, Derrick L., N. Levinson; Daniel E. Atkins, and Vlad Wielbut. 2001.ÒHuman Capacity Building for the Knowledge Economy: Creating
Globally Distributed Web-Based Learning Environments for AdvancedGraduate Studies in International Affairs.Ó Paper presented at the 2001
Annual Meeting of the International Studies Association, Chicago, Illinois.Collis, David. 2000. ÒNew Business Models for Higher Education.Ó In 
TheInternet and the University. Devlin, Maureen, Larson, Richard and JoelMeyerson, eds. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Educause: 97-116.Connolly, Frank W. 2001. ÒMy Students DonÕt Know What TheyÕre Missing.ÓThe Chronicle of Higher Education 48 (17) December 21.Darden, Lindley. 1997. ÒRecent Work in Computational Scientific Discovery.ÓMichael Shafto and Pat Langley, eds. Proceedings of the Nineteenth AnnualConference of the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence
Erlbaum: 161-166.Deming, Peter J. and Robert M. Metcalfe. 1997. Beyond Calculation: The NextFifty Years of Computing. New York: Springer-Verlag.Drucker, Peter. 1999. ÒBeyond the Information Revolution.Ó Atlantic Monthly.284:4 (October). (www.theatlantic.com/issues/99oct/9910drucker.htm)Drucker, Peter. 2001. ÒThe Next Society: A Survey of the Near Future.Ó TheEconomist 356 (32) (3 November): 3-20.Duderstadt, James J. 2000a. The Future of the University in the Digital Age.Speech at the University of Wisconsin at Madison. November 29.
(milproj.ummu.umich.edu/publications/uw_it_and_university/
uw_it_and_university.pdf)Duderstadt, James J. 2000b. Intercollegiate Athletics and the American University:A University ProfessorÕs Perspective. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
Press.Duderstadt, James J. 1999. ÒNew Roles for the 21st Century University.Ó Issuesin Science and Technology 16 (2) Winter: 37-44.Feldman, Stuart. 2001. Presentation on ÒTechnology FuturesÓ at the Work-
shop on the Impact of Information Technology on the Future of theResearch University. January 22. (programs.researchchannel.com)Foster, Andrea. 2002. ÒPlagiarism-Detection Tool Creates Legal Quandary.ÓThe Chronicle of Higher Education 48 (36) May 17.Foster, Andrea. 2001. ÒPrinceton Computer Scientist Sues for the Right toSpeak at a Conference.Ó The Chronicle of Higher Education 47 (40) June 22.Foster, Andrea. 2000. ÒNew Software-Licensing Legislation Said to ImperilAcademic Freedom. The Chronicle of Higher Education 46 (48) August 11.Gartner Group. 2001. ÒGartner Dataquest Survey Shows 61 Percent of U.S.Households Actively Using the Internet.Ó Press release. August 29.
(www4.gartner.com/5_about/press_releases/2001/pr20010829b.html)Grasha, Anthony F. 1994. ÒA Matter of Style: The Teacher as Expert, FormalAuthority, Personal Model, Facilitator, and Delegator.Ó College Teaching42 (4) Fall.Greenfield Online. 2000. ÒThe Internet is ÔBig Man on Campus.Ó (press release).
August 7. (www.greenfieldcentral.com).Gilbert, Steven W. 1995. ÒTechnology and the Changing Academy.Ó Change 27(5) September: 58-62.Gobbetti, Enrico and Riccardo Scateni. 1998. ÒVirtual Reality: Past, Present,and Future.Ó In G. Riva, B. K. Wiederhold, and E. Molinari, eds. 
VirtualEnvironments in Clinical Psychology and Neuroscience: Methods and Tech-niques in Advanced Patient-Therapist Interaction. Amsterdam, Netherlands:IOS Presss: 3-20.Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REFERENCES61Goldstein, Michael B. 2000 ÒTo Be [For-Profit] or Not To Be: What is theQuestion?Ó Change 32 (5) September: 25-31Gomory, Ralph. 2000. ÒInternet Learning: Is It Real and What Does it MeanFor Universities?Ó (www.eng.yale.edu/sheff/Gomory_talk.htm)Government-University-Industry Research Roundtable. 2001a. Transcript ofthe Workshop on the Impact of Information Technology on the Future of theResearch University, January 22-23, 2001, Washington, D.C.Government-University-Industry Research Roundtable. 2001b. ÒCommercial-izing University Research: Aligning Incentives and Protecting the ResearchEnterprise.Ó Summary Brochure. Washington, D.C.: National Academy
Press.Government-University-Industry Research Roundtable. 2000. ÒIndustry-University Research Partnerships: What Are the Limits of Intimacy?ÓSummary Brochure. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.Government-University-Industry Research Roundtable. 1998. A Dialogue onResearch University Futures, Proceedings of the 1997 Academies GoverningBoard Symposium.Hanna, Donald, ed. 2000. Higher Education in an Era of Global Competition.Madison, Wisconsin: Atwood.Healy, Patrick. 1999. ÒGrowth in State Spending on Colleges Is Likely to SlowDown.Ó The Chronicle of Higher Education 45 (48) August 6.Hebel, Sara. 2001. ÒPublic Colleges Feel Impact of the Economic Downturn.ÓThe Chronicle of Higher Education 47 (45) July 20.Hebel, Sara, Schmidt, Peter and Jeffrey Selingo. ÒAs Legislative Sessions Begin,Colleges Gear Up for a Slowdown.Ó The Chronicle of Higher Education 47
(17) January 5.Huey, John. 1994. ÒWaking Up to the New Economy,Ó Fortune. June 27.Information Technology Association of America. 2001. When Can You Start?Building Better Information Technology Skills and Careers. Washington, D.C.Internet Software Consortium. 2001. Internet Domain Survey, July 2001. July.(www.isc.org).In-Stat/MDR. 2002. Mobile Internet Access Devices. June. (www.instat.com).Joy, Bill. 2000. ÒWhy the Future DoesnÕt Need Us.Ó Wired. April.
(www.wired.com/wired/archive/8.04/joy.html)Kahney, Leander. 2000. ÒNet Speed AinÕt Seen NothinÕ Yet.
Ó Wired News.March 21. (www.wired.com)Katz, Richard N. ed. 1999. Dancing with the Devil: Information Technology and theNew Competition in Higher Education. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Kellogg Commission. 2001. Returning to Our Roots: Executive Summaries of theReports of the Kellogg Commission on the Future of State and Land-GrantUniversities. Washington, D.C.: National Association of State Universitiesand Land-Grant Colleges. (www.nasulgc.org)Kharaf, Olga. 2001. ÒThe Fiber-Optic ÔGlutÕ in a New Light.
Ó Businessweek Online.Kiernan, Vincent. 1999. ÒInternet-based ÔCollaboratoriesÕ Help Scientists Work
Together.Ó The Chronicle of Higher Education 45 (27) March 12.King, Alison. 1993. ÒFrom Sage on the Stage to Guide on the Side.Ó CollegeTeaching 41 (1) Winter.KMI Research. 2002. Worldwide Cable Market Summary by Region (Single-ModePlus Multimode). Private communication. August 15. (www.kmicorp.com).Koch, James. 1998. ÒHow Women Actually Perform in Distance Education.ÓThe Chronicle of Higher Education 45 (2) September 11.Kurzweil, Ray. 1999. The Age of Spiritual Machines: When Computers ExceedHuman Intelligence. New York: Viking.Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION62Kushner, Mark J. 2001. ÒCore Values and the New Business Model.Ó ASEEPrism Online. May. (www.asee.org/prism/may01/lw.cfm)Lewis, Laurie, Kyle Snow, Elizabeth Farris and Douglas Levin. 2000. ÒDistanceEducation at Postsecondary Institutions, 1997-98.Ó Washington, D.C.:
National Center for Education Statistics. nces.ed.gov/pubs2000/

qrtlyspring/5post/q5-7.html)Lerych, Lynne Drury. 2001. ÒMeeting the Bottom Line in the College Biz.ÓNewsweek. April 9.Lucent Technologies. 2000. ÒNetworking.Ó Trends and Developments 4 (2)
(www.lucent.com/minds/trends/trends_v4n2/page1.html)Mangan, Katherine. 2001. ÒExpectations Evaporate for Online MBA Programs,ÓThe Chronicle of Higher Education 48 (6) October 5.Massy, William. 2001. Presentation on ÒThe Impact of IT on the BroaderEnvironment of the Research UniversityÓ at the Workshop on the Impact
of Information Technology on the Future of the Research University.January 22. Washington, D.C. (programs.researchchannel.com).Massy, William and Robert Zemsky. 1995. ÒUsing Information Technologyto Enhance Academic Productivity.Ó Educom White Paper.
(www.educause.edu/nlii/keydocs/massy.html)Matrix NetSystems. 2000. ÒInternet Survey Reaches 93 Million Internet-HostLevel. Press release. September. (www.matrixnetsystems.com).McDonald, Tim. 2001. ÒIBMÕs ÔBlue GeneÕ Supercomputer to Top ASCI White.
ÓNewsfactor Network. August 22. (www.newsfactor.com/)McGarvey, Joe. 1999. ÒNet Experts Predict Petabit Future.Ó Interactive Week.September 17.McRobbie, Michael. 2001. Presentation on ÒThe Impact of IT on Organizationand StructureÓ at the Workshop on the Impact of Information Technology
on the Future of the Research University. January 22. Washington, D.C.(programs.researchchannel.com)Mendels, Pamela. 1999. ÒNon-Traditional Teachers More Likely to Use theNet.Ó The New York Times. May 26.Mellon Foundation. 2001. Recent Announcements. April 5. (www.mellon.org)
Merrill Lynch. 2000. The Knowledge Web.National Education Association 2000. ÒConfronting the Future of DistanceLearningÑPlacing Quality in Reach.Ó News release announcing survey
results. June 14. (www.nea.org/nr/nr000614.html)National Research Council. 2002. Cybersecurity Today and Tomorrow: Pay Nowor Pay Later. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.National Research Council. 2001a. Issues for Science and Engineering Researchersin the Digital Age. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.National Research Council. 2001b. Embedded Everywhere: A Research Agenda forNetworked Systems of Embedded Computers. Washington, D.C.: National
Academy Press.National Research Council. 2001c. Building a Workforce for the InformationEconomy. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.National Research Council. 2001d. Academic IP: The Effects of University Patent-ing and Licensing on Commercialization and Research. Washington, D.C.:
National Academy Press.National Research Council. 2000a. LC21: A Digital Strategy for the Library ofCongress. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.National Research Council. 2000b. Making IT Better: Expanding InformationTechnology Research to Meet SocietyÕs Needs. Washington, D.C.: National
Academy Press.Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REFERENCES63National Research Council. 1999. Funding a Revolution: Government Support forComputing Research. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.National Research Council. 1993. National Collaboratories: Applying InformationTechnology for Scientific Research. Washington, D.C.: National Academy
Press.National Science Board and Government-University-Industry Research
Roundtable. 1998. Stresses on Research and Education at Colleges and Univer-sities: Phase II of a Grass-roots Inquiry. (www7.nationalacademies.org/guirr/stresses.html)National Science Board and Government-University-Industry Research
Roundtable. 1994. Stresses on Research and Education at Colleges and Univer-sities: Institutional and Sponsoring Agency Responses.National Science Board. 1999. Education and Human Resource CommitteeWorkplan, November 18.National Science Board. 2000. Science and Engineering IndicatorsÑ2000.Arlington, Virginia: National Science Foundation.National Science and Technology Council. 2000. Information Technology: The21st Century Revolution. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing
Office.Newman, Frank. 2001. Presentation on ÒThe Impact of IT on the BroaderEnvironment of the Research UniversityÓ at the Workshop on the Impact
of Information Technology on the Future of the Research University.January 22. Washington, D.C. (programs.researchchannel.com)Newman, Frank. 2000. ÒSaving Higher EducationÕs Soul.Ó Change 32 (5)
September: 16-23.  (www.futuresproject.org/publications/soul.pdf)Newman, Frank and Lara K. Couturier. 2001. ÒThe New Competitive Arena:Market Forces Invade the Academy.Ó Change 33 (5) September: 11-17.Newman, Frank and Jaime Scurry. 2000. ÒHigher Education in the DigitalRapids,Ó The Futures Project: Policy for Higher Education in a Changing
World. (www.futuresproject.org/publications/digitalrapidsreport1.pdf.)Noble, David. 2001. ÒThe Future of the Faculty in the Digital Diploma Mill.ÓAcademe 87 (5) September-October.Normile, Dennis. 2002. ÒÔEarth SimulatorÕ Puts Japan on the Cutting Edge.
ÓScience 295. March 2.Odlyzko, Andrew. 2000. ÒThe Future of Scientific Communication.Ó(www.dtc.umn.edu/~odlyzko/doc/future.scientific.comm.pdf)Olcott, Donald, Jr. and Kathy Schmidt. 2000. ÒRedefining Faculty Policies andPractices for the Knowledge Age.Ó Donald Hanna, ed. In 
Higher Educationin an Era of Global Competition. Madison, Wisconsin: Atwood.Olsen, Florence. 2002. ÒE-Commerce Starts to Pay Off.Ó The Chronicle of HigherEducation 48 (46) July 26.Olsen, Florence. 2001a. ÒReport Details Options on Paying for Technology.ÓThe Chronicle of Higher Education 47 (37) May 25.Olsen, Florence. 2001b. ÒSurvey Documents Increased Spending by Collegeson Information Technology.Ó The Chronicle of Higher Education 48 (11)
November 9.Olsen, Florence. 2000. ÒScholars in Medicine and Psychology Explore Uses ofVirtual Reality.Ó  The Chronicle of Higher Education 47 (3) September 22.Ouellette, Philip and S.P. Sells. 2001. ÒCreating a telelearning community fortraining social work practitioners working with troubled youth and their
families.Ó Journal of Technology and Human Services 20:1-3.Passig, David and Haya Levin. 1999.  ÒGender interest differences with multi-media learning interfaces.Ó Computers in Human Behavior 12 (2) March.Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION64Pethokoukis, James M. 2002. ÒE-learn and earn.Ó U.S. News and World Report.June 24.Press, Eyal and Jennifer Washburn. 2000. ÒThe Kept University.Ó The AtlanticMonthly 285 (3) March.Reuters.  2002.  
ÒJapan claims fastest computer title.Ó (news.com.com/2102-
1001-887718.html)Rudolph, Frederick. 1991. The American College and University: A History. Athens,Georgia: University of Georgia Press.Shea, Christopher. 2001. ÒTaking Classes to the Masses,Ó The Washington PostMagazine September 18:25-33.Telegeography, Inc. 2001. International Bandwidth 2001. Washington, D.C.(www.telegeography.com/Publications/bandwidth2001/ib2001_exec_summary.pdf)The Chronicle of Higher Education. 2000. ÒDefinitions of 1994 Carnegie Classifi-cations.Ó 47:13. November 24.Texas A&M University. 1994. Final Implementation Report of the Campus-BasedDiscussions at Texas A&M University.Thompson, Dennis F. 1999. ÒIntellectual Property Meets Information Technol-ogy,Ó Educom Review 34 (2). (www.educause.edu)Trimble, Paula Shaki. 2001. ÒStudy Eyes Terascale Road Map.Ó Federal Com-puter Week. March 12.Vaidhyanathan, Siva. 2001. Copyrights and copywrongs : the rise of intellectualproperty and how it threatens creativity. New York : New York UniversityPress.Vision 2010 Project web site (www.si.umich.edu/V2010/home.html)Weiland, Todd. 2000. ÒUnbundled: Higher EducationÕs Inevitably VirtualFuture.Ó VirtualStudent.com. July. (www.virtualstudent.com/html/unbundled.html)Wilson, Robin. 2001. ÒA Higher Bar for Earning Tenure.Ó The Chronicle ofHigher Education 47 (16) January 5.Wulf, Wm. A. 1994. 
University Alert: The Information Railroad Is Coming
.(www.cs.virginia.edu/~wulf/documents/buttons.html)Wulf, Wm. A. 1995. ÒWarning: Information Technology Will Transform theUniversity,Ó Issues in Science and Technology 11 (4) Summer: 46-52.Young, Jeffrey R. 2002a. ÒEver So Slowly, Colleges Begin to Count Work withTechnology in Tenure Decisions.Ó The Chronicle of Higher Education 48 (23)February 22.Young, Jeffrey R. 2002b. ÒThe 24-Hour Professor.Ó The Chronicle of HigherEducation 48 (38) May 31.Young, Jeffrey R. 2001a. ÒUniversities Begin Creating a Free, ÔOpen SourceÕCourse-Management System.Ó The Chronicle of Higher Education 47 (34)
May 4.Young, Jeffrey R. 2001b. ÒLogging in with Farhad Saba: Professor Says Dis-tance Education Will Flop Unless Universities Revamp Themselves.Ó TheChronicle of Higher Education 47 (42) June 29.Young, Jeffrey R. 2000a. ÒFaculty Report at U. of Illinois Casts Skeptical Eye onDistance Education.Ó The Chronicle of Higher Education 46 (19) January 14.Young, Jeffrey R. 2000b. ÒVirtual Reality on a Desktop Hailed as a New Tool inDistance Education.Ó The Chronicle of Higher Education 47 (5) September
22.Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A67hat follows is a chronology of meetings and activitiesof the NRC project on the Impact of Information
Technology on the Future of the Research University(ITFRU). Additional background can be found onthe project web site (www7.nationalacademies.org/guirr).February 14, 2000First meeting of Steering Committee (ÒpanelÓ), Washington, D.C.May 5, 2000Meeting of Steering Committee Technology Subgroup on

ÒCutting Edge IT Issues,Ó Sloan Foundation, New York, N.Y.June 9, 2000Steering Committee members testified at the House Sub-committee on Basic Research hearing, ÒThe Internet, DistanceLearning, and the Future of the Research University.Ó More
information on the hearing, including witness statements, canbe found at www.house.gov/science/hearing_106.htmJuly 20, 2000Conference call of the Steering Committee University Subgroupfocusing on impacts of information technology on instruction
and educationAugust 17, 2000Conference call of the Steering Committee University SubgroupPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION68August 24-25, 2000Meeting of Steering Committee, ÒA View of TechnologyFutures,Ó Bell Labs (Murray Hill, N.J.) and IBM Watson Labs
(Yorktown Heights, N.Y.)December 4, 2000Conference call of the Steering Committee concerning work-
shop planningJanuary 16, 2001Conference call of the Steering Committee to finalize workshopplanningJanuary 22-23, 2001Workshop on the Impact of Information Technology on theFuture of the Research University, Washington, D.C.March 6, 2001Broadcasts of the first dayÕs workshop sessions begin on theResearch Channel. Sessions are available for viewing atprograms.researchchannel.comApril 24, 2001Conference call of the Steering Committee concerning theJanuary workshop, June GUIRR meeting, and Phase II fundingJune 19-20, 2001Members of the Steering Committee facilitate discussion of the
project at the Government-University-Industry ResearchRoundtable Council meetingAugust 29, 2001Conference call of the Steering Committee regarding the JuneGUIRR meeting, continuing efforts for Phase II funding, and
concluding Phase I activitiesFall-Winter, 2001-2002Preparation of final project reportPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B69˘IMPACT OF INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY ON THE FUTURE
OF THE RESEARCH UNIVERSITYCHAIRED BY JAMES J. DUDERSTADTPRESIDENT EMERITUS: UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGANJanuary 22-23, 2001Washington, DCJanuary 22, 2001Lecture Room, The National Academy of Sciences Building7:45 AMContinental Breakfast
8:15Welcome, Introductions, Background and Objectives
(Jim Duderstadt)8:30Wm. A. Wulf,
President,National Academy of EngineeringPlenary Address:The Information Technology TrainÑA Wakeup Call to the Research University8:45Technology Futures
Moderator:Dan AtkinsExecutive Director,Alliance for Community TechnologyPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION70DiscussantsFred BrooksChair, Computer Science Department,University of North Carolina, Chapel HillStu FeldmanPresident, IBM Worldwide Computing10:30Break
10:45The Impact of IT on the Activities of the University
(Teaching, Research, Service)Moderator:Joe WyattChancellor Emeritus, Vanderbilt UniversityDiscussants:Tim KilleenDirector,National Center for Atmospheric ResearchRichard LarsonProfessor of Electrical Engineering, MITGary MillerAssociate Vice President,
Distance Education,Pennsylvania State UniversityDon NormanProfessor Emeritus,University of California, San Diego12:30 PMLunch
1:30The Impact of IT on Organization and Structure
Moderator:Nils HasselmoPresident,
American Association of UniversitiesPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B71Discussants:Jon ColeProvost, Columbia UniversityMarye Anne FoxChancellor, North Carolina State UniversityMike McRobbieVice President for Information Technology/
Chief Information Officer,Indiana UniversityBarbara OÕKeefeDean, School of Speech,Northwestern University3:15Break
3:45The Impact of IT on the Broader Environment of the
Research University (e.g., post-secondary educationmarketplace, research enterprise)Moderator:Doug Van HouwelingPresident, University Corporation forAdvanced Internet Development/Internet2Discussants:Bill MassyPresident,
Jackson Hole Higher Education GroupFrank NewmanDirector, The Futures ProjectDiana OblingerProfessor of the Practice,Kenan-Flagler Business School,
University of North Carolina, Chapel HillBob ZemskyTrustee, Franklin and Mills College5:30First Day Wrap-up (Jim Duderstadt)
5:45Reception
Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION72January 23, 2001Members Room, The National Academy of Sciences Building7:45 AMContinental Breakfast

8:15Informal Remarks and Discussion (Wm. A. Wulf)
Potential Impacts of IT on the Research University
and Possible Actions8:45Breakout groups: 
ÒHow should the researchuniversity respond to the challenges, threats, andopportunities associated with IT?Ó`What should institutions do themselves?
Moderater: Bob Weisbuch, Members RoomWhat should the federal government do?Moderater: Dan Atkins, Board RoomWhat should industry do?Moderater: Lee Sproull, Room 28010:45Break
11:15Breakout Group Reports and Discussion
12:00 PMLunch

1:00How best can the National Academies
Õ ITFRUProject stimulate and support such actions?
For example, should we:¥Establish an ongoing dialogue that will engagecampuses?
¥Organize further workshops or focus groups oncampus?¥Develop a national Web portal on the subject?3:30Meeting Wrap-up (Jim Duderstadt)
4:00 PMAdjourn
Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C73James J. Duderstadt (Chair) is President Emeritus and Univer-sity Professor of Science and Engineering at the University of
Michigan. He also is the Director of the Millennium Project, aresearch center concerned with the future of higher education.Dr.Duderstadt obtained his B.S. in electrical engineering from

Yale and his Ph.D. in engineering science and physics from theCalifornia Institute of Technology. He joined the faculty of theUniversity of Michigan in 1968, and served as Dean of the
College of Engineering and then Provost and Vice President forAcademic Affairs before becoming President of the universityin 1988. Dr. Duderstadts teaching and research interests span arange of subjects in science, mathematics, and engineering,including science policy and higher education. Dr. Duderstadthas received several national awards and has been elected to
many honorific societies. He has chaired or served on numerousboards, including the National Science Board, the ExecutiveCouncil of the National Academy of Engineering, the Committee
on Science, Engineering, and Public Policy of the NationalAcademy of Sciences, the Big Ten Athletic Conference, Unisys,and CMS Energy.Daniel E. Atkins earned a B.S. in electrical engineering from
Bucknell University in 1965, and an M.S.E.E. and a Ph.D. in
computer science from the University of Illinois, Champaign-Urbana, in 1967 and 1970, respectively. Dr. Atkins joined theUniversity of Michigans Department of Electrical Engineeringand Computer Science (EECS) as an assistant professor in 1972.From January 1989 through July 1990, he served as interimDean of the College of Engineering. In 1990 Dr. Atkins created
an R&D consortium to realize a prototype of a collaboratory,a vision around which a large and interdisciplinary group ofPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION74faculty and administrators have coalesced their interests.Dr.Atkins became founding Dean of the new School of Infor-
mation in July 1992 and held that position until September 1998.With major support of the University and the W. K. Kellogg
Foundation, Dr. Atkins led the School of Informations creationof a graduate research and educational program to produceleaders and change agents in the design, use, and evaluation of
new knowledge-work environments. Dr. Atkins is currently theExecutive Director of the Alliance for Community Technology,a strategic partnership with the W. K. Kellogg Foundation.John Seely Brown is Chief Scientist of the Xerox Corporation.
He has been deeply involved at Xerox in expanding the role of
corporate research to include organizational learning, ethnogra-phies of the workplace, complex adaptive systems, and tech-niques for unfreezing the corporate mind. His research interests
include digital culture, ubiquitous computing, user-centeringdesign, and organizational and individual learning. Dr. Brownis a cofounder of the Institute for Research on Learning, a
member of the National Academy of Education, and a Fellow ofthe American Association for Artificial Intelligence. He serveson numerous advisory boards and boards of directors. He has
also published nearly 100 papers in scientific journals and thebooks Seeing Differently: Insights on Innovation and 
The Social Lifeof Information (with Paul Duguid) (Harvard Business School
Press). He was awarded the 1998 Industrial Research InstituteMedal for outstanding accomplishments in technological inno-vation and the 1999 Holland Award in recognition of the best
paper in Research Technology Management in 1998. Dr. Brown has
a B.S. in Mathematics and Physics from Brown University, andan M.S. in Mathematics and a Ph.D. in Computer and Commu-
nication Sciences from the University of Michigan.Marye Anne Fox is Chancellor of North Carolina State
University. Previously, she served in numerous capacities at theUniversity of Texas, including Vice President for Research andDirector of the Center for Fast Kinetics Research. Dr. Fox has
held numerous visiting appointments and has had extensiveconsulting experience throughout her career. She has also beena board member of many organizations, including the National
Science Board; she was chair of the Federal Science and Tech-nology guidance group (1998/1999); and is currently a memberPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C75of COSEPUP and Co-chair of the Council of the Government-University-Industry Research Roundtable. Dr. Fox is known forher contributions to organic photochemistry and photoelectro-chemistry. Her research interests include physical organic
chemistry, organic photochemistry, organic electrochemistry,chemical reactivity in non-homogeneous systems, heterogeneousphotocatalysis, and electron transfer in anisotropic macro-
molecular arrays. Dr. Fox earned her Ph.D. from Dartmouth in1974. She is a member of the National Academy of Sciences.Ralph E. Gomory has been President of the Alfred P. SloanFoundation since 1989. He was Higgins Lecturer and AssistantProfessor at Princeton University from 1957 to 1959. Dr. Gomory

joined the Research Division of IBM in 1959, became an IBMFellow in 1964, and Director of the Mathematical SciencesDepartment in 1965. He was made IBM Director of Research in
1970, and held that position until 1986, becoming IBM VicePresident in 1973 and Senior Vice President in 1985. In 1986,Dr.Gomory became IBM Senior Vice President for Science and

Technology. Dr. Gomory served on the Presidents Council ofAdvisors on Science and Technology from 1990 to March 1993,and he has served in numerous capacities for many other aca-
demic, industrial, and governmental organizations. He is amember both of the National Academy of Sciences and theNational Academy of Engineering. Dr. Gomory received his
B.A. from Williams College in 1950, studied at Cambridge Uni-versity, and received his Ph.D. in mathematics from PrincetonUniversity in 1954. He has also been awarded a number of
honorary degrees and prizes, including the National Medal ofScience.  Dr. Gomory served in the U.S. Navy from 1954 to 1957.
Nils Hasselmo is currently the President of the Association of
American Universities. Previously, he held numerous positionsat the University of Minnesota, including President (1989-1997),
Vice President for Administration and Planning (1980-1983),and Chairman of the Department of Scandinavian Languagesand Literature and Director of the Center for Northwest Euro-
pean Language and Area Studies (1970-1973). Dr. Hasselmo hasalso served as Senior Vice President for Academic Affairs andProvost at the University of Arizona (1983-1988) and held visit-
ing appointments at the University of Wisconsin (1964-1965),Harvard University (1967), and Umea University in SwedenPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION76(1977). Dr. Hasselmo has received numerous fellowships andawards and is a member of a number of professional and educa-tional associations, including the Board of the National MeritScholarship Corporation, the Council of Big Ten, the National
Association of State Universities and Land-Grant Colleges, theUniversities Research Association, and the Kellogg Commissionon the Future of State Universities and Land-Grant Colleges.
Dr.Hasselmo received his baccalaureate from Augustana
College and Ph.D. in Linguistics from Harvard University.Paul M. Horn is currently Senior Vice President, Research, of
the IBM Corporation, a position he has held since 1996. In his 20years with IBM, Dr. Horn has been a champion for translating
technology research into marketplace opportunitiesfirst, as asolid state physicist, and then followed by several key manage-ment positions in science, semiconductors, and storage. Prior to
his current appointment, Dr. Horn was Vice President and LabDirector of the Research Divisions Almaden Research Center inSan Jose, California. Dr. Horn graduated from Clarkson College
of Technology and received his doctoral degree from theUniversity of Rochester in 1973. Prior to joining IBM in 1979,Dr.Horn was a professor in the Physics Department and the

James Franck Institute at the University of Chicago. Dr. Horn isa Fellow of the American Physical Society and an NSF GraduateFellow, and he was an Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellow from
1974-1978. He is a former Associate Editor of Physical ReviewLetters and has published some 85 scientific and technical papers.In 1988 he received the Bertram Eugene Warren award from the
American Crystallographic Association. Dr. Horn is a memberof numerous professional committees, including the Council onCompetitiveness, the Government-University-Industry Research
Roundtable, the Clarkson University Board of Trustees, the UCBerkeley Industrial Advisory Board, and the Board of the NewYork Hall of Science.Shirley Ann Jackson has served as the 18th President of
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute since July 1, 1999. Previously,
she was Chairman of the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission.During her tenure with the Commission she enhanced the regu-latory effectiveness of the 3,000-employee, $472-million agency.
Prior to joining the NRC, she was Professor of Physics at RutgersUniversity and held research positions at Bell Laboratories, thePreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C77Fermi National Accelerator Center, the Stanford Linear Accel-erator Center, and the Aspen Center for Physics. She holds aB.S. in physics and a Ph.D. in theoretical elementary-particlephysics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. She is a
member of the National Academy of Engineering.Frank H.T. Rhodes is Professor of Geological Sciences and
President Emeritus at Cornell University. Before assuming thepresidency at Cornell in 1977a position he then held for18years
Dr. Rhodes was Vice President for Academic Affairsat the University of Michigan for three years. He joined theMichigan faculty as professor of geology in 1968 and, in 1971,was named Dean of the College of Literature, Science, and the
Arts. He was professor and head of the geology department andDean of the Faculty of Science at the University of Wales, andhas served on the faculty at the University of Illinois and the
University of Durham. Dr. Rhodes received a bachelor of sciencedegree with first-class honors, as well as a doctor of philosophydegree, a doctor of science degree, and a doctor of laws degree
from the University of Birmingham, England. He went to theUniversity of Illinois in 1950 as a postdoctoral fellow andFulbright scholar. Dr. Rhodes was appointed by President
Reagan as a member of the National Science Board, of which heis a former chair, and by President George H.W. Bush as amember of the Presidents Educational Policy Advisory Com-mittee. He has served as Chair of the American Council onEducation, the American Association of Universities, and theCarnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. He has
also served as a trustee of the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation.Dr. Rhodes has published widely in the fields of geology,paleontology, evolution, the history of science, and education.
He is a principal of the Washington Advisory Group, a memberof the board of directors of the General Electric Company, and amember of the Board of Overseers of Ko University, Turkey.
He is currently president of the American Philosophical Society.Marshall S. Smith is Program Director for Education at the
Hewlett Foundation, and Professor of Education at StanfordUniversity. He has been involved in helping to shape the nationseducational policies, especially as they relate to equal opportu-
nity and high standards. He served as Undersecretary and ActingDeputy Secretary of the U.S. Department of Education from 1993Preparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION78to 2000. In these capacities, he was the Chief Operating Officer ofthe Department and the Chief Policy Advisor to the Secretary.Originally trained in statistical techniques for research, Dr. Smithhas extensive knowledge of policy issues from his years of previ-
ous governmental and academic experience. This experience
has included research on such topics as computer analysis of
social-science data, early-childhood education, critical thinking,
and social inequality; teaching positions at Harvard, Wisconsin,and Stanford; and six years as Dean of the School of Educationat Stanford. Dr. Smiths current research interests includenational and state educational policy, educational quality, chal-lenging educational standards, imaginative use of technologyfor learning, and policy and practices in education in emerging
nations. He has been a member of several organizations, includ-ing the National Academy of Education and the National Councilon Education Standards and Testing, and he served as the chair
of several committees, including the National Academy ofSciences Board of International Comparative Studies in Educa-tion and the U.S. Government Subcommittee on Educational
Standards. Dr. Smith obtained his baccalaureate, M.A., and Ed.D.in Measurement and Statistics (1970) from Harvard.Lee Sproull holds the Leonard N. Stern School Professorship ofBusiness at the Stern School, New York University. She is cur-rently Director of the Stern School Initiative in Digital Economy,
a comprehensive project combining educational programs,research, and industry partnerships. Dr. Sproull is an inter-nationally recognized sociologist whose research centers on the
implications of computer-based communication technologiesfor managers, organizations, communities, and society. She hasconducted research on technology-induced changes in inter-
personal interaction, group dynamics and decision making, andorganizational or community structure. Dr. Sproull has been aVisiting Scholar at Xerox PARC, Digital Cambridge Research
Lab, and Lotus Development Corporation, and has publishedthe results of her research in eight books and more than60 articles. She has held previous appointments as Professor of
Management at Boston University and Professor of Social andDecision Sciences at Carnegie Mellon University. She holds aB.A. from Wellesley College, and an M.A. and Ph.D. from
Stanford University. Dr. Sproull is a member of the ComputerScience and Telecommunications Board of the National ResearchPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C79Council and the advisory board of MentorNet, and is a formerTrustee of the Computer Museum.Doug Van Houweling has been President and CEO of the
University Corporation for Advanced Internet Development(UCAID) since October 1997. UCAID is a consortium of U.S.research universities, in collaboration with private- and public-
sector partners, currently engaged in the Internet2 project toadvance networking technology and applications for the researchand education community. He is on leave from the University
of Michigan. Dr. Van Houweling has been active in inter-university initiatives, serving on the board of EDUCOMaconsortium of 450 universities that developed computer net-
works and systems for sharing information and resourcesandas a founder of EDUCOMs Networking and Telecommunica-tions Task Force. He has also served as a board member of the
Interuniversity Consortium for Educational Computing. Priorto going to Michigan, Dr. Van Houweling was Vice Provost forComputing and Planning at Carnegie Mellon and Assistant
Professor of Government at Cornell. He received his under-graduate degree from Iowa State University and his Ph.D. ingovernment from Indiana University.Robert Weisbuch is President of the Woodrow Wilson National
Fellowship Foundation.  He joined the Foundation after 25 years

at the University of Michigan, where he served as Chair of theDepartment of English, Associate Vice President for Research,and Associate Dean for Faculty Programs and Interim Dean at
the Rackham School of Graduate Studies. He is a graduate ofWesleyan University and holds a Ph.D. in English from YaleUniversity. He has received awards both for teaching and schol-
arship at Michigan, and is the author of books on EmilyDickinson and the stormy relations between British andAmerican authors in the 19th century. While Dean of the School
of Graduate Studies, he established a fund designed to improvethe mentoring of graduate teaching assistants, created humani-ties and arts awards for faculty, and made diversity an integral
criterion in evaluating program quality. He also headed up atwo-year initiative to improve undergraduate education.Wm. A. Wulf is currently on leave from the University of
Virginia to serve as President of the National Academy ofPreparing for the Revolution: Information Technology and the Future of the Research UniversityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREPARING FOR THE REVOLUTION80Engineering. During 1988-1990, Dr. Wulf was Assistant Directorof the National Science Foundation, where he headed theDirectorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineer-ing. Prior to joining the University of Virginia, Dr. Wulf founded
Tartan Laboratories and was a professor at Carnegie MellonUniversity. While at Carnegie Mellon and Tartan, Dr. Wulfhelped found the Pittsburgh High Technology Council and
served as its Vice President and Director. His breadth and depthof experience have given him a unique perspective on therelationships between universities, industry, and government.
Dr. Wulf is a member of the National Academy of Engineering,a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and aFellow of three professional societies (ACM, IEEE, AAAS). He is
also the author of over 80 papers and technical reports, hasauthored three books, and holds two U.S. patents.Joe B. Wyatt is Chancellor Emeritus of Vanderbilt University.
Much of his earlier career focused on computer science andsystems, in both industry and academia. In addition to holding
faculty positions, he was also associated with EDUCOM invarious capacities, including service as President and CEO. In1976, he was appointed Vice President for Administration at
Harvard and was named Chancellor of Vanderbilt in 1982,stepping down in 2000. He holds degrees in mathematics fromTexas Christian University and the University of Texas.
Mr.Wyatt has carried out research on behalf of the National
Science Foundation, the Ford Foundation, the Office of NavalResearch, and the Eli Lilly Foundation. He is coauthor of the
book Financial Planning Models and the author of numerous
papers and articles in fields relating to technology, manage-ment, and education. Additionally, Mr. Wyatt serves on a
number of corporate boards, as well as professional and serviceorganizations, and was a founding director of the Massachu-setts Technology Development Corporation. He is Chairman of
the Universities Research Association and past Co-chair of theGovernment-University-Industry Research Roundtable, as wellas past Chairman of the Nashville Area Chamber of Commerce.
Mr. Wyatt is also a member of the Association of AmericanUniversities, the Business Higher Education Forum, theAdvisory Committee of the Public Agenda Foundation, and the
Council on Competitiveness.