DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/10569The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning fromSeptember 1194 pages | 6 x 9 | HARDBACKISBN 978-0-309-38181-9 | DOI 10.17226/10569Committee on the Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11;Computer Science and Telecommunications Board; Division on Engineering andPhysical Sciences; National Research CouncilThe Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee on the Internet Under Crisis Conditions:Learning from September 11Computer Science and Telecommunications BoardDivision on Engineering and Physical SciencesTHE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSWashington, D.C.
www.nap.eduThe Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS   500 Fifth Street, N.W.   Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Gov-erning Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn fromthe councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engi-
neering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsiblefor the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard forappropriate balance.Support for this project was provided by the Association for ComputingMachineryÕs Special Interest Group in Data Communication (ACM SIGCOMM);
the IBM Corporation; and the Vadasz Family Foundation, a contributor to theComputer Science and Telecommunications BoardÕs program on information tech-nology and society.  Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations

expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarilyreflect the views of the organizations that provided support for the project.International Standard Book Number 0-309-08702-3Cover image courtesy of Verizon Communications.  Cover designed by Jennifer
Bishop.Copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 500 FifthStreet, N.W., Lockbox 285, Washington, DC 20055; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313 in the Washington metropolitan area.  Internet, http://www.nap.edu.
Copyright 2003 by the National Academy of Sciences.  All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of AmericaThe Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating soci-
ety of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedi-
cated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the generalwelfare.  Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863,
the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on
scientific and technical matters.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts is president of the NationalAcademy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter
of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstandingengineers.  It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its mem-
bers, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advis-
ing the federal government.  The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors
engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages educationand research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers.  Dr. Wm. A.

Wulf is president of the National Academy of Engineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in
the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public.  The
Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciencesby its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon
its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education.  Dr.
Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sci-
ences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology withthe AcademyÕs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal gov-ernment.  Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the

Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both theNational Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in pro-viding services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering
communities.  The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the
Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts and Dr. Wm. A. Wulf are chair and
vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.www.national-academies.orgThe Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ivCOMMITTEE ON THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONS:LEARNING FROM THE IMPACT OF SEPTEMBER 11CRAIG PARTRIDGE, BBN Technologies, ChairPAUL BARFORD, University of Wisconsin, Madison
DAVID D. CLARK, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
SEAN DONELAN, SBC Communications
VERN PAXSON, International Computer Science InstituteÕs Center forInternet ResearchJENNIFER REXFORD, AT&T LabsÐResearchMARY K. VERNON, University of Wisconsin, MadisonStaffJON EISENBERG, Senior Program Officer and Study DirectorMARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL, Director
DAVID PADGHAM, Research Associate
KRISTEN BATCH, Research Associate
DAVID DRAKE, Senior Project Assistant
JANET D. BRISCOE, Administrative OfficerThe Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARDDAVID D. CLARK, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Chair
ERIC BENHAMOU, 3Com Corporation
DAVID BORTH, Motorola Labs
JOHN M. CIOFFI, Stanford University
ELAINE COHEN, University of Utah
W. BRUCE CROFT, University of Massachusetts, Amherst
THOMAS (TED) E. DARCIE, AT&T LabsÐResearchJOSEPH FARRELL, University of California, Berkeley
JOAN FEIGENBAUM, Yale University
HECTOR GARCIA-MOLINA, Stanford University
WENDY KELLOGG, IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center
BUTLER W. LAMPSON, Microsoft Corporation
DAVID LIDDLE, U.S. Venture Partners
TOM M. MITCHELL, Carnegie Mellon University
DAVID A. PATTERSON, University of California, Berkeley
HENRY (HANK) PERRITT, Chicago-Kent College of Law
DANIEL PIKE, Classic Communications
ERIC SCHMIDT, Google, Inc.
FRED SCHNEIDER, Cornell University
BURTON SMITH, Cray, Inc.
LEE SPROULL, New York University
WILLIAM STEAD, Vanderbilt University
JEANNETTE M. WING, Carnegie Mellon UniversityStaffMARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL, DirectorHERBERT S. LIN, Senior Scientist
ALAN S. INOUYE, Senior Program Officer
JON EISENBERG, Senior Program Officer
LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Program Officer
CYNTHIA PATTERSON, Program Officer
STEVEN WOO, Dissemination Officer
DAVID PADGHAM, Research Associate
KRISTEN BATCH, Research Associate
PHIL HILLIARD, Research Associate
JANET D. BRISCOE, Administrative Officer
MARGARET HUYNH, Senior Project Assistant
DAVID C. DRAKE, Senior Project AssistantThe Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viJANICE SABUDA, Senior Project AssistantJENNIFER BISHOP, Senior Project Assistant
BRANDYE WILLIAMS, Office AssistantThe Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiPreface
Although secondary to the human tragedy resulting from the Sep-tember 11, 2001, attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon,
telecommunications issues were significant that day both in terms of dam-
age (physical as well as functional) and of mounting response and recov-
ery efforts.  The Internet has come to be a major component of the nation
Õs(and the worldÕs) communications and information infrastructure.  People
rely on it for business, social, and personal activities of many kinds, and
government depends on it for communications and transactions with the
media and the public.  Thus there is interest in how the Internet per-

formed and was used on September 11.Unlike the situation with longer-standing telecommunications ser-vices (notably the public telephone network), there are few regulations,
policies, or practices related to the InternetÕs functioning in emergencysituations.  Nor are there many publicly available data to help policy

makers or the industry itself assess the InternetÕs performanceÑeither ona continuing basis or in the aftermath of a crisis.  No regular system exists

for reporting failures and outages, nor is there agreement on metrics of
performance.1  Some experiences are shared informally among network
1A pilot effort was made by the Federal Communications Commission to collect outageinformation under the auspices of the Network Reliability and Interoperability Council, butthis was limited to a voluntary trial, recently ended in 2002.  Interest in mounting a new
voluntary effort continues in some quarters.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiiPREFACEoperators or in forums such as the North American Network OperatorsGroup (NANOG), but that information is not readily accessible for na-
tional planning or research purposes.  The decentralized architecture of

the InternetÑalthough widely characterized as one of the InternetÕsstrengthsÑfurther confounds the difficulty of collecting comprehensivedata about how the Internet is performing.It is therefore unsurprising that no definitive analyses exist on theimpact of September 11 on the Internet, though a few conflicting anec-
dotal reports about its performance that dayÑsuch as several presenta-tions at NANOG indicating relatively little effect2 and press accounts
suggesting that the impact was severe3Ñhave appeared.Responding to an initial request in early 2002 from the Association forComputing MachineryÕs Special Interest Group in Data Communication(ACM SIGCOMM), the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
(CSTB) established the Committee on the Internet Under Crisis Condi-
tions:  Learning from the Impact of September 11.  The committee
Õs chargewas twofold: to organize an exploratory workshop for gathering data and
accounts of experiences pertinent to the impact of September 11 on the
Internet, and to prepare a report that summarizes the InternetÕs perfor-mance that day and offers conclusions on better preparing for and re-
sponding to future emergencies.A diverse group of industry representatives and researchers partici-pated in the workshop (see Appendix A).  They were invited to share

information candidly, with the understanding that the organizing com-
mittee would take care not to publish sensitive or proprietary informa-
tion.  Consequently, although the committee has strived to present as

much detail as possible, specific figures or names of organizations have
been omitted in some instances.  Following the workshop, the study com-

mittee decided to supplement what was obtained there, so additional
information in several areas was gathered from a number of sources.2North American Network Operators Group 23rd Meeting, October 21-23, 2001, Oak-land, Calif.  Presentations available online at <http://www.nanog.org/mtg-0110/

agenda.html>.3According to an article in ComputerWorld: ÒExtent of cyberinfrastructure devastation onSept. 11 unprecedented, officials say.  For several tense hours on Sept. 11, the nation was

deaf, dumb and blind due to the Ôabsolutely massiveÕ loss of communications infrastructure
resulting from the collapse of the World Trade Center, a senior government official said lastweek.Ó  The article goes on to focus on consequences of damage to a Verizon central office
but implies much wider impact.  Dan Verton.  2002.  ÒDigital Destruction Was Worst Imag-inable,Ó ComputerWorld, March 4.  Available online at <http://www.computerworld.com/
managementtopics/management/recovery/story/0,10801,68762,00.html>.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ixPREFACEThe overall human and economic costs of the September 11 attacksÑwhich dwarf in significance the attacksÕ effects on the Internet
Ñhavebeen widely covered and are not examined here.  Instead, this report

focuses on three issues related to the Internet: (1) the local, national, and
global consequences of the destruction that occurred in New York City;
(2) the impact of the crisis, including the actions of users as well as the
effects of the physical damage; and (3) how people made use of the
Internet in a time of crisis.The project was smallÑreflecting its relatively narrow focus and theobjective of producing a report quicklyÑand had limited resources.  These
considerations, combined with the relative paucity of data, mean that the
committeeÕs assessment was not comprehensive.  Instead, the committee
examined several sources of data that revealed the overall status of the
Internet on September 11 as well as shortly thereafter, and it drew on the
detailed experiences of several Internet service providers.  This was suffi-

cient to derive a rough sense of that dayÕs impact on the Internet infra-structure nationwideÑand worldwide.The committee and the CSTB acknowledge the financial support pro-vided for this project by ACM SIGCOMM, the IBM Corporation, and the
Vadasz Family Foundation.  Their support enabled but did not influence

the outcome of the committeeÕs work.The committee also wishes to thank the workshop participants fortheir thoughtful contributions and for their comments on a draft of this
report.  Responsibility for the report, however, remains with the authoring

committee.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiAcknowledgment of ReviewersThis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen fortheir diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with pro-
cedures approved by the National Research CouncilÕs Report ReviewCommittee.  The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid

and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its pub-
lished report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets
institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to
the study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript remain
confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. We wish
to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:Geoffrey Baehr, U.S. Venture Partners,Steven Bellovin, AT&T LabsÑResearch,Scott Bradner, Harvard University,
Geraldine MacDonald, America Online, Inc.,
Udi Manber, Yahoo! Inc., and
Andrew Odlyzko, University of Minnesota.Although the reviewers listed above provided many constructivecomments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclu-
sions or recommendations, nor did they see the final draft of the report
before its release.  The review of this report was overseen by Robert R.

Everett, Honorary Trustee of the MITRE Corporation.  Appointed by the

National Research Council, he was responsible for making certain that anThe Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERSindependent examination of this report was carried out in accordancewith institutional procedures and that all review comments were care-
fully considered.  Responsibility for the final content of this report rests

entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiiContentsSUMMARY AND FINDINGS 1
1  INTRODUCTION11
A Brief Overview of the Internet, 11
What Would It Mean for the Internet to Fail?, 13
A Brief Overview of Events on September 11, 2001, 142  THE NETWORK EXPERIENCE21
Overview of Damage and Impairment, 22
Collapse of North and South Towers, 23Building 7 Collapse and Damage to Verizon Central Office, 23
Electrical Power at Co-location Sites in Lower Manhattan, 24Internet-wide (Global) Phenomena, 25Routing and Reachability, 25
Traffic Load Across the Internet, 29
Domain Name System, 31Specific Nonlocal Effects, 31Difficulties Accessing POPs, 32
Disruption of the DNS in South Africa, 32
Interdependency in Hospital Wireless Networks, 33Restoration Efforts, 33ISP Cooperation, 34
Improvising to Restore Connectivity, 35The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xivCONTENTSThe Experiences of Other Communications Networks:Telephone, Wireless Voice and Data, and Broadcasting, 36Telephone, 36
Cellular Telephones, 37
Broadcast Television and Radio, 383  THE USER EXPERIENCE40
Impact on Business in the Immediate Area, 40
People on the Net, 41The Internet as a Source of News, 42
The Internet as a Means of Communicating BetweenIndividuals, 44The Internet and Community, 47
Overall Use of the Internet, 484  PERSPECTIVES ON THE INTERNET EXPERIENCE OF
SEPTEMBER 1149

Other Outages: Operator Errors and Infrastructure Faults, 49Operator Error, 50
Infrastructure Faults, 51Attacks on, or with, the Internet, 53Baseline: Effects of Damage on September 11, 53
If the Internet Were the Target, Would There BeGreater Impact?, 54Possible Effects of a Deliberate Electronic Attack with theAid of, or Against, the Internet, 575  MEASURING THE INTERNET61
Network Measurement Methods and Tools, 62Active Measurement Tools, 63
Passive Measurement Tools, 64Measurement Challenges, 67Proprietary Data, 67
Consistency in Data and Analysis, 67
Representativeness, 67The Future: Targeted Assessment During a Crisis, 68Global Network Monitoring, 68
Targeted Measurement During a Crisis, 69APPENDIXES
APARTICIPANTS IN MARCH 5-6, 2002, WORKSHOP73
BCOMMITTEE MEMBER AND STAFF BIOGRAPHIES74
The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Summary and FindingsOVERVIEWThe events of September 11, 2001, in addition to their other conse-quences, caused localized physical damage to the Internet in one of the
networkÕs most important hubs, New York City.  Communications infra-

structure located in the World Trade Center itself and nearby at the
Verizon central office at 140 West Street, along with fiber-optic cables that
ran under the Trade Center complex, was destroyed.  Electrical power in

Lower Manhattan was disrupted, and local telecommunications facilities
there suffered a variety of problems with their backup power systems.Serious effects on communications networks, however, were confinedto New York City and a few other regions highly dependent on it for their
connectivity.  In some cases, automatic rerouting at the physical or net-

work levels allowed Internet traffic to bypass many of the infrastructureÕs
failed parts.  Most local Internet-connectivity problems that could not be

resolved by automatic rerouting were fixed within hours or days through
the rapid deployment of new equipment or reconfiguration of the system.Although users outside New York City were also affected by theevents of September 11, most of the difficulties experienced were not due
to serious problems in the Internet infrastructure itself but rather to dis-
ruptions stemming from subtle interdependencies between systemsÑit
turned out that some services depended indirectly on connections made
in New York City.Even though their network connectivity had not been impaired, manyThe Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONSusers had difficulty reading some popular news Web sites.  Unprec-
edented levels of user demand immediately following the attack severely
stressed the server computers for these sites.  Web service providers

quickly took a number of stepsÑsuch as reducing the complexity of Webpages, using alternative mechanisms for distributing content, and reallo-
cating computing resourcesÑto respond successfully to demand.Despite these problems, the Internet, taken as a whole, was not sig-nificantly affected.  For example, it did not suffer the kinds of overloads

that are often associated with the telephone system in a time of crisis.  The

resilience of the network during the September 11 crisis was a credit to the
ingenuity and perseverance of the people who worked to restore commu-
nication service near the attack sites; and fundamentally, it was testimony
to the InternetÕs inherently flexible and robust design.However, the InternetÕs performance on September 11 does not nec-essarily indicate how it might respond to being directly targeted.  Fur-

thermore, it is clear that the experience of individual Internet service
providers (ISPs) and corporate networks on September 11 does not gener-
alize:  damage suffered, and ability to respond, varied widely from place

to place.  In particular, the modest effect on Internet communications

overall does not indicate how well an individual ISP (and its customers)
would fare in an attack targeted specifically to that ISP.   Representatives

of several ISPs told the committee that what made September 11 a rela-
tively untroubled (albeit unnerving) day for them was simply the fact that
their facilities were not concentrated at 140 West Street.  But the experi-

ence did establish the InternetÕs overall resilience in the face of significantinfrastructural damage.FINDINGSThe workshop organized by the Committee on the Internet UnderCrisis Conditions: Learning from the Impact of September 11 yielded a
number of insights about what happened and did not happen to the
Internet as a result of the attacks of September 11, 2001.  It also provided

a number of lessons learned that could reduce the impact of future crises,
and it pointed to some ways in which the Internet itself could play a
greater role in crisis response.Finding 1.  The events of September 11 had little effect on Internet
services as a whole.  The network displayed considerable flexibility

that underscored its adaptability in the face of infrastructure dam-
age and the demands imposed by a crisis.In much of the data that the committee examined, an observer wouldbe hard-pressed to find any unusual impact from the events of SeptemberThe Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3SUMMARY AND FINDINGS11 outside the immediately affected areas.  Connectivity indeed dropped
on the morning of September 11 at some locations in the Internet, and it
dropped as well during several subsequent intervals when electrical-
power disruptions affected telecommunications facilities in Lower Man-
hattan.  But connectivity recovered quickly, and the magnitude of its loss
was actually less than has been seen in other incidents affecting the
Internet.  For some users, however, the events of September 11 signifi-

cantly affected their Internet experience, disrupting their connectivity
altogether or limiting their ability to obtain information from certain news

sites.Measures of overall Internet traffic suggest that traffic volumes weresomewhat lower on September 11 than on a typical business day, with
many who normally would have been using the Internet turning to televi-
sion for news and to phone calls for reaching loved ones.   Traffic did

increase in two areasÑthe quest for news and the use of Internet commu-nications as a substitute for telephone calls.  News Web sites, straining

under unprecedented levels of demand, took a number of steps to en-
hance their ability to handle the traffic (Box 3.1 in Chapter 3 describes
CNNÕs experience in particular and the strategies it employed).  Low-
bandwidth e-mail and instant messaging were used as substitutes for
telephone service, especially where conventional-telephone and cellular
network congestion was high.Overall, the Internet experience on September 11 was in no way com-parable to the trials of some other communications media, such as the
cellular phone services in greater New York, which suffered from local
infrastructure damage and regional congestion.  In part, this difference

reflects the InternetÕs unique design (described in Box 4.1 in Chapter 4).A number of examples of how the Internet was used in the hours anddays immediately following the September 11 attacks highlight the flex-
ibility afforded by that design.  NYSERNet, a nonprofit networking con-

sortium, was able to reroute connectivity to bypass physical damage in
Lower Manhattan.  It proved relatively easy to reconnect the New York

Academy of Medicine to the Internet by means of a jury-rigged wireless
link.  When telephone service was impaired (through local damage to

telephone circuits and disruption of some toll-free systems), some net-
work operators were able to use instant messaging and voice-over-
Internet Protocol (IP) to coordinate activities.  CNN and other informa-

tion providers adapted their content and modified the ways in which they
delivered Web data to accommodate the extraordinary demand for news.
A wireless instant-messaging service saw increased use on September 11
and in the following days.  Various groups rapidly set up Web sites for

exchanging information on the disaster and the possible whereabouts of
missing people.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONSAn important point about these responses is that they required nocentral coordination.  Individuals and groups were able to spontaneously

craft solutions to their problems and to deploy them quickly.Finding 2.  While the committee is confident in its assessment that
the events of September 11 had little effect on the Internet as a
whole (Finding 1), the precision with which analysts can measure
the impact of such events is limited by a lack of relevant data.The data available to the committee to gauge the impact of September11 included active measurements of packet delay and loss over a small
fraction of the InternetÕs paths, selected passive monitoring of applica-tion-level behavior and global-routing activity, and data from a survey of
Internet users.  In some cases, this information was sufficient for drawing

qualitative conclusions.  But the committee
Õs examination also revealedthe paucity of Internet data available to the research community.  Avail-

able data are limited for reasons that include the following:¥Factors intrinsic to the InternetÕs design.  One cannot, for example,determine how many individual users are actually affected by the loss of
routes to a particular set of addresses.  It is also hard to know if users who

have lost connectivity through one route have reestablished connectivity
through another oneÑnew connections might have been made at a higherlevel of aggregation, in which case data showing fewer routes available
would not mean worse connectivity.¥Modest size of the measurement universe.  The measurements of
Internet activity that are made on a regular basis are rather limited.  For

example, connectivity is monitored to some extent by examining routing
tables, but only from particular vantage points.  Routes themselves are

periodically traced to probe connectivity, but only with coarse time granu-
larity.  Data collected on traffic volumes (workload) are often considered

proprietary, and much of the  measurement of Internet activities is con-

ducted by small research groups with modest resources.  Moreover, the

available analysis and modeling tools for probing Internet behavior could
be much improved.¥Tendency to simply discard data.  Even when information is collected,it is often retained only for a short time.  In a number of cases, requests for

workload data and other detailed logs of Internet activity during Septem-
ber 11 showed that the data had already been discarded by the time of thecommitteeÕs March 2002 workshop.¥Nonavailability of good measures of the overall state of the Internet.  One
of the consequences of the fragmented and often proprietary measure-
ment infrastructure is that data are gathered piecemeal in diverse ways
and stored in various formats; there is no commonly accepted way ofThe Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5SUMMARY AND FINDINGSstandardizing what information is collected and integrating the data toenable characterization of the InternetÕs overall health.  Therefore, ready
comparison of September 11 to a ÒtypicalÓ day was not possible.  The
information available to the committee generally permitted only rough
comparisons in the context of a particular set of data (e.g., data on the
reachability of a particular set of Internet addresses suggest that the ef-
fects of September 11 were similar to those of a severed fiber-optic cable).
One exception was that some conclusions could be drawn about the
Internet as a whole when specific measurements could be correlated with
data from surveys of Internet users (which are designed to be representa-
tive of all U.S. users).The inability to measure in detail the effects of September 11 on theInternet does not by itself provide a clear mandate for building a new
and widespread Internet measurement system, which would be both
complex and costly.  Gathering data across all Internet providers would

probably require new regulations to compel their cooperation.   There is,

however, a relatively easy way to help improve understanding of the
InternetÕs behavior during crises or other anomalous events: simply hold-ing on to the relevant data.  One lesson from September 11 with regard to

Internet measurement is that important data from such circumstances
are typically discarded soon after the fact.  It may be useful to find ways
to alert network managers to the importance of archiving data collected
during significant events so that more detailed analysis can be performed
later on.Finding 3.  The events of September 11 did have a major effect on
the services offered by some information and service providers.Although the Internet as a whole was largely unaffected by the eventsof September 11, those services and service providers that were affected
were often hit hard.  The surge in demand for news overwhelmed the

Web-server capacity of at least two major news services, for example, and
nearby infrastructure serving the New York Stock Exchange and its mem-
ber firms was heavily damaged.Also, while many of the effects of September 11 were highly localized(like the attacks themselves), some parties far from the physical disaster
sites were affectedÑISPs in parts of Europe lost connectivity because theyinterconnected with the rest of the Internet in New York City, and South
Africa experienced disruptions associated with the Domain Name System
(DNS).Finding 4.  PeopleÕs use of Internet services on and immediately
following September 11 differed from what has been typical.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONSPeople used the Internet very differently in the aftermath of the Sep-tember 11 attacks.  For example, they sent less e-mail overall (although

some substituted e-mail for phoning where the telephone networks were
congested), and they used news sites more heavily.  They made greater

use of instant messaging.  The overall picture that emerges is that indi-

viduals used the Internet to supplement the information received from
television (which was the preferred source of news).  Those unable to

view television often substituted Internet news.  The telephone, mean-

while, remained the preferred means of communicating with friends and
loved ones, but chat rooms and e-mail were also used, especially where
the telephone infrastructure was damaged or overloaded.The levels of other activities on the Internet, such as e-commerce,declined.  One consequence of this decrease was that in spite of larger

numbers of person-to-person communications, total load on the Internet
decreased rather than increased, so that the network was not at risk of
congestion.Finding 5.  September 11 demonstrated the Internet
Õs overall resil-ience to physical attacks.  But it also revealed that in parts of the

system, redundancy appears to have been inadequate.The attacks of September 11 were not directed at the Internet.  None-
theless, because New York City is a major worldwide data-communica-
tions hub and a number of key communications links and facilities were
concentrated in a handful of sites near the World Trade Center complex,
the attack caused significant damage to Internet elements.  On the basis of

its analyses of the effects of the attack, of steps taken to restore connectiv-
ity, and of various Òwhat ifÓ scenarios, the committee concludes that the
richness of the InternetÕs interconnectivity provides effective protectionagainst a localized physical attack.  Although the committee heard from

workshop participants that a carefully designed, distributed attack against
a number of physical locations, especially if carried out in a repeating
pattern, could be highly disruptive, it concluded that an attack at a single
point or a small number of points is probably survivable.Regarding the infrastructural damage that occurred on September 11,the level of Internet redundancy was adequate outside the immediately
affected area.  However, parts of the Internet were not as redundant as

one might suppose.  Links that were logically distinct turned out to run

over the same fiber spans or to be connected to major systems through the
same trenches or buildings.  Co-location of capacity and equipment cuts

expenses, but it obviously increases vulnerability to common outages.
Improving the robustness of the communications infrastructure may re-
quire conscious trade-offs between reliability and cost.  Finally, certain

providers and certain regions of the world are heavily dependent on aThe Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.7SUMMARY AND FINDINGSfew key connection points; diversifying those points would significantlyimprove robustness.The connectivity problems outside New York City illustrate that end-to-end communication on the Internet depends on the functioning of sev-
eral different (often geographically separate) systems such as local phone
lines, modem banks, authentication servers, and DNS servers.  In addi-

tion, some wireless applications (handheld devices at hospitals, for ex-
ample) depend on Internet access to reach application services located in
the same building.  A hospital in New York City learned on September 11

that wireless personal digital assistants (PDAs), on which doctors rely to
access medical information, were connected through an external ISP net-
work.  Thus when the hospital
Õs sole link to the Internet was briefly bro-ken by the collapse of the Twin Towers, doctors had trouble accessing
hospital records.  ISPs and users alike should be aware of these potential

vulnerabilities and take appropriate steps to improve redundancy where
connectivity is mission-critical.Finding 6.  The Internet experience on September 11
 exposed a num-
ber of subtle operational issues that merit attention from users and
operators.Most disasters impart useful lessons on what might be done better inthe future.  The September 11
 experiences of ISPs and users were noexception:¥Internet operations depend on the public telephone network.   One spe-
cific vulnerability is the use of toll-free telephone numbers for communi-
cating between different ISP operation centers.  This practice makes

Internet operations vulnerable to outages in the toll-free system (which
involves an extra database lookup as compared with direct-dialing of a
toll call).  And the toll-free system indeed had a partial failure on Septem-

ber 11 as a result of call volume, complicating ISP coordination.  More

generally, although the public telephone network and the Internet are for
the most part logically distinct, they are closely tied physically because
both depend on the same fiber-optic infrastructure.  This shared vulner-

ability suggests that in the future the two networks be analyzed together;
for example, to what degree are they dependent on the same physical
facilities and to what degree can they actually substitute for one another?¥Telecommunications-facility disaster planning should factor in supportfor operational personnel, and ensuring a capability for remote operation should
be considered wherever possible.  One ISP reported difficulty in feeding its
operations staff, as all the businesses around its center in Northern Vir-
ginia had closed.  There was some difficulty getting diesel fuel delivered

to backup power generators serving telecommunications facilities inThe Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONSLower Manhattan.  Key data centers were sometimes inaccessible as a
result of areawide closures, even though they themselves had not suf-
fered damage.  Operators that could manage their sites remotely, how-

ever, reported that this capability was valuable for keeping services run-
ning.¥Key businesses and services that must operate in a disaster should exam-ine their dependence on Internet connections and plan accordingly.  Several
examples of interdependencies arose in workshop discussions:  (1) a New

York City hospital relied on an external Internet link to connect wireless
PDAs, (2) the NYC.gov Web site was disconnected from the Internet by
the attack, and (3) major news sites had difficulty accommodating higher
demand.  Specific responses that may be appropriate for organizations

and Web sites likely to be used in an emergency include these: (1) provid-
ing redundant network connectivity (from more than one network pro-
vider and by way of more than one physical link or conduit), (2) perform-
ing an end-to-end audit of Internet dependencies, and (3) establishing
plans for dealing with greatly increased traffic loads.¥Network operators and telecommunications interconnection facility op-erators should review their emergency power procedures.  Power problems
caused transient disruptions to Internet connectivity as well as possible
damage to the equipment because of overheating (when cooling systems
failed).  Most network operators and ISPs had already established proce-

dures for dealing with power failures, and in New York City these proce-
dures generally worked as planned.  But not enough attention appears to

have been paid to the possibility that some backup systems could fail.  For

example, a number of disruptions to the Internet occurred 8 to 12 hours
after the power was shut off in Lower Manhattan because backup batter-
ies and generators failed.  Reports also suggest that ISPs, unlike some

other utilities, were not granted access to the restricted zone in Lower
Manhattan, which further complicated their recovery efforts.  Specific

problems included these:ÑPoor operating procedure resulted in a facilityÕs backup generatorbeing shut off to conserve fuel, which in turn led to service interruptions
when grid electrical power was lost.ÑFuel delivery problems, including delivery of the wrong type offuel to one location, made it difficult to keep generators running.ÑCommunications equipment was allowed to continue operatingeven when electrical power necessary for cooling systems had been lost.ÑFiber termination circuits were not connected to generators andfailed when their 8-hour batteries failed.ÑBackup generators shut down when their air intake filters becameThe Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.9SUMMARY AND FINDINGSclogged with dust, a problem that could possibly have been averted ifmore rapid access for maintenance had been possible.Several prudent steps could be taken to reduce future disruptions.Operators should evaluate their vulnerabilities to multiday electrical out-
ages.  In particular, the evaluation should determine the primary and

backup power source for every major device (server, router, switch) and
independently powered link (e.g., Synchronous Optical Network
[SONET] or point-to-point fiber).  Operators should also identify how

each device will respond to a power outage (after both primary and
backup power fail) and how it will resume functioning when power is
restored.  Operators should develop contingency plans that allow them to

provide services for the maximum period of time (in particular, all key
devices should use the longest-lived backup power supplies available)
and restore most services remotely after an outage.  Operators should also

identify special needs (e.g., fuel for generators and the space in which to
place additional generators if they are needed) that may require the con-
sent of local authorities, and they should have plans for coordinating with
authorities in the event of an emergency.Finding 7.  The experience gained from the events of September 11
points to ways in which the Internet could be better leveraged in
future crises.It is reasonable to anticipateÑand thus to plan forÑincreased use ofthe Internet in future crises, and lessons learned from September 11 indi-
cate some of the issues that deserve attention.On the one hand, it is clear that in the immediate aftermath of adisaster, people will typically turn on television sets (to get news) and call
family and friends on the telephone (to convey news, report on their
status, or supplement television news with information of a more per-
sonal nature); they tend not to use the Internet.  The data from September

11 show that this pattern held on that day; even heavy Internet users went
first to the television and the telephone.On the other hand, it is also clear that if the television or telephonewas unavailable or failed to provide the information people needed, they
turned to the Internet even if they normally were not heavy Internet
users.  For instance, it appears that much of the surge in demand at online

news sites on the morning of September 11 came from people who did not
have access to television sets at their workplace.  People also appear to

have used the Internet to supplement information available from other
sources, as evidenced by marked shifts in topics searched on the Internet.
These behaviors suggest that disaster planning should include examina-The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONStion of how the Internet might be used to disseminate information in afuture crisis.The experiences of September 11 also indicate the value of efficientInternet or Internet-style data communication in a disaster.  These alter-

natives, such as text messaging and e-mail, make more efficient use of
limited communications capacity than do other services.  By midday on

September 11, the cellular-phone networks in Manhattan were severely
congested, yet there are reports that people who used their cell phones or
wireless-equipped PDAs to send instant messages were able to communi-
cate effectively.  E-mail and instant messages were also used as a substi-

tute for telephone calls.Although better communication over the Internet could simply havebeen the result of the relative overprovisioning of the Internet-related
communication infrastructure, there are several fundamental reasons
why, for example, using a PDA to send a short text message such as ÒIÕmOK and am walking homeÓ is far more efficient and more likely to suc-
ceed than making a cell-phone call when the network is congested.  First,
the Internet degrades under load more gracefully than does the voice
network.  If sufficient capacity is not available, the cell-phone network

will not permit new calls to be set up.  In contrast, the Internet makes use
of mechanisms that continue to accept new messages but reduce trans-
mission rates when the network is congested.  Also, by virtue of their

flexible design, Internet-style communications lend themselves to human
actions that reduce the loadÑwhether by substituting a brief text messagefor a data-intensive voice call or removing data-intensive graphics from a
Web page (as CNN did in the face of high loads).  A lesson here is that

organizations responsible for disaster planning should encourage aware-
ness of this more efficient way to communicate.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.111Introduction
A BRIEF OVERVIEW OF THE INTERNETThe Internet is a worldwide collection of networks, operated by some10,000 Internet service providers (ISPs),1 that accommodates a diversity
of applications such as e-mail, instant messaging, the World Wide Web,
and numerous other, more specialized functions.This system involves multinational telecommunications carriers, cable
companies, corporate networks, nonprofit-organization networks, gov-
ernment-agency networks, sole proprietorships, and even hobbyists.  Each

network consists of a set of optical-fiber, copper-circuit, or wireless com-
munications links that connect to Òend-hostsÓÑdesktop personal com-
puters (PCs) or servers that provide Web contentÑor to specialized com-
puters known as routers that control the paths taken by data packets.  The

interconnection of these networks is facilitated by a set of standardized
protocols that determine how data and routing information are ex-
changed.The networks of the Internet are not only interconnected but for themost part are richly interconnected.  Its architecture, which dynamically
adjusts the routes that packets follow in response to changes in the net-
work (such as failures of communications links), emphasizes redun-1Boardwatch Magazine (<http://www.boardwatch.com>) lists 9,400; CyberAtlas (<http:
//cyberatlas.internet.com/big_picture/geographics/article/0,,5911_151151,00.html>) putsthe worldwide figure at more than 11,400.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONSdancy.2  However, this redundancy has its limits; only a finite number ofpaths connect any given point to the rest of the system.  Also, geography

and economics mean that some locations have a high concentration of
Internet facilities while others only have few.New York City, a principal focus of this report, can be thought of as aÒsuperconnected node.Ó This is largely because the city has a great many
Internet users, private data networks, ISPs, and fiber-optic grids.3  For
example, more than 600 dial-up ISPs and over 300 digital subscriber line
(DSL) providers are listed in the ISP directory Boardwatch for the borough
of Manhattan alone.  Fiber-optic cables enter and exit Manhattan by way

of at least five different rights-of-way.  At least 74 U.S. and multinational

telecommunications carriers have equipment in New York, either in co-
location facilities or in private suites.  The city is served by more than 100

international Internet carriers, and it has direct links with 71 countries.4Connected to the Internet through the long-haul fiber networks ofseveral major carriers, New York City is also a major interconnection
point for these carriers.5  Interconnection is for the most part done at oneof several key Òcarrier hotelsÓÑbuildings in which carriers lease space inorder to link with other carriers located in the same building.  Internet

providers connect with each other through private connections at the
carrier hotels, either directly through Internet exchange points such as the
New York Internet Exchange (NYIX) or indirectly through transit provid-
ers.  Most transatlantic telecommunication cables landing along the New

Jersey/New York coastline are ÒbackhauledÓ to one of the Manhattan
2The redundancy and distributed character of the Internet clearly echo the design con-templated in Paul BaranÕs seminal studies of packet networks at RAND.  The series, to-
gether with brief commentary, is available online at <http://www.rand.org/publications/RM/baran.list.html>.3The Lower Manhattan Telecommunications UsersÕ Working Group (LMTUWG.  Au-
gust 2002.  Building a 21st Century Telecom Infrastructure: Lower Manhattan Telecommunica-tions UsersÕ Working Group Findings and Recommendations) reports six physically distinctfiber networks in Lower Manhattan (AT&T, Con Edison Communications, MCI WorldCom,
Metromedia Fiber Network, Time Warner, and Verizon).  Information supplied to the com-mittee by Anthony Townsend indicates more than 40 providers of fiber in Manhattan, notall of which are physically distinct (because of sharing and resale by providers).4Telegeography, Inc. October 2001. Telegeography 2002: Global Statistics and Commentary.Washington, D.C.  Executive summary available online at <http://www.telegeography.
com/ products/books/pg/pdf/pg2002_exe_sum.pdf>.5In addition to New York City, Washington, D.C., stands out on the East Coast of theUnited States as having a high concentration of Internet facilities.  Several Internet service
providers maintain network-control and data centers near Washington, D.C., and in North-
ern Virginia.  Thus, in most ISP networks, the New York City-to-Washington, D.C., corridor
contains the largest number of circuits.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.13INTRODUCTIONcarrier hotels to facilitate interconnection with other network operators.In some cases, the only route by which carriers can interconnect with the
transatlantic cables is at one of the New York City carrier hotels.Local Internet access may be provided through a number of differenttechnologies, including dial-up, integrated services digital network
(ISDN), DSL, T-1, cable modem, wireless, and SONET fiber.  Many of

these connections take place over the network of the local exchange car-
rier, Verizon, and the long-haul fiber networks connect to VerizonÕs cen-tral offices as well.  Several ISPs that have registered as competitive local

exchange carriers (CLECs) also have equipment in these central offices;
collocated equipment there connects their networks to Verizon facilities
that in turn connect the ISPs to their customers through DSL or ISDN.
Finally, dial-up customers use the Verizon local network to place phone
calls to modems operated by their ISPs.  Other high-speed local data

circuits are supplied by such companies as Time Warner Cable, Frontier,
Cablevision/Lightpath, Metromedia Fiber Network, Inc. (MFN), AT&T
Local Services, and WorldCom.WHAT WOULD IT MEAN FOR THE INTERNET TO FAIL?There are two principal types of failure that the Internet can incur:1.Parts of the network, such as interconnection points or communicationslinks, are damaged or destroyed, and consequently the Internet stops functioning
as expected.  There are two obvious manifestations of this kind of failure.
First, the Internet could be damaged enough that it is partitionedÑsplitinto separate networksÑso that a user might be able to reach some Websites or send e-mail to some places but unable to communicate with oth-
ers.  Second, the Internet could remain fully interconnected but the dam-

age might cause a reduction in capacity that impairs the networkÕs opera-tion in a material way.  That is, when some links are damaged and new

routes are constructed by the network to bypass the failed components,
the backup paths are often of lower bandwidth.  Thus there is less overall

capacity, and increased network congestion is a likely outcome.  A user

might, for example, experience significantly greater Web-page loading
times and be unable to view video clips.2.Changes in network use result in higher loads that cause parts of thenetwork to be overwhelmed by traffic.  For example, increased network use in
a particular geographical area could overload the aggregate capacity con-
necting that area to the rest of the Internet.  Or, increased demand on a

particular service, such as a Web site, might exceed the capacity of the
links to that service or the capacity of the computers providing it.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONSBoth types of failureÑwhether or not either of them occurred as aresult of the September 11 attacksÑare considered in this report.A BRIEF OVERVIEW OF EVENTS ON SEPTEMBER 11, 2001As the catastrophe at the World Trade Center unfolded, elements ofthe communications and power infrastructures were impaired, damaged,
or destroyed.  Box 1.1 provides a detailed outline of what transpired on

and immediately after September 11. Local effects, such as damage to
Verizon switching centers and last-mile facilities, had direct effects on
Lower ManhattanÑnotably, the loss of telephone lines and damage to thecellular-phone system.  At the same time, the infrastructural damage had
effects that extended beyond the immediate area.  Following is a sum-

mary of the key events and their effects on telecommunications, including
the Internet:¥8:45Ð10:00 A.M.  Towers are attacked and set afire.  Interior World
Trade Center (WTC) communication is disrupted.  Increased volume con-

gests local exchanges and wireless networks.  Limited physical damage

occurs to the surrounding local telephone networks.¥10:00Ð11:00 A.M.  Towers collapse.  Because the WTC was a signifi-
cant wireless repeater site, some wireless connectivity is disrupted (Sprint
PCS, Verizon, AT&T Wireless).  Several ISPs
Õ points of presence (POPs) in
the complexÑthose of WorldCom, AT&T Local Service, and Verizon/GenuityÑare destroyed.  Some data and private-line services to a diverse
set of customers in New York City, Connecticut, Massachusetts, and even
some European locations are disrupted.¥11:00 A.M.Ð5:00 P.M.  Local power failures occur and some equip-
ment is switched over to battery and/or generators.  Fires burn in the

WTC complex.¥5:20Ð5:40 P.M.  WTC Building 7 collapses, destroying a Consoli-
dated Edison electrical substation in the process.  The collapse also

breaches the 140 West Street Verizon central office building, causing dam-
age to equipment and the flooding of basement power systems.  The fires,

collapse, and flooding knock out much of the telecommunications service
in Lower Manhattan.Although there were other significant events on September 11, 2001,this report mainly examines those in New York City.  The crash of United

Airlines Flight 93 in Somerset County, Pennsylvania, and that of Ameri-
can Airlines Flight 77 into the Pentagon did not appear to have any addi-
tional impact on the public InternetÕs infrastructureÑthough they weredefinitely a factor in shaping how people made use of the network.  The
The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.15INTRODUCTIONBOX 1.1Detailed Time Line of the Events of September 11, 2001, and theDays Immediately FollowingDate and TimeEventInternet Effect
9/11/20017:59Ð8:42 A.M.American Airlines Flight 11,
United Airlines Flight 175,
United Airlines Flight 93, andAmerican Airlines Flight 77 take off.8:40 A.M.Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA) notifies North American
Aerospace Defense Command(NORAD) American Flight 11hijacked.8:43 A.M.FAA notifies NORAD American
Flight 175 hijacked.8:46 A.M.American Airlines Flight 11
crashes into North Tower(WTC 1) of World Trade Center.8:46 A.M.Fighter Scramble Order: two
F-15s dispatched from Otis AirNational Guard Base inFalmouth, Mass.  (airborne 8:52 
A.M.).
8:52 A.M.Port Authority Trans-Hudson
(PATH) train service ordered stopped.9:02 A.M.United Flight 175 crashes intoBBC, CNN, MSNBC,
South Tower (WTC 2).New York Times, Yahoo
news, and other news
Web sites becomeextremely unresponsive.Smaller local and
regional news sites suchas sfgate.com andnando.net still
responsive.9:12 A.M.ÒRescueÓ PATH train departs
WTC station.9:17 A.M.FAA shuts down all New York
City airports.9:21 A.M.All bridges and tunnels in New
York City closed.continuesThe Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONS9:24 A.M.FAA notifies NORAD American
Flight 77 hijacked; line kept open;United Flight 93 reported hijacked
during same call.9:24 A.M.Fighter Scramble Order: two F-16s
dispatched from Langley Air ForceBase, Va.  (airborne 9:30 
A.M.).
9:32 A.M.New York Stock Exchange closed.
9:37 A.M.American Flight 77 crashes into
Pentagon.9:39 A.M.All New York City VHF
stations, except CBS 2,off the air.  Many radio

stations also off the air.9:40 A.M.FAA orders nationwide air
traffic halt.9:45 A.M.Passenger on United Flight 93
makes cell-phone call.10:03 A.M.United Airlines Flight 93 crashes
in Somerset County, Pa.10:05 A.M.WTC 2 (South Tower) collapses.Verizon (South Tower),
Genuity POPs in WorldTrade Center destroyed,
AT&T Local Services POPin sub-basementoperating on battery
power.10:10 A.M.Portion of Pentagon collapses.
10:28 A.M.WTC 1 (North Tower) collapses.
10:31 A.M.Transatlantic circuit
reported down afterNorth Tower collapse.10:32 A.M.ISP operators report traffic
volume  decreasing
slightly on networks.11:02 A.M.All New York City bridges opened
for outbound traffic only.BOX 1.1Continued
Date and TimeEventInternet Effect
The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.17INTRODUCTION11:12 A.M.Hundreds of DS-3 circuits
reported down in NewYork City.11:39 A.M.CNN.com back up with
very low  graphics.
1:02 P.M.New York City Mayor Giuliani
orders evacuation of Manhattansouth of Canal Street.1:16 P.M.WorldCom SS7 long-
distance switchexperiences problems.2:26 P.M.AT&T reports its long-
distance network is
intact, but someequipment was damagedin its local New York
service.3:48 P.M.CNN.com employs
Akamai content servernetwork to increase
capacity.3:48 P.M.Covad reports service
affected by fire in/near140 West Street central
office.4:35 P.M.Commercial power fails because of25 Broadway, 32 Old
fire at World Trade Center BuildingSlip, 140 West Street on
7 (built over Consolidated Edisongenerator power.

substation); Con Edison reportsarea bordered by Dover Street onthe north, the East River to the east,
William Street to the west, andWall Street to the south withoutcommercial power.5:20 P.M.World Trade Center Building 7Verizon
Õs 140 West Streetcollapses.central office walls
breached by falling steelbeams.BOX 1.1Continued
Date and TimeEventInternet Effect
continuesThe Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONS7:17 P.M.U.S. Attorney General Ashcroft
announces FBI has set up Website for tips about the attacks:
<www.ifccfbi.gov>.7:33 P.M.Verizon announces payphones in
Lower Manhattan free for local calls.8:30 P.M.President Bush addresses the nation.
9:54 P.M.Federal Emergency Management
Agency notifies primary Emergency
Alert System stations by e-mail toÒmake any and all preparationsÓif primary communication methods
fail (estimated time).10:07 P.M.ISP dial-access
equipment overheating in32 Old Slip.  Reduction

in inbound calls fromNew York City area.10:26 P.M.Generator stopped at 32
Old Slip; some carriers
on battery.10:36 P.M.Verizon circuits at 60
Hudson Street reporteddown.11:21 P.M.NYC.gov (161.185.0.0/
16) offline.9/12/2001
1:09 A.M.Generator started at 32
Old Slip; Verizon circuitsstill down.2:30 A.M.Sprint reports that power
fluctuations at a NewYork City switchingfacility disrupted Sprint
voice, data, and wirelessin southern Connecticut.9:00 P.M.Incorrect report of structural
problems at 60 Hudson Street.BOX 1.1Continued
Date and TimeEventInternet Effect
The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.19INTRODUCTION10:22 P.M.NYC.gov restored online.
Fuel truck allowed intoarea to refuel 25Broadway.9/13/20015:38 P.M.25 Broadway generator
failure; some equipment
on battery.SAIX (South AfricaInternet Exchange), NYIX
(New York InternetExchange), DANTE,Teleglobe, and many
other providers affected.9:28 P.M.25 Broadway generator
repaired.9:47 P.M.25 Broadway generator
fails (again).9/14/2001
11:59 A.M.Fiber cut south of
Washington, D.C.(MFN).8:26 P.M.32 Old Slip power fails.
8:55 P.M.32 Old Slip power
restored.11:10 P.M.25 Broadway restored on
Consolidated Edison-supplied generator.9/15/20011:28 P.M.25 Broadway generator
out of fuel; because ofmisjudged fuelconsumption and fuel-
truck travel time.8:03 P.M.25 Broadway generator
refueled.SOURCE:  Compiled from various news reports and reports obtained by the committee from
representatives of various Internet service providers.BOX 1.1Continued
Date and TimeEventInternet Effect
The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONSdestruction at the Pentagon certainly had some effect on military commu-nications, but those are not considered in this report.  However, as is

discussed in Chapter 2, indirect impacts on Internet operations in the
Washington, D.C., metropolitan area were felt as the normal course of
business was disrupted.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.212The Network ExperienceSeptember 11, 2001, started out more or less routinely on the Internet.Early Tuesday morning is a common time for Internet service providers
(ISPs) to schedule maintenance activities on their network, and on that
particular Tuesday there were some instances of delay or packet loss
between 2:00 A.M. and 5:00 
A.M., when Verizon updated software on East
Coast frame-relay switches and other ISPs made changes in their net-
works.  But by 6:00 
A.M. Eastern time, it appears that the Internet routingand traffic loads were normal for the start of a workday.That normalcy would be shattered for the Internet, as for so manyother operations, when American Airlines Flight 11 crashed into the
World Trade CenterÕs North Tower at 8:46 A.M.  Within minutes, major
online news sites were struggling to serve between 3 and 10 times their
normal load as Internet users sought details.  One news Web site esti-

mated that traffic to its Web servers was doubling every 7 minutes, begin-
ning around 8:50 A.M., until about 9:30 
A.M.By just after 9 A.M., when United Airlines Flight 175 crashed into the
World Trade CenterÕs South Tower, the Web sites of CNN, MSNBC, the
New York Times, Yahoo! News, and others were observed to be slowing
significantly.  The cause would later be reported to have been the loads on

these sitesÕ servers, not connectivity problems in reaching servers across
the Internet.  Then the South Tower collapsed, damaging equipment and

circuits in the Trade Center complex.  The subsequent collapse of the

North Tower, the collapse of World Trade Center Building 7 (a 47-story
structure), damage to the neighboring Verizon central office, and powerThe Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONScuts in Lower Manhattan all had disruptive effects on the Internet andother communications systems.How did the InternetÕs communications infrastructure in particularexperience all these events?  How much did the events in New York City,

and in Washington, D.C., affect the movement of data throughout the
Internet?  How were ISPs affected by the events of September 11?  How

serious were the impacts?  What actions did ISPs (and others) take in

response?This chapter sets out to answer those questions, as best they can beanswered with the available information. Data pertaining to the Internet
operations that day were of two types: quantitative data on the system as
a whole and on the response of particular networks, and anecdotal re-
ports from network operators, users, and news media that help provide
context and possible explanations for the changes on the Internet, both at
the macro and micro levels, that were deemed necessary after the attacks.How comprehensive and authoritative is this information?  Some of
itÑfor example, data on changes in the Internet
Õs routing configurationsÑpermit the overall impact on the Internet to be measured.  Reports on

specific incidents, on the other hand, do not allow generalizations about
the whole system, though they do provide insights into the kinds of local
problems that could arise in the future and the responses that may miti-
gate them.  Still, the participation in this study of several national ISPs

and one New York regional ISP, together with the anecdotal information
obtained though informal information-sharing relationships within the
Internet operator community, permit at least a reasonable sampling of the
overall experience.  In addition, user surveys taken by the Pew Internet

and American Life project allowed the committee to relate reported user
behavior to some ISP measurements.1  However, in a number of instances,
data that would inform the committeeÕs understanding of what transpiredon and shortly after September 11 were lacking (a detailed discussion of
Internet-measurement issues is presented in Chapter 5).OVERVIEW OF DAMAGE AND IMPAIRMENTThe terrorist attacks in New York City caused an immediate disrup-tion in communications within the World Trade Center complex. Soon
thereafter, the collapse of the Twin Towers damaged and destroyed equip-
ment of several wireless providers and some data circuits serving the1Lee Raime and Bente Kalsnes. 2001. The Commons of the Tragedy: How the Internet WasUsed by Millions After the Terror Attacks to Grieve, Console, Share News, and Debate the CountryÕsResponse.  Pew Internet & American Life Project, Washington, D.C., October 10. Available
online at <http://www.pewinternet.org/reports/toc.asp?Report=46>.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.23THE NETWORK EXPERIENCENew York City area, the northeastern United States, and Europe.  During
the rest of the day on September 11, local power failures caused tempo-
rary equipment outages.These events had several types of effects on ISPs and Internet users,including the following:¥Loss of Internet connectivity in the vicinity of the attacks. The effects in
New York City were extensive as a result of the catastrophic damage at
the World Trade Center site, the large number of nearby institutions, and
the important role that New York City plays in the Internet infrastructure.
Two main factors contributed to the loss of Internet connectivityÑthepermanent destruction of networking equipment at the site and the loss
of power and cooling in adjacent areas for varying lengths of time. (By
contrast, the attack in Washington, D.C., did not appear to have a direct
influence on network connectivity for institutions outside the Pentagon.)¥Connectivity loss at Òout of townÓ locations in the United States and in
other parts of the world.  Several ISPs elsewhere in the United States and
overseas experienced connectivity problems resulting from the loss of
fiber-optic lines that ran through Manhattan and the temporary disrup-
tion of access to Manhattan-based services.  (The experience of these net-

works and providers offers insights into how to plan for future incidents.)¥Surges in demand for some Internet services.  As word of the attacks
began to spread, Internet users turned to a variety of news sites for more

information.  The greatly increased load on these sites made it difficult for

all requests to be met.COLLAPSE OF NORTH AND SOUTH TOWERSInternet facilities were destroyed when the World Trade CenterÕsTwin Towers collapsed.  Several ISPs, including AT&T Local Systems,

Genuity, Verizon, and WorldCom, had points of presence (POPs)Ñfacili-ties at which customers are connected to an ISPÕs networkÑlocated in theTrade Center complex.  Also, a number of fiber-optic cables ran through

the complex in conduits, and circuits of one major telecommunications
carrier ran through the Port Authority Trans-Hudson (PATH) sub-site
rail tubes that link Manhattan and New Jersey.  MFN alone reported the

loss of more than 1,300 optical fibers as a result of the towersÕ collapse.
Building 7 Collapse and Damage to Verizon Central OfficeAt approximately 3:45 P.M., ISPs received reports of a fire in or near
the Verizon central office at 140 West Street.  From a local perspective, the

biggest effects probably came from the collapse of Building 7 of the TradeThe Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONSCenter complex at about 5:20 P.M.; this collapse caused extensive damage
in VerizonÕs central office, across the street at 140 West Street, crushingthe walls and cable vaults and causing the office to begin to flood. The
result was disrupted service over the course of the evening.  Some 14,000
business and 20,000 residential customers lost telephone service (approxi-
mately 300,000 voice circuits).  Data communications, with a total capac-

ity equivalent to 3.6 million 56 kilobit-per-second (kbps) circuits (or 90 OC
48 SONET links), were also disrupted.  Ultimately, all customers directly

connected to equipment located at West Street lost Internet service.  Sev-

eral competitive local exchange carriers (CLECs) and ISPs also had equip-
ment in the West Street building, and service in their networks was af-
fected as well.Damage to 140 West Street also caused further damage to fiber linksalready compromised by the collapse of the Twin Towers.  In some cases

the fiber-optic infrastructure had self-healed by routing around the dam-
age done by the TowersÕ collapse; the SONET fiber-optic rings commonly
used for metropolitan-area networks can be configured to automatically
recover in the event of a single cut in the ring. But the infrastructure was
not designed to heal from a second break in the fiber.As a result of these events, Internet connectivity to several universi-ties, medical colleges, and hospitals, and to the city governmentÕs officialWeb site, was interrupted.  ISPs took a number of steps to restore connec-

tivity, as described below.Electrical Power at Co-location Sites in Lower ManhattanIn addition to the direct effects from the collapse of the Twin Towersand Building 7, there were indirect effects of the attacks, especially re-
garding electrical power.  These disruptions had consequences for other

critical telecommunications facilities, even those located outside the area
of the attacksÕ direct physical impacts.
To be sure, telecommunications facilities operators make provisionsfor power failures.  ISP co-location facilities and telephone central offices

contain backup batteries and generators.  The exact battery time and fuel

capacity of individual offices is not public information, but they generally
are provisioned for between 8 and 72 hours of backup in case of commer-
cial electric-utility failure. Most facilities routinely test their backup systems to ensure that
they work.  However, it is still not uncommon for a backup system to fail

to start up correctly when regular power fails.2  Still, by 4:35 
P.M., several
2Participants at the committeeÕs meeting in Washington, D.C., estimated that backupsystems fail to start correctly in about 1 out of 10 tests.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.25THE NETWORK EXPERIENCEInternet co-location facilities near the World Trade Center complex wereoperating on backup generators because commercial utility power had
failed or been turned off (by Consolidated Edison, the local electric utility).Luckily enough, the backup power systems at all the co-location andphone facilities in Lower Manhattan apparently turned on properly when
Consolidated Edison was forced to turn off power just before 10:00 P.M. onSeptember 11.  However, as the power outage extended over multiple

days (past the planned life of the backup power systems), maintaining
power became a serious issue as batteries expired and backup generators
ran out of fuel.Following the loss of the grid electricity supply, some fiber-optic links,which depend on electrically powered termination devices at each end for
sending and receiving pulses of light over the fiber, failed.  It is standard

practice to attach these devices to batteries, which provide several hours
of backup power.  However, several providers apparently failed to antici-

pate significantly longer power outages, such as providing additional
backup using electrical generators.  Consequently, in the early morning of

September 12, some minor perturbations in Internet connectivity occurred
in the New York City area when the backup batteries supplying optical
devices ran out of power themselves.Although power problems did not persist beyond the month of Sep-tember 2001, some longer-term effects may still remain.  In particular,

some networking equipment in the area around the World Trade Center
site may have sustained damage from overheating, caused by the loss of
power to cooling systems and excessive dust in the air conditioning.  One

concern from such incidents is that the affected equipment, though still
operating, could be less reliable in the future.INTERNET-WIDE (GLOBAL) PHENOMENARouting and ReachabilityChanges in routing information exchanged using the Border Gate-way Protocol (BGP) indicate changes to the Internet Protocol  (IP) routing

topology (see Chapter 5 for more details).  Route withdrawals (indicating

that a path to a group of Internet addresses is no longer available) and
advertisements (indicating how to reach a group of Internet addresses)
are routine events.  They occur, for example, as circuits go up and down

and when network operators make changes in their networks to adjust
traffic flows across different routes.The collapse of the South Tower was the first event to cause visibleeffects on global routing.  Figure 2.1 (prepared by Renesys Corporation,

using data collected by the RIPE [R”seaux IP Europ”ens] Network Coor-The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONS102,000104,000106,000108,00081416182022
Nimda1012WTC 2 down
25 Bway power out
25 Bway power back
Day in September 2001
Number of reachable prefixes
FIGURE 2.1  Number of reachable network prefixes as reported by several BGP
core routers from the United States, Europe, and Japan from September 8 to Sep-tember 22, 2001.  (All times GMT.)  Major events are marked on the plot.

SOURCE: Renesys Corporation analysis of RIPE RIS archives.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.27THE NETWORK EXPERIENCEdination Center from several sources) shows changes to the BGP routingtable.  Events are reflected in reachability measures as well: Matrix

NetSystems recorded a brief 8 percent decrease in the ability to reach
(ping) a select number of sites on the Internet in the minutes following the
collapse of the first tower (see Figure 2.2).3  A loss of this magnitude for
an extended period of time would generally be considered a serious prob-
lem, but its occurrence for a brief period of minutes is less soÑand cer-tainly not unprecedented.  Data from a full month show other dips in

reachability, but of a smaller magnitude (see Figure 2.3).Internet routing and reachability measurements returned nearly tonormal within 15 minutes of the collapse of the South Tower.  However,

Matrix NetSystems and Telstra BGP data show that on September 11,
about 1 to 2 percent of the approximately 105,000 routes did not return to
normal for almost 24 hours.  Some of these routes were for businesses

located in the World Trade Center complex.  Interestingly, others were

associated with ISPs in other countriesÑItaly, Germany, Romania, andSouth Africa, for example.  The collapse of the North Tower appears to

have caused some transatlantic circuits to fail, and these ISPs obviously
depended on their New York City links for more than just connectivity to
the United States (see Box 2.1).An analysis of the BGP message activity measured during and afterSeptember 11 shows that some global routing ÒeventsÓ (spikes in the
volume of BGP messages) did take place because of outages caused by the
attacks. However, the magnitude of these events was quite modest.Overall, the rate of BGP routing advertisements and withdrawals sug-gests that the Internet was actually more stable than normal on September
11.  One possible reason for this overall stability is that network operators

understandably tend to avoid optional maintenance and hardware or
software changes during emergencies.  Anecdotal information from net-

work operators also suggests that many operators were watching the
news instead of making normal changes to their routers.  The most sig-

nificant traffic and routing events occurred several hours after the attacks;
they resulted from damage to the Verizon central office at 140 West Street
and power failures at the Telehouse 25 Broadway Internet co-location
facility.  Several of these events are visible in Figure 2.1.
3Different sets of hosts used by Matrix NetSystems display ÒnormalÓ reachability levels
of less than 100 percent because the list of hosts in each set is kept constant to enablecomparisons over long intervals and some hosts on the list no longer exist.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONS%Formatted Wed Sep 12 11:39:36 2001 GMTTimezone (msdw-2, New York, NY)http://www.matrixnetsystems.com
Copyright © 2001 Matrix NetSystems, Inc.GMT EDT Sep 1103:0005:0007:0009:0011:0013:0015:0017:0019:0021:0023:00
Sep 1011 PMSep 113 AM5 AM7 AM9 AM11 AM1 PM3 PM5 PM7 PM
11223344112233448082
8486
88
909294
96
98100Reachability %4 World ISP1000 (1098)3 DNS TLD servers (12 WWW (335)1 Internet (1267))FIGURE 2.2  Reachability of four representative sets of Internet hosts on Septem-
ber 11, 2001. SOURCE: Matrix NetSystems, Inc.%Formatted Sat Sep 15 23:07:21 2001 GMTTimezone (msdw-2, New York, NY)GMT EDT Sep9/39/49/59/69/79/89/99/109/119/129/139/149/15
Aug 31Sep 1Sep 2Sep 3Sep 4Sep 5Sep 6Sep 7Sep 8Sep 9Sep 11Sep 13
11223344112233448082
848688
90
92
94
96
98100Reachability %4 World ISP1000 (1082)3 DNS TLD servers (1)2 WWW (341)1 Internet (1267)http://www.matrixnetsystems.comCopyright © 2001 Matrix NetSystems, Inc.FIGURE 2.3  Reachability of four representative sets of Internet hosts during 12
days in September, 2001. SOURCE: Matrix NetSystems, Inc.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.29THE NETWORK EXPERIENCEBOX 2.1How Damaged Cables in New York City Could Affect the Internetin Other CountriesIt may seem surprising that events in New York City could have disrupted Internetconnectivity far from U.S. shores, but one explanation is the structure of the interna-tional telecommunications market.  The pricing and availability of international

phone circuits are complex and do not necessarily reflect such simple measures asdistance.  They do reflect such factors as treaties, other historical ties between coun-
tries, and geography.  For example, it is often easier to run a cable under water than
across land.   Also, in many cases, it is much less expensive for an Internet service
provider (ISP) in country A to connect with an ISP in neighboring country B byleasing a line to the United States (or, in some cases, to the United Kingdom) than
simply by leasing a line that runs directly from A to B.  As a result, many regions
choose to interconnect their various ISPs in the United States.  New York City (and
London) are key interconnection points for Africa and parts of Europe.  Miami, Flor-
ida, is a major interconnection point for Central and South America.  It is this coun-
terintuitive interconnection pattern that explains why the collapse of the World TradeCenter affected networks in Italy, Germany, Romania, and South Africa.Traffic Load Across the InternetActive ping-style probes are used by a number of entities to monitorthe Internet.  Data from these sources showed only a small loss in overall
connectivity during September 11 and a corresponding slight increase in
packet delay times and loss.  One example, collected by the Cooperative

Association for Internet Data Analysis (CAIDA), is shown in Figure 2.4.
Measurements such as these reflect a sort of global average, highlighting
the fact that from a global traffic perspective, the events of September 11
were actually quite localized in scope.These observations are supported by passive measurements of packettraffic.  Reports of several ISPs that participated in the committee
Õs work-shop indicated that the total level of Internet traffic in fact dropped slightly
on September 11 compared with that on the previous Tuesday.  The nor-

mal Internet pattern, by contrast, is for traffic volume to increase slightly
each week.One ISP provided workshop participants with detailed informationabout traffic on its backbone that confirmed the general reports received
from other ISPs.  The ISP providing the detailed information did not

experience any unusual peak traffic loads, delay, or loss within its back-
bone. Nor did it report any unusual routing instability there. Impacts
were confined to the edges of its network, such as customer-access lines.
This view is supported by data from Yahoo, which averaged roughly 1The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONSFIGURE 2.4  Reachability seen by various CAIDA monitors in September 2001.
SOURCE:  CAIDA.
billion page views per day at that time.  Traffic to news sites jumped
threefold on September 11, and queries related to a search for news
jumped 50-fold; yet the overall traffic was just slightly lower than normal.Not all ISPs reported lower traffic levels, however.  Some that special-
ize in content delivery (i.e., ISPs that combine regional or national net-
works and high-performance Web servers to provide high-performance
Web hosting) saw a large increase in traffic.  One nationwide content-

distribution network (Akamai) saw traffic jump 350 percent above nor-
mal, likely reflecting increased interest on September 11 in particular con-
tent, such as news images, and additional use of its service by some major
content providers.Another measure of Internet use is the rate at which dial-up users login to their ISPs.  Consistent with reports that overall traffic declined, data
from America Online (AOL) show log-ins on September 11 falling below
the rate on September 10 during the period immediately following the
plane crashes and during the evening hours (see Figure 2.5).  Two plau-

sible explanations are that Internet news sites were experiencing high
congestion levels and that users were watching television to obtain news
and information.234
567891011121314
15Day in September 200105,00010,00015,00020,00025,00030,000Number of replying destinations in a cyclePalo Alto, Calif.College Park, Md.
Moffett Field, Calif.AmsterdamTokyo          
Herndon, Va.Marina del Rey, Calif.Tokyo      Washington, D.C.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.31THE NETWORK EXPERIENCEDomain Name SystemNot all Internet applications and services were affected significantlyby the crisis.  An example is the Domain Name System (DNS)
Ñan impor-tant Internet service that looks up a name (e.g., <www.example.com>) in
its databases and returns the Internet Protocol address (e.g., 190.0.34.72)
associated with that name.4  This process is known as name resolution.
Measurements of DNS activity during September 11 show that the load
on the root servers was normal to lightÑmost likely because caching ofdomain names on end-hosts is typically very effective in reducing load on
the system, especially when most users are accessing commonly requested

sites during a crisis event.  There was, however, a DNS problem in South
Africa stemming from the loss of connectivity in New York, as described
in the following section.SPECIFIC NONLOCAL EFFECTSAs noted earlier, the damage around the World Trade Center com-plex had impacts worldwide.  In addition to interruptions in local ISPs
Õ010,00020,00030,00040,00050,00060,00070,00080,00090,00012 AM2 AM4 AM6 AM8 AM10 AM12 PM2 PM4 PM6 PM8 PM10 PM10 Sept11 Sept8:45 a.m.AA flight 11 crashes into the  WTC North Tower.9:03 a.m.UAL flight 175 crashes into the WTC South Tower.9:43 a.m.AA flight 77 crashes into Pentagon.10:05 a.m.WTC South Tower collapses.1:04 p.m.President Bush declares US military worldwide is on high alert. 8:30 p.m. President Bush 
delivers televised 
address to the nation. 
Log-ins per minuteTimeFIGURE 2.5  AOL log-ins per minute on September 10 and September 11, 2001.
SOURCE:  Geraldine MacDonald, America Online.
4W. Stevens.  1994.  
TCP/IP Illustrated, Vol. 1: The Protocols. Addison-Wesley, Boston.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONSconnectivity to the rest of the Internet, there were more complexÑandsurprisingÑeffects on the connectivity of providers, some of them lo-cated well outside New York City.  These effects, resulting from subtle

interdependencies between different systems and protocols, included
dial-up access problems for ISPs with POPs located in New York City;
loss of connectivity for networks in such disparate places as Romania and
at the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) in Geneva,
Switzerland; and DNS problems in South Africa.  Several of these prob-

lems are detailed below.Difficulties Accessing POPsISPs that offer dial-up connectivity must provide several facilities,including modem banks and POPs.  Customers prefer to make a local

(nontoll) call to connect to their ISPs, so the providers seek to have modem
banks in most local calling areas.  Once connected through a modem

bank, customers must authenticate themselves with the ISP before being
connected to the Internet or allowed to use ISP-provided services such as
e-mail or customer-created Web pages.  Building a network that provides

these capabilities in each local calling area is expensive and hard to main-
tain, so it is common practice for ISPs to simply connect a set of modem
banks to a single POP (a practice known as backhauling, because the ISP
Òhauls the data backÓ to a common point).  In this way, the equipment
required at each modem bank is kept to a minimum.  Because such POPs
often cover several states or even a larger region, and because several
providersÕ POPs for the northeastern United States happened to be located
in New York City, some customers in other states found that even though
they could establish a dial-up connection, they could not connect to the
Internet. Their local modem banks, unbeknownst to them, were connected
to a New York City POP that was out of service.Disruption of the DNS in South AfricaInternet disruptions in New York City led to at least one protocol-related delayed reactionÑdisruption of DNS serviceÑfar away.  Some
users in South Africa reported difficulty resolving domain names ending
in .za, the top-level domain for South Africa, in the days following Sep-
tember 11.  As a result, they could not access Internet services (such as

Web servers) within the country, despite the fact that there were no physi-
cal network disruptions in South Africa itself at that time.The answer to how this happened even though networks and DNSservers in South Africa continued to operate lies in the design of the DNS.
To reduce the load on name servers, the DNS supports automatic cachingThe Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.33THE NETWORK EXPERIENCEof frequently used names, allowing common requests to be handled withinformation in caches operated by a userÕs ISP.  Only requests that are not
cached are passed to higher-level servers, and if no cached information is
found, ultimately the request is passed to the DNSÕs root servers.  How-
ever, this caching does not completely isolate these users from loss of
connectivity with the root servers.  To ensure that updated information

propagates throughout the Internet, DNS entries have an expiration date
associated with them.  Once an entry expires, a cache flushes the stored

information and requests a fresh copy.  If the root server cannot be

reached, this flushed information cannot be restored.Interdependency in Hospital Wireless NetworksAnother surprising problem resulted from the loss of Internet connec-tivity in several hospitals.  Today, many hospitals rely on handheld com-
puters and wireless connectivity to provide doctors with bedside access
to hospital databases (for receiving updated laboratory reports, for ex-
ample).  It turns out that by contracting with an outside carrier to provide

this wireless connectivity, the hospitals introduced a dependence on
Internet links.  Thus if the Internet link between the hospital and the

wireless carrier fails, the wireless devices will lose access even to internal
databases.Surmounting interdependencies such as these is important, becausethey can lead to surprising failure modes, and it is difficultÑbecauseinterdependencies can arise from effects ordinarily hidden by the layered
structure of the Internet architecture, or by the tendency of commercial
Internet services to keep private (for competitive reasons) the specifics
about their underlying interconnection structures. These interdependencies

can become even more difficult to comprehend in the face of technologies
that complicate the basic structure of Internet connectivity, such as virtual
private networks, private address realms interconnected using network
address translators, overlay networks, firewalls, or transparent proxies.
In some cases, such technologies make interconnection easier by hiding
internal details of the networks.  At the same time, their presence can

complicate interconnection by imposing additional hurdles that must be
negotiated beyond the basic Internet Protocol connectivity.RESTORATION EFFORTSDespite the physical destruction in New York City on September 11,Internet connectivity was quickly restored for many of the affected insti-
tutions.  Probably the most enduring image of data-communications res-

toration was the tremendous effort to put the New York Stock ExchangeThe Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONSÒback in business.Ó  But a number of other efforts to restore Internet
connectivity were mounted rapidly.  These activities, which involved the
use of alternate paths to the Internet as well as the rapid deployment of
new infrastructure, were usually less visible and more improvised, though
generally effective.ISP CooperationAs the events of September 11 unfolded, many Internet service pro-viders took steps to ensure that their networks would continue to run
smoothly.  Their actions ranged from increasing staff at network opera-

tions centers to coordinating with other ISPs to assure connectivity.Ordinarily competitive service providers cooperated to restore con-nectivity lost after VerizonÕs 140 West Street facility was damaged.  For
example, NYSERNet (a nonprofit networking consortium) and Applied
Theory (a for-profit spin-off of NYSERNet) reconfigured routers, shared
their circuits, and made use of other circuits as far away as Buffalo, New
York, to restore service to medical institutions in New York City;  this

roundabout approach was necessary because the two organizationsÕ per-
sonnel could not enter the cordoned-off area south of 14th Street to access
equipment.One result was that NYC.gov, the official New York City Web site,was back in service on September 12 at 8:22 P.M.  After a few days, access
restrictions in Lower Manhattan were relaxed, and NYSERNet and Ap-
plied Theory staff could enter facilities in Lower Manhattan to reconfigure
capacity on other SONET rings and restore service to schools, hospitals,
and city governments on Long Island.  Similar cooperation was reported

in London and Amsterdam as ISPs made use of interconnection facilities
in those cities to reconnect networks that normally would link in New
York City.ISPs encountered some glitches as they sought to communicate witheach other to coordinate their activities. The ISPs typically have the phone
numbers of one anotherÕs network operations centers so that their staffscan cooperate during major outages.  In most cases, these are toll-free

numbers.  But during the middle of the day on September 11, toll-free

dialing on the WorldCom telephone network was disrupted (though the
toll-free service of other major providers remained operational) as a result
of link failures and an increased volume of phone calls.5   Some ISPs then
5WorldCom estimated that 187,465 toll-free queries failed during an approximately 12-hour period, starting at 9:00 A.M. on September 11.  According to WorldCom
Õs outage reportto the Federal Communications Commission:  ÒThe root cause of the problem has beenisolated to message congestion between the Signal Control Points (SCPs) in West Orange,The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.35THE NETWORK EXPERIENCEfound themselves scrambling to exchange non-toll-free numbers that theynormally would not have expected to need.Some ISPs also discovered problems with their contingency plans.Not all ISPs require that their equipment automatically restart in case of a
power failure; their expectation had been that in the very rare event of
both primary and backup power failure, they would be able to manually
restart their systems once power was restored.  But the power outage at

the Telehouse facility and its location in a limited-access area made those
expectations untenable.  The lesson is, in fact, not new. Telephone compa-

nies and some of the more savvy ISPs already knew it.  Nonetheless, the

incident points to the need for all telecommunications providers to con-
sider such contingencies and to be equipped to deal with them.Another operational challenge faced by ISPs working to restore ormaintain their networks was that of basic support for personnel.  Given

local business closures in the wake of the attacks and the extended shifts
that staff were required to work, some ISPs found it difficult to obtain
food service for them.Improvising to Restore ConnectivityIn a number of cases, improvised links allowed connectivity to berestored.  Some of these efforts relied on the Internet
Õs architecture, whichis compatible with almost any sort of communications link and accommo-
dates almost any sort of service.  For example:
¥Wireless data links using unlicensed spectrum were used to rees-tablish customer connectivity from sites in Lower Manhattan to sites

slightly farther north, where Internet links were undamaged.¥Time Warner Cable (TWC) deployed cable modem service to pro-vide connectivity in state and local government offices.  For example,

when WNYW (Fox) and Police Plaza lost their digital subscriber line (DSL)
connections, TWC replaced the Internet connectivity with Road Runner
cable modem service.  TWC also supplied New York City
Õs morgue withNew Jersey, Dominguez Hills, California, and Irving, Texas and the switch network result-ing from a mass calling event following the terrorist attacks in New York and Washington,
D.C. Multiple link failures contributed to the congestion. As a result of the congestion, SCPServers were intermittently unable to respond to queries, causing toll free service calls fromthe switch network to time out and fail.Ó  (WorldCom. 2001. 
Final Service Disruption Report,No. 01-149.  WorldCom, Washington, D.C., October 11.  Available online at <http://
www.fcc.gov/Bureaus/Engineering_Technology/Filings/Network_Outage/2001/re-ports/01-149.pdf>.)The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONSstatic IP addresses so that it could create its own networks, and cable andRoad Runner service were installed at the Staten Island Red Cross.  Voice-

over-IP (VoIP) phones running over the cable network were used to sup-
port communications among city and state offices.6¥Internet phones were used in New York City as a way of circum-venting problems with the local and long-distance phone networks.  Or-

ganizations making these facilities available included local universities
(chiefly for their students), Time Warner, and Cisco.¥In Washington, D.C., a temporary IP infrastructure was deployedat the old Naval Research Laboratory facility to provide communications
services for the Department of Defense units from the Pentagon.In addition, many users communicated using unconventional means.Institutions that had lost network connectivity were given the temporary
use of other offices with Internet access through the generosity of other
companies and universities.Also, once it was discovered by the late afternoon of September 11that making long-distance calls was often easier in New York City than
placing local calls, ISPs began to advise residents having difficulty dialing
into their Internet service providers to make long-distance phone calls in
order to reach modems in other locations.  Anecdotal accounts suggest

that a large number of people did just that.THE EXPERIENCES OF OTHER COMMUNICATIONS NETWORKS:  TELEPHONE, WIRELESS VOICE AND DATA, AND
BROADCASTINGThe Internet was only one of several communications systems af-fected by the events of September 11.  To place its experience in context,

this section provides a brief overview of the other communications net-
worksÕ efforts that day.
TelephoneAs an indication of how quickly news travels (and a testament to howwell the communications infrastructure was working), changes came
swiftly.  Apparently the first communications impact outside New York

City occurred right after United Airlines Flight 175 struck the South Tower
at 9:02 A.M., as the load on some telephone switches in northern New
6ÒWorld Trade Center Tragedy: Time Warner Cable of New York City & NY1 NewsEfforts.Ó Time Warner Cable News Release, September 14, 2001.
The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.37THE NETWORK EXPERIENCEJersey impaired parts of the national toll-free calling system (discussedabove, in the context of ISP coordination).  Because of congestion, the

Government Emergency Telecommunication System, which provides au-
thorized users with priority access to telephone circuits, was employed by
government officials.  By about 9:15 
A.M., the situation was quite excep-
tional.  In New York City, call volumes were making it increasingly diffi-
cult to call into or out of the city.Outside the city, the impact was more muted.  With the exception of
some difficulty with toll-free numbers, the telephone network was work-
ing well (although the load was higher than normal).  The crash of Ameri-

can Airlines Flight 77 into the Pentagon at 9:37 A.M. did not dramaticallychange this picture, except to increase call volume into and out of the
Washington, D.C., area, thereby adding the nationÕs capital to the list ofdifficult-to-call places.  About the same time, as it was learned that the

two New York planes had originated in Boston, call loads in Boston also
grew.At noon, telephone traffic remained high.  Indeed, the number of
telephone calls reported to have been completed by Verizon on Septem-
ber 11 was approximately double that of a typical day.  However, it ap-

pears that difficulties in calling out of New York City may have eased by
thenÑfor example, AOL recommended that users unable to connect to itsNew York modem banks with a local number try calling a long-distance
access number to get online; this advice apparently worked for many
users.At 5:20 P.M., World Trade Center Building 7 collapsed, severely dam-
aging VerizonÕs 140 West Street central office.  Although some of the
equipment in the building continued to run for several more hours, local
telephone connectivity through the exchange was ultimately lost.  Unfor-
tunately, the damage to the building included the disabling of some of the
monitoring equipment, so it is not possible to determine exactly how
telephone service degraded over the evening of September 11.  Another

effect of the damage to 140 West Street was to further damage fiber links
already affected by the collapse of the Twin Towers, causing additional
connectivity losses.Cellular TelephonesAs word of the attacks spread, the cellular telephone system in thenortheastern United States began to be heavily loaded.  Nationally, call

volume rose 50 percent above normal.  One can compare this rate with the

30 percent increase typical on MotherÕs Day, the canonical example of anexceptional calling day.  Cellular telephone systems are usually engi-
The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONSneered to support traffic during busy hours with only about 4 percent ofcalls being blocked (given a busy signal).  Regionally, the experience was even more dramatic.  New York City
had a 400 percent increase in call attempts during the day.  At about 11:00
A.M., the volume was up 1,300 percent for at least one major carrier.  Wash-
ington, D.C., had a 125 percent increase for the day.  New England as a

whole saw a 75 percent increase.  The cellular system was not engineered

for these loads, so call-blocking rates grew accordingly.  In New York, 75

percent of calls were blocked (92 percent at the morning peak).  In Wash-
ington, D.C., 56 percent of calls were blocked.Wireless InternetÑusing such devices as Research in MotionÕs Black-berryÑalso rose on September 11.  Traffic surged by 60 percent around
10:00 A.M. and stayed high through the early afternoon.7Although there have been reports that a large number of cellularphone sites were disabled by the collapse of the Twin Towers, the indus-
try maintains that only five sites were damaged in the attacks.  In any

case, by late afternoon on September 11, a combination of damage to
telephone lines and the loss of power caused 160 cell sites in Lower Man-
hattan to become inoperable (slightly under 5 percent of the New York
City cellular infrastructure).  Over the hours and days that followed, the

cellular operators adopted a variety of measures, such as the installation
of temporary sites and the use of alternate radio frequencies, to restore (or
in some cases, such as at the Pennsylvania crash site, to increase) capacity.
In Lower Manhattan, full capacity was restored within a week.8Broadcast Television and RadioTransmission facilities of 9 of the 14 local-area television stations,along with those of 5 local radio stations, were lost when the North Tower
of the World Trade Center was destroyed.  Of the stations that lost their

transmission facilities, only 2 were able to quickly restore serviceÑWCBS-TV (Channel 2), which switched to a full-power backup antenna at the
Empire State Building, and WXTV (Channel 41).  For households that

subscribed to cable, there was much less impact:  most television stations
deliver their feeds to cable operators directly, by way of fiber or micro-
wave links, and the New York cable-system operators reported no service
interruptions outside Lower Manhattan.  (However, the impact on broad-
7From reports by carriers to the Federal Communications Commission.8Data from Kathryn Condello, 2001, ÒWireless Industry: Impact and Recovery EffortsSummary ReportÓ (presentation to the Network Reliability and Interoperability Council),
Cellular Telecommunications and Internet Association, Washington, D.C., October 30.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.39THE NETWORK EXPERIENCEcast viewers was greater in New York City than it might have been inother metropolitan areas, as household cable penetration is only about 50
percent, significantly less than the nationwide average of 70 percent.)To speed the restoration of broadcast service, the Federal Communi-cations Commission gave stations temporary authority to locate replace-
ment transmitters at any reasonable site, provided they would not cause
interference with other stationsÕ activities.  Shortly after the World Trade
Center buildings collapsed, a number of broadcasters set up transmitters
at a tower in Alpine, New Jersey.  Since then, six networks have relocated

transmitters to the Empire State Building, and two have remained at the
Alpine site.  Broadcasters do not consider this pair of sites adequate,

however, for the long term: the Empire State Building does not have
enough physical or electrical capacity for all of the broadcasters, and the
Alpine tower, by virtue of its relatively modest height and remote loca-
tion, does not serve as sizable a market as the World Trade Center site
did.  Efforts are now under way to select one or more permanent trans-

mitter sites that are more suitable.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.403The User ExperienceIMPACT ON BUSINESS IN THE IMMEDIATE AREA Wall Street-area financial institutions were of course significantly
affected by the September 11 attacks, though in varying degrees.  Some

companies were severely hurtÑCantor Fitzgerald, for example, lost a
majority of its employees and all of its facilities in the World Trade Cen-
ter.  Other firms suffered primarily from the loss of their physical offices.
At Morgan Stanley, most employees escaped the area before the Twin
Towers collapsed, but the firmÕs offices, along with all the information
technology (IT) equipment in place there, were completely destroyed.Other companies located near the World Trade Center, such as MerrillLynch and Lehman Brothers Holdings, Inc., also could be categorized as
Òheadquarters rendered unusableÓ;1 and a great deal of additional space
in the areas abutting Ground Zero was rendered either temporarily or
permanently out of commission.  The New York Stock Exchange itself

was shut down for almost a week, in part because many firms did not
have the communications capability for completing trades and in part
because the Exchange had communications and physical-damage issues
of its own to contend with.Some financial firms faced power and communications disruptionseven though their office space and IT infrastructure had not been directly1Randall Smith.  2001.  ÒAt Morgan Stanley, Readiness Saved Lives,Ó  
Wall Street Journal,September 14, p. C1.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.41THE USER EXPERIENCEdamaged.  Most significant for companies in Lower Manhattan, the col-
lapse of Building 7 of the World Trade Center and the consequent damage
to VerizonÕs central office across the street disrupted voice and data linesthat linked Wall Street to the world.2  Another nearby Verizon office thatserved the New York Stock Exchange was also affected, with 20 percent of
its high-speed data lines Òout of actionÓ and the rest 
Òoperating onlysporadically.Ó3Some local firms reported not being seriously affected.  For example,
the director of infrastructure at Blackwood Trading LLC was quoted as
saying that Òif he hadnÕt seen the attack, he wouldnÕt have known ithappened.Ó Blackwood was relatively well prepared for such a disaster:
while its data center is housed on Wall Street, the firm backs up all its
trade data to remote centers in New Jersey, which is on a separate power
grid; it was able to execute more than a Òhalf-million trades before theNASDAQ voluntarily shut down,Ó according to that executive.
4 Indeed,
data loss was less of a problem than one might think.  Most large Wall

Street firms had responded to the earlier World Trade Center bombing (in
1993) by focusing their attention on crisis management,5 which resulted
in the institution of thorough data-backup or co-location procedures.
Cantor FitzgeraldÕs eSpeed, for example, had mirrored the firmÕs entireoperations at other sites.6PEOPLE ON THE NETData on peopleÕs usage of the Internet following the terrorist attackscame from a variety of sources.  Probably the most detailed information

available to the committee was from the Pew Internet and American Life2Shawn Tully. 2001.  ÒRebuilding Wall Street,Ó  Fortune, Vol. 144, No. 6: pp. 92-100.Available online at <http://www.fortune.com/indexw.jhtml?channel=artcol.jhtml&doc_id=204166>.3Emily Thornton et al.  2001.  
ÒThe View from Ground Zero,Ó  Business Week Online,September 13.  Available online at <http://www.businessweek.com/bwdaily/dnflash/
sep2001/nf20010913_005.htm>.4Mark Hall and Lucas Mearian.  2001.  
ÒIT Focus Turns to Disaster Recovery,Ó  IDG,September 11.  Available online at <http://www.cnn.com/2001/TECH/industry/09/11/
disaster.recovery.idg/index.html>.5Shawn Tully. 2001.  ÒRebuilding Wall Street,Ó Fortune, Vol. 144, No. 6: pp. 92-100.  Avail-
able online at <http://www.fortune.com/indexw.jhtml?channel=artcol.jhtml&doc_id=204166>.6Edward Cone and Sean Gallagher.  2001.  
ÒCantor FitzgeraldÑForty-Seven Hours,ÓBaseline, October 29.  Available online at <http://www.baselinemag.com/article/0,3658,
apn=2&s=2101&a=17022&ap=1,00.asp>.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONSProject, which surveyed Internet users immediately after September 11.7The project had been conducting telephone surveys of Internet users forsome time before the crisis, and it continues surveying users even now;
thus its data not only present a picture of how users behaved that day but
also allow comparison with their behavior both before and after the at-
tack.Other useful sources of data on user behavior included Web-usagemeasurements from Webhancer, search statistics from major search sites
such as AOL and Google, and data from content providers such as
CNN.com and Akamai.  Together, these data provide a very telling por-

trait of what people wanted, needed, and expected from the Internet in
those extraordinary circumstances.The Internet as a Source of NewsMany people learned of the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Cen-ter and the Pentagon while they were at work or on their way to work.8And because people often do not have access to television sets at their
place of work, there is reason to believe that they then turned to Internet
news sites for information.In what is sometimes referred to as a Òflash crowdÓ9 event, national
and international demand for timely information soared, and many news
Web serversÑthose of CNN, MSNBC, and the New York Times, for ex-ampleÑexperienced unprecedented loads.  An anecdote regarding CNN
ÕsWeb site <www.cnn.com> gives a vivid example of just how fast the
demand for Internet-accessible news grew.  When the director of the facil-

ity saw on TV that the second plane had just struck, he stood up in his
cubicle and shouted to other staff members to take steps (such as bringing
extra servers online) to prepare for an increased demand for news.  By the

time he sat down, that spike had already arrived.  (Box 3.1 discusses the

CNN experience, including steps that the network took to keep up with
demand, in more detail.)7Lee Raime and Bente Kalsnes. 2001. The Commons of the Tragedy: How the Internet WasUsed by Millions After the Terror Attacks to Grieve, Console, Share News, and Debate the CountryÕsResponse.  Pew Internet & American Life Project, Washington, D.C., October 10. Available
online at <http://www.pewinternet.org/reports/toc.asp?Report=46>.8While it is difficult to get a precise estimate, data from the Census Bureau suggest thatalmost half of the U.S. workforce was at work or en route when the planes hit. Informationavailable online at <http://www.bls.gov/news_release/flex.t07.htm>.9The term Òflash crowdÓ was coined by science fiction writer Larry Niven, who wrote a
short story by that title about masses of people teleporting to see exciting events they seereported in the news.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.43THE USER EXPERIENCEDuring the remainder of the month after September 11, the number ofInternet users who sought to get news online increased by about 25 per-
cent, even though Internet use for some other purposes (such as shopping
or sending e-mail) declined.  Indeed, survey data indicate that the total

number of Internet users declined by about 10 percent in the week imme-
diately following September 11 (see Table 3.1).Even given the surge in demand for online news, all the evidence isthat Internet users, in the same proportion as the general population,
preferred to get their news from television.  A poll by the Pew Project

showed that in the week after September 11, television was the main
source of information for 79 percent of Americans and for 80 percent of
the heaviest Internet users (see Table 3.2).  Heavy Internet users relied on

the Internet as much as on radio and newspapers, while Americans over-
all relied on the radio and newspapers far more than they depended on
the Internet.One possible reason for this seeming contradictionÑhigh online de-mand for news and high reliance of Internet users on television
Ñis thatonce they were home from work (where they relied largely on the Internet)
on September 11, most people turned on their television sets and got the
latest news without having to go online for further information.  Another

possible reason was frustration with the Internet: 43 percent of Internet
users reported at least some trouble accessing Web sites in the first hours
after the attacks, and 15 percent reported great difficulties.10  Yet another
possible reason is that news organizations generally do not provide live
streaming video programming.11  In the end, about a fifth of those who
had difficulty reaching a site gave up on using the Internet for news
during that period.12Another important point is that many people appear to have used theInternet not as a replacement for regular news sources but as a supple-
ment.  Major search engines reported that the information sought by users

changed dramatically on September 11 and in the following days.  For

example, on September 12, a number of talk shows mentioned
Nostradamus, a Renaissance writer renowned for his prophecies.  There-

after, ÒNostradamusÓ was at the top of the list or near the top at many
popular search engines; at Yahoo, for example, it was number 1.13 Google
10Raime and Kalsnes, 2001, The Commons of the Tragedy
.11A scalable technology known as multicast could support streaming video to large num-bers of viewers, but it is not commonly employed by content providers.12Raime and Kalsnes, 2001, The Commons of the Tragedy
.13Google <http://www.google.com/press/zeitgeist/9-11-search.html>; Yahoo <http://websearch.about.com/gi/dynamic/offsite.htm?site=http://buzz.yahoo.com/>; Lycos<http://websearch.about.com/gi/dynamic/offsite.htm?site=http://50.lycos.com/091101%5FSpecial.html>.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONSBOX 3.1CNN.com on September 11, 2001
September 11, 2001, has certainly not been the only high-demand period expe-rienced by Internet news sites.  For example, interest in the results of the 2000 gen-
eral election fueled a steep rise in demand.  But September 11 set new records, and

consequently the ability to reach major news Web sites that day was reduced forsome people.1To use this experience to better understand the demands on news servers duringa crisis event and to identify measures that can help deal with that demand, a repre-sentative from CNNÕs Internet division was invited to participate in the workshopheld by the Committee on the Internet Under Crisis Conditions.  Key elements of

CNNÕs experience follow.On September 11, CNNÕs overall demand surged greatly, with the measureddaily load (as expressed in page views) increasing on September 11 to 132 millionÑ
nearly 10 times the more typical load of 14 million on September 10.  The measured
demand of September 11 probably underestimates total user demand, however, be-cause not all users were able to successfully load the Web page as the demand
initially surged after the crash of the first airplane. The number of hits (pages orimages requested) doubled every 7 minutes, resulting in an order-of-magnitude in-crease in less than 30 minutes.  Demand for news continued to grow in the hours

following the attack, with the load on September 12 reaching 304 million pageviewsÑmore than twice that measured on September 11.Keeping up with demand after the first airplane crash was very challenging for theCNN operations staff, who employed a combination of several techniques to dealwith the load:¥Reducing Web page complexity.  The CNN.com main Web page was signif-
icantly reduced in size (i.e., as measured by the number of separate elements such asreported that ÒNostradamus,Ó Òcnn,Ó and 
ÒWorld Trade CenterÓ were the
top three terms among people whose search-engine usage increased dur-
ing the week ending September 13.14The Internet as a Means of Communicating Between IndividualsOn September 11, many people felt the need to communicate rightaway with family, friends, and colleagues.  The purpose of these commu-

nications ranged from emergency responses (as officials in New York14Google.  2002.  
ÒGoogle Search Statistics from 9/11/01,Ó Google, Mountain View, Calif.
Available online at < http://www.google.com/press/zeitgeist/9-11-search.html>.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.45THE USER EXPERIENCECity and Washington, D.C., sought to deal with the crisis) to trying sim-ply to make sense of what was happening.Although the Internet was one medium by which people chose tocommunicate, it is important to emphasize that the preferred mode of
personal communications was the telephone.  Indeed, even heavy Internet

users reported using the telephone more than the Internet (and at a higher
rate than the national average).  While 63 percent of Americans phoned a
family member about the attacks on September 11 or in the following
days, 75 percent of heavy Internet users called a family member during
that period.1515Raime and Kalsnes, 2001, The Commons of the Tragedy
.headline pictures and graphical menu bars for selecting additional content), consis-tent with CNNÕs in-place strategy for handling high-demand periods. In fact, themain page was stripped down to the bare bonesÑeven further than the usual mini-mumÑto increase its ability to serve pages.  Indeed, at its minimum complexity, the
page could fit into a single IP packet.¥Adding more servers.  A number of other server systems are colocated with
the servers assigned to CNN.com.  These systems, which normally are used for other
CNN and Turner Broadcasting content, were for the most part experiencing signifi-cantly reduced volume that day. Thus, a number of them were reconfigured and
added to the CNN.com server pool. (Interestingly, CNN did retain server capacity forthe Cartoon Network, which saw an increase in volumeÑlikely reflecting parentsÕdesire to provide children with an alternative to the disturbing news.)¥Temporarily employing a third-party content-distribution network.  CNN ar-
ranged to significantly increase its use of the Akamai content delivery network inorder to reduce the load on the CNN servers themselves.  That is, the CNN Web

pages temporarily pointed Web browsers to retrieve images from Akamai serversinstead of from the usual CNN systems.The net effect of all of these efforts was to enable overall capacity to increase overan order of magnitude within hours of the event, permitting CNN to cope with thegreatly increased demand.1For example, according to a report in ComputerWorld, the Web-measuring company Keynoteobserved that the availability (responsiveness to requests to download Web pages) of the Web
sites of CNN, the New York Times, ABC News, MSNBC, and USA Today were all significantly
reduced following 9:00 a.m. on September 11.  (Todd R. Weiss. September 11, 2001.  
ÒNewsSites Simplified After Performance Bogs Down.Ó ComputerWorld.  Available online at <www.
computerworld. com/managementtopics/ebusiness/story/0,10801,63729,00.html>.)The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONSTABLE 3.1Internet Use by Activity, August Through September 2001
Aug. 13ÐSept. 10aSept. 12Ð19bSept. 20ÐOct. 1cActivity(percentage)(percentage)(percentage)
Going online for any565157
purposeSending or reading514249
e-mailGetting news online222726

Seeking hobby201022
informationBrowsing for fun201320

Doing work-related171315
researchSeeking medical or535
health informationBuying products422
aN = 1,351; margin of error is 3 percent.bN = 1,138; margin of error is 3 percent.cN = 525; margin of error is 6 percent.SOURCE:  Lee Raime and Bente Kalsnes. 2001. 
The Commons of the Tragedy: How the InternetWas Used by Millions After the Terror Attacks to Grieve, Console, Share News, and Debate theCountryÕs Response.  Pew Internet & American Life Project, Washington, D.C., October 10,
p.7.  Available online at <http://www.pewinternet.org/reports/toc.asp?Report=46>.
TABLE 3.2Main Source of Information Following September 11, 2001
Main SourceAll Americans
aHeaviest Internetof Information(percentage)Users
b (percentage)Television7980
Radio76
Newspaper77
Internet26

Talking with others21
aN = 1,029; margin of error is 3 percent.bN = 260; margin of error is 7 percent.  The Pew study defines the heaviest Internet users
as those who have more than 3 yearsÕ experience online and who log on from home every
day.  This group constitutes about 20 percent of all Internet users and about 11 percent of
the U.S. adult populationSOURCE:  Lee Raime and Bente Kalsnes. 2001. 
The Commons of the Tragedy: How the InternetWas Used by Millions After the Terror Attacks to Grieve, Console, Share News, and Debate theCountryÕs Response.  Pew Internet & American Life Project, Washington, D.C., October 10,
p.10.  Available online at <http://www.pewinternet.org/reports/toc.asp?Report=46>.
The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.47THE USER EXPERIENCEAt the same time, about one-third of Americans had difficulty placinga phone call on September 11 (see ÒThe Experiences of Other Communi-cations NetworksÓ in Chapter 2 for more detail on the telephone system
and its performance), and about one in eight turned to the Internet to
communicate with friends and loved ones.  Much of the communication

was through e-mail, which was used almost as soon as the attacks began,
though a modest fraction of Internet users (13 percent) reported using
instant messages.16  Anecdotal reports both from Washington, D.C., and
New York City suggest that instant messaging proved a viable alternative
for office workers who were unable to use their phones but still had
Internet access.Those directly affected by the attacks also made use of Internet com-munications.  Some people trapped at the top of the Twin Towers were

able to e-mail colleagues and family.17  Some communications from the
Twin Towers were from people who used wireless PDAs, such as those
from Research in Motion (Blackberry), to send messages even after in-
building infrastructure had been knocked out.Finally, Internet telephony provided a useful alternative communica-tions channel for some people who had lost telephone service, though
apparently the total number of such calls was small compared to those
placed through the conventional telephone network.The Internet and CommunityIn the hours and days following the attacks, a number of Web siteswere created (or adapted from existing sites) to help fill various disaster-
related needs.  They included the following:
¥Missing person and ÒIÕm aliveÓ lists.  For example, Prodigy Commu-nications created an ÒIÕm okÓ online message center to help people find
information about loved ones.¥Relief supply requests.¥Solicitations for relief contributions.
  Companies such as Amazon.com
and Yahoo used their Internet billing systems to facilitate peopleÕs dona-tions to the American Red Cross.16Raime and Kalsnes, 2001, The Commons of the Tragedy
.17New York Times. 2002.  ÒFighting to Live as the Towers Died.Ó May 26, p. 1, col. 1.
The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONSOverall Use of the InternetTotal use of the Internet declined, as discussed above.  (Instances in
which particular ISPs instead saw a rise in traffic levels appear to be
attributable to their serving news and other content that were in higher
demand on September 11.)   The decrease in overall demand is apparent

in both the Pew Internet users survey data and in reports of ISPs, includ-
ing presenters at the workshop.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.494Perspectives on the Internet Experienceof September 11
The overall events of September 11 were so extraordinary and shock-ing that it is sometimes difficult to put them in perspective.  There is a

tendency to look for echoes of the Twin TowersÕ fall in everything one
sees.  This chapter seeks to provide some of that perspective by examin-

ing other major communications events occurring on the Internet and
seeing how they compared.  Then it considers what could happen to the

Internet if attacked directly (rather than suffering collateral damage) or if
it were used as an integral part of the attack itself.OTHER OUTAGES:OPERATOR ERRORS AND INFRASTRUCTURE FAULTSThe committeeÕs conclusion is that September 11, with respect to itsimpact on the Internet, was a relatively minor incident.  Yet quantifying

that observation has proved difficult.  There are neither general norms of
Internet performance nor infrastructure to monitor the network compre-
hensively.  Rather, individuals and organizations rate the InternetÕs per-

formance differently, according to their own priorities.Still, there are several basic measures that interested parties generallyuse to assess the InternetÕs performance:¥Traffic levels.  How much does traffic vary from that of a typical
day?¥Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) reachability and update rates.  How
The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONSmany regions of the network are being advertised by BGP, and how oftenis the information about various parts of the network changing?¥Measured reachability.  Rather than relying on BGP, one can mea-
sure Internet connectivity directly by attempting to communicate with a
number of systems scattered throughout the network and reporting on
oneÕs actual ability to exchange data.In the following paragraphs, these metrics are used to examine somerecent Internet events that most people consider exceptional and to com-
pare them with those of September 11.Operator ErrorNetwork operators often joke that a single misplaced comma in anappropriate configuration file could take down the Internet.  While that

was certainly true in the late 1980s,1 operators today have well-defined
procedures and methods for checking configurations before putting them
into their networks.  Furthermore, most operators employ systems to

protect their network from configuration errors in other networks.  How-

ever, operational errors do still occur from time to time, and some of these
have major effects.To illustrate how local errors can have global impact, let us consideran example from the Domain Name System (DNS)Ña distributed data-base that keeps the name-to-address mappings for the Internet.  If a

Web browser needs to find the Internet address of the name <www.
nationalacademies.org>, for example, the browser queries the DNS.The DNS is a hierarchical database that makes heavy use of caching.To explain the process by simplifying somewhat, the way that a name
such as <www. nationalacademies.org> is looked up in the DNS is as
follows:  the browser asks a local DNS server if it knows the name <www.

nationalacademies.org>.  If the local server knows the name, it returns the

IP address for <www.nationalacademies.org>; if not, the server consults
1 of 13 root servers.  The root servers act as query managers; though they
rarely answer a query themselves, they tell the local server what DNS
server it should consult to get the definitive answer about <www.
nationalacademies.org>.What makes the DNS work and keeps the root servers from beingoverwhelmed with queries is the systemÕs use of caching.  Once a local
1In the late 1980s, the Internet often suffered from so-called black-hole problemsÑrout-ers misconfigured to erroneously report to other routers that they have the best possibleroute to every point on the Internet.  A black hole effectively encourages all nearby routers
to send all traffic to it and then discards all the incoming traffic as undeliverable.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.51PERSPECTIVES ON THE INTERNET EXPERIENCE OF SEPTEMBER 11server is told the address of <www.nationalacademies.org>, it is expectedto cache that address for some period of time (a few hours or days), so
that the next time the server is asked about <www.nationalacademies.
org> it will not have to query the root servers again.  The exact time that

a name is cached is controlled by the owner of the name.  For example,

the National Academies determine how long the name <www.national
academies.org> can be cached at a server.In February 2001, a router that connected the DNS servers for namesending in microsoft.com to the rest of the Internet was misconfigured,
and the router stopped forwarding traffic.  It turned out that, contrary to

recommended practice, Microsoft had placed all the microsoft.com serv-
ers on the same local network; thus, when the router stopped working, no
one could query about names ending in microsoft.com.  Furthermore,

Microsoft had decided to keep the cache times on its names very shortÑabout 2 hours.  As a result, within that time every name ending in

microsoft.com effectively became unknown on the Internet.Unfortunately, in terms of impact on the network, Microsoft namesare very popular.  As the DNS dropped Microsoft names from caches, any

query about a Microsoft site had to be sent to the root servers, which
would then point the queries at the microsoft.com servers.  Because the

servers were unreachable, the query would fail, no names would be
cached, and the next query for a Microsoft site would again result in a
query of the root servers.  Loads jumped by 25 percent at some root

servers until the misconfigured router was repaired.2  In contrast, the
events of September 11 had no discernible effect on the number of queries
to the root servers.Infrastructure FaultsIn many ways, the effects on the Internet from the September 11 at-tacks were similar to other, albeit accidental, Òinfrastructure faultsÓ that
the Internet has incurred.  Figure 4.1 illustrates the effects on the global

Internet of one such type of fault, a Òfiber cut,Ó on November 23, 1999,
when a major Internet link was severed.  The figure plots Internet

reachability using the same methodology as was used in Figure 2.2 in
Chapter 2.  The effects of the fiber cut are comparable to those of the

September 11 damageÑall in all, about a 6 to 7 percent loss in overallInternet connectivity, but short-lived.  Figure 4.2 shows another outage
2Nevil Brownlee, K.C. Claffy, and Evi Nemeth. 2001. DNS Measurements at a Root Server.Cooperative Association for Internet Data Analysis, San Diego. Available online at <http://www.caida.org/outreach/papers/2001/DNSMeasRoot/>.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONS%Formatted Wed Nov 24 20:13:34 1999 GMTTimezone (jpc-1, Austin, TX)GMT CST Nov 23Nov 2203:009 PM05:0011 PM07:002 AM09:004 AM11:006 AM13:008 AM15:0010 AM17:00noon19:002 PM21:004 PM23:001122331122338082848688909294
96
98100Reachability %3 DNS TLD servers (520)2 WWW (525)1 Internet (1969)http://www.matrixnetsystems.comCopyright © 2001 Matrix NetSystems, Inc.FIGURE 4.2  Impact of damage from Hurricane Floyd on the reachability of two
representative sets of Internet hosts.  SOURCE:  Matrix NetSystems, Inc.
FIGURE 4.1  Impact of a 1999 fiber cut on the reachability of two representative
sets of Internet hosts (1, 2) and the Domain Name System root servers (3).
SOURCE:  Matrix NetSystems, Inc.
%Formatted Wed Sep 22 14:29:25 1999 GMTTimezone (jpc-1, Austin, TX)GMT CDT Sep 13Sep 12Sep 14Sep 13Sep 15Sep 14Sep 16Sep 15Sep 17Sep 16Sep 18Sep 17Sep 19Sep 185 AM12:005 AM12:005 AM12:005 AM12:005 AM12:005 AM12:005 AM12:003 PM112211228082848688
90
92
94
96
98100Reachability %2 mping from MIQ beacons to WWW (550)1 mping from MIQ beacons to Internet (2068)http://www.matrixnetsystems.comCopyright © 2001 Matrix NetSystems, Inc.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.53PERSPECTIVES ON THE INTERNET EXPERIENCE OF SEPTEMBER 11with similar effects but a different cause; here, the downward spikes onSeptember 17, 1999, coincide near the peak of the physical damage in-
flicted by Hurricane Floyd.  Again, the magnitude of the spikes are com-

parable with that of September 11, 2001.ATTACKS ON, OR WITH, THE INTERNETBaseline:  Effects of Damage on September 11
 On September 11, an important interconnection point (at 140 West
Street in New York City) was severely damaged, some long-distance com-
munications links (especially those under the World Trade Center com-
plex) were severed, and there was a localized electrical power outage.
Those experiences, together with discussions about them with several
Internet service providers, give some indication of the InternetÕs vulner-ability to a direct and deliberate physical attack.  As detailed in Chapter 2,

the effects of the terrorist attacks were complex, but by simplifying some-
what, some broad patterns emerge:¥Most of the attacksÕ effects were local.  The majority of the serious
communications disruptions were suffered by networks and customersÑsuch as the stock exchanges, Covad DSL customers, and the parts of
NYSERNet in Lower ManhattanÑphysically close to 140 West Street.Effects of the attacks were substantially less notable in Upper Manhattan,
and nationally they were hard to discern at all.¥Nonlocal effects occurred in surprising places. Some Internet custom-
ers in western New England found that connectivity problems in New
York affected their ability to dial in to their ISP. And one of the most
seriously affected parts of the Internet turned out to be an ocean awayÑinSouth Africa.¥Rich communications infrastructure and the flexibility of the Internettechnology eased recovery.  While a number of address ranges were briefly
removed from the Internet by the attacks, most of them were back on the
network in less than a day.  The rich communications infrastructure of the

United States made it feasible for most ISPs to reroute around the dam-
age.  In cases where rerouting was not an option (as at locations in Lower

Manhattan), it was often possible to improvise new connectivity (e.g., a
IEEE 802.11b wireless link extending out a window in New York City).
Oversimplifying a little, it was only sites within a few blocks of the World
Trade Center or sites with limited communications infrastructure (e.g.,
some of the non-U.S. areas affected by the collapse) that had difficulty
recovering.  And even in many of the difficult cases, recovery time was

still measured in days (not weeks or months).The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONS¥Long power outages caused serious harm to communications.  One can
argue that, from the perspective of the Internet, the most serious effect of
the attacks on the World Trade Center was that power had to be shut off
to Lower Manhattan.  The power outage at Telehouse had an effect on

Internet connectivity that was comparable to that of the TowersÕ collapses
earlier.  Extended power outages tend to be a feature of physical disasters

(whether they have human or natural causes), and they have great im-
pact: the nationÕs communications infrastructure ultimately relies on pow-ered equipment to carry data.If the Internet Were the Target, Would There Be Greater Impact?If attackers were out to physically damage the Internet infrastructuredirectly, it is unlikely that 140 West Street would be near the top of their
list.  Even within Manhattan, several facilities contain substantially more

Internet equipment and are more important to the InternetÕs operation.Many have speculated that a physical attack on one of the majorInternet exchange locations, such as MAE-East (near Washington, D.C.)
or the PAIX facility (near San Francisco), would cause serious disrup-
tions.  Internet exchange locations are facilities at which a number of ISPs

install routers on a common network.  This mode of interconnection is

often more cost-effective than is arranging a separate physical connection
to each network at which an ISP wishes to peer.  Concern is simulta-

neously heightened as well:  an attack on an exchange location would

break multiple connections between ISPs.But as best as the committee can determine, such an attack would notpose a serious risk to the Internet as a whole.  Most ISPs are connected to
it at more than one point, both to increase their redundancy in the face of
unintended eventsÑsuch as fiber cuts and power failuresÑand becausethey generally seek to exchange traffic with other ISPs as close as possible
to the trafficÕs origin, thereby avoiding additions to the load on their ownnetworks.  Indeed, the largest ISPs are connected to one another at dozens

of points throughout the United States.  The committee finds no reason to

believe that there is a point (or even a small number of points) in the
Internet that, if removed, would partition the countryÕs system into adisconnected group of networks.Another concern is that an attacker could sever a critical fiber-opticlink.  However, as a matter of practice, large ISPs maintain networks with

redundant paths to ensure connectivity in such circumstances.  To be

sure, the level of redundancy can turn out to be lower than the literal
counting of links would suggest.  In a number of places, fiber runs are

concentrated in particular rights-of-way, as was illustrated by a 2001 inci-The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.55PERSPECTIVES ON THE INTERNET EXPERIENCE OF SEPTEMBER 11dent in which a fire in a Baltimore, Maryland, train tunnel destroyed anumber of links.  But carriers work hard to discover such vulnerabilities,

and large networks deploy geographically distinct links that allow a dam-
aged link to be bypassed (though performance in terms of capacity or
delay may suffer until that link is restored).  The September 11 experience

demonstrated such redundancy in major Internet links.Indeed, it turns out that failures of one or more Internet componentsare not infrequent events.  Fiber cuts occur often, and most major Internet

exchange points have failed at one time or another. In the past, there have
even been simultaneous failures of exchange points in at least three differ-
ent locations.  Some of these events have had noticeable effects on one or

more ISPs, but the impact is not felt across the Internet.  As is described in

Box 4.1, the InternetÕs basic design makes it resilient in the face of fail-uresÑincidents do not tend to ripple across the whole network.There is, however, some reason to believe that it might be possible fora motivated attacker to cut the Internet links between the United States
and other countries; these links appear to have less redundancy than is
present within the backbones of major U.S. ISPs.  It is highly likely that

such an attack would also separate a number of countries outside the
United States from each other.  Moreover, such incidents could lead to

indirect effects along the lines of the degradation of South AfricaÕs DNScapability following the World Trade Center attacks.The principal issue with international connectivity is that most of thetransoceanic fiber-optic communications cables land in North America at
a few sites.  As noted in Chapter 2, one reason why New York City is a

superhub for the Internet is that a large number of the transatlantic cables
make landfall close to the city.  Similarly, Miami, Florida, is a hub for

connectivity with Latin America.  The vulnerability is further increased

because, for economic reasons, most connections to these transoceanic
cables are made at carrier hotels in New York City rather than at the
landing points themselves; it is much cheaper to run one fiber-optic cable
from the landing to an interconnection point than it is for each carrier
wishing to connect to the fiber to run separate lines.  Many of the indi-

vidual landing points are themselves also vulnerable to attack.It should also be noted that although it is difficult for a physical attackto damage the Internet as a whole, there are a number of ways to attack an
individual ISP, many of which would cause problems for several hours or
days.  Economies of scale can be achieved by concentrating equipment in
a small number of locations, and some ISPs, as well as content ISPs (which
run large Web farms), seem particularly prone to doing so, even going so
far as putting all their ÒeggsÓ (servers) in one 
ÒbasketÓ (location), which
obviously makes the ISP more vulnerable to physical attack.  (Some ISPs
The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONSBOX 4.1How the InternetÕs Design Makes It ResilientThe Internet differs fundamentally from most of the other communications net-works in how it adapts to equipment failures and increases in traffic load, a legacy ofthe design goals of the early days of the ARPANET.1  Whereas the telephone network
has very complicated switches but simple Òedge devicesÓ (i.e., telephones), the Inter-net places much of its intelligence in the end-hosts.  The network provides a relative-
ly simple service of best-effort packet delivery.  Packets flow through the network

independently and may be lost, corrupted, or delivered out of order.  The fact that
the Internet Protocol (IP) offers such a simple packet-delivery service makes it easierto continue providing the service during transient network failures.  After a failure,

the network routers communicate among themselves to compute a new path, if pos-sible, to the packetÕs destination.  Some packets may be lost during this transition
period, but the communication continues after the routers start using the new path.Building on top of the IP, the end-hosts implement transport-layer protocols thatcoordinate the end-to-end delivery of data between applications.  The TransmissionControl Protocol (TCP) underlies most communication on the Internet, such as the
downloading of Web pages. TCP provides the main mechanism needed by mostInternet applicationsÑa logical connection that delivers a sequence of bytes fromthe sender to the receiver in an ordered, reliable fashionÑand it is used for much of
the traffic over the Internet.  Hosts running TCP adapt their behavior to network
congestion.2  In response to loss or delay, the TCP sender reduces the transmission
rate to avoid overloading the network.  During periods of heavy load, TCP senders

traversing the same bottlenecked link transmit at a lower rate to share the limitedresources.This adaptability has the advantage that application performance tends to Òde-grade gracefullyÓ under heavy load, though such a degradation in performance maydrop to a level that is unacceptable for some users.  It may be acceptable for applica-
tions such as e-mail (which can be queued and delivered as bandwidth becomes
available) and instant messaging (which requires little bandwidth), but it can be dis-ruptive for Web downloads and can unacceptably degrade multimedia streaming.do operate multiple facilities, but even then, they tend to locate themwithin the same cluster of buildings.  This strategy is not sufficiently

robust, as power failures would likely cause problems across the entire
complex.)Finally, the committee learned during its workshop that a carefullydesigned distributed attack against a number of physical locations, espe-
cially if done in a repeating pattern, could be highly disruptive.  An attack

at a single point, however, is survivable.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.57PERSPECTIVES ON THE INTERNET EXPERIENCE OF SEPTEMBER 11POSSIBLE EFFECTS OF A DELIBERATE ELECTRONIC ATTACKWITH THE AID OF, OR AGAINST, THE INTERNETAs previously noted, the Internet itself was not a target on September11, 2001, nor, apparently, was it used by terrorists for anything more than
their own information-acquisition or communication needs.  However,

the Internet could plausibly play a more central role in future terrorist
attacks.  Acquiring the expertise necessary to use it in that way would be

analogous to the efforts of the September 11 attackers in learning how to
pilot jet aircraft.  Once the expertise was acquired, the Internet could be
The adaptation of the TCP to network congestion is in sharp contrast to the con-trol mechanisms in the traditional telephone network, which determine the path for
the call and allocate the necessary bandwidth before transmitting any data.  For
example, the telephone network dedicates 64 kilobits per second for each telephonecall on each link in its route.  The connection is not established unless sufficient

resources are available, ensuring that existing telephone calls are not affected by thedecision to accept a new connection.  A disadvantage of this approach is that users
may experience blocked calls (i.e., busy signals) after network failures and during
periods of heavy call volume, but it has the advantage that the heavy load does notdegrade the quality of ongoing phone conversations.  In addition, the telephone
network has mechanisms for imposing priority on which calls are accepted.  For

example, the network can be configured to favor outgoing calls in disaster areas toenable victims to reach the outside world.The Internet, meanwhile, was designed for robustness and adaptivity to serve allusers.  Though the hardware and software components in early IP networks were not
very reliable, especially in comparison with the mature technology in the telephonenetwork, the designers of the ARPANET wanted the network to continue to function
even if a natural disaster or malicious attack caused individual components to fail.These design principles enabled the Internet to withstand the localized physical at-tacks it endured on September 11.  The attacks separated a small number of networks

from the rest of the Internet, but by and large the infrastructure was able to adapt byexploiting alternate routes around the failed equipment and by having end-hostsadjust their sending rates to the available bandwidth.1David D. Clark. 1988.  ÒThe Design Philosophy of the DARPA Internet Protocols,Ó pp. 106-
114 in SIGCOMM Ô88, Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Communications Architecturesand Protocols, August 16-18, 1988, Stanford, Calif. Association for Computing Machinery, NewYork, N.Y.2Van Jacobson.  1988.  
ÒCongestion Avoidance and Control,Ó SIGCOMM Õ88, Proceedingsof the ACM Symposium on Communications Architectures and Protocols, August 16-18, 1988,Stanford, Calif. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, N.Y.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONSutilized by terrorists in a number of ways and in the pursuit of diversegoals.The potential, range, and plausibility of terrorist attacks on or withthe Internet are thoroughly explored in Making the Nation Safer: The Role ofScience and Technology in Countering Terrorism, a recent National ResearchCouncil publication3 to which the committee defers for a complete dis-
cussion.  This section only sketches some of the possibilities for terrorist

use of the Internet, primarily to develop a contrast with the actual impact
on the Internet from September 11.
If the aim is terror, then widespread Internet failures could causeconfusion and possibly instill panic, particularly if such failures occurred
in conjunction with separate physical attacks.  Broader attacks of 
any form
could have this effect, but the Internet would prove a particularly valu-
able element because of its use by some as a news channel and especially
because its functioning and vulnerabilities remain a mystery to much of
the populaceÑpeople might fear the worst if a significant disruption tothe Internet were to occur.A different Internet-related means for instilling panic would be tocreate misinformation.  This could be done directly, by altering the con-

tents of Internet news sites.  Alternatively, information in the Domain

Name System database could be changed to redirect names to incorrect
addresses, or the routing system could be tampered with so that users
would be connected to substitute servers.4  Each technique could expose
users to Web pages, seemingly authentic, that contained either subtly or
grossly incorrect information crafted by the attackers.Attackers could also attempt to use the Internet either to directlyinflict damage or to augment damage inflicted by other means.  For ex-

ample, they could undermine systems whose operations rely on using the
Internet or are susceptible to manipulation through the Internet (see Mak-ing the Nation Safer for further discussion).
Another form of terrorist attack could involve the direct infliction ofdamage, by nonphysical means, on the InternetÕs own systems. This mightbe done in several ways:3National Research Council.  2002.  
Making the Nation Safer: The Role of Science and Technol-ogy in Countering Terrorism.  National Academies Press, Washington, D.C.  Available online
at <http://books.nap.edu/html/stct/index.html>. For an extended discussion, see theforthcoming Computer Science and Telecommunications Board report on information tech-nology for countering terrorism.4Some of the risks of DNS and routing attacks are described in Computer Science andTelecommunications Board, National Research Council.  1999.  
Trust in Cyberspace.  Na-
tional Academy Press, Washington, D.C.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.59PERSPECTIVES ON THE INTERNET EXPERIENCE OF SEPTEMBER 11¥By the deletion of information (such an attempt might not be highlyeffective, however, as mechanisms exist to deal with the routine occur-
rence of corrupted information);¥By disabling hardware (for some machines, it is possible to usesoftware to render the hardware inoperable); or¥By rendering services inaccessible (for example, if computers un-der attackersÕ control continually flood a service with bogus traffic).
These threats might seem minor compared to physical damage thatattackers could inflict, except that the scale of such software-based attacks
is potentially immense.  And it is well established that attackers can ac-

quire access to hundreds or thousands of machines to be used as launch-
ing points for coordinated follow-on attacks.Toolkits that exist for automatically scanning and exploiting a widevariety of security flaws in Internet servers could also be used as weap-
ons.  When coupled with software that then repeats the scanning and

exploiting (using each newly compromised machine as an additional
platform), they become a ÒwormÓ or a virus (the distinction being that
viruses require some user action to activate them, while worms do not).
Though not a new concept, worms recently gained notoriety with the
advent, in the summer of 2001, of Code Red and NimdaÑworms thatinfected several hundred thousand Internet hosts in a matter of hours.Furthermore, recent theoretical work has pointed to more efficientspreading strategies that appear to enable a worm to compromise a vul-
nerable population of a million servers in a matter of minutes, perhaps
even in tens of seconds.5  And a plausible potential exists for compromis-
ing perhaps 10 million Internet hosts in a surreptitious ÒcontagionÓ fash-
ion that, while taking longer than the quick propagation of worms such as
Code Red, would make the worm much harder to detect; it would not
exhibit the telltale scanning used by rapidly propagating worms.The ability to acquire hundreds of thousands or even millions of hostswould enable terrorists to launch truly Internet-wide attacks.  One form

of attack would be distributed denial-of-service (DDOS) floods, in which
an immense stream of traffic is sent to a particular Internet service or
resource (such as a particular router or access link).  Such attacks gained

notoriety in February 2000 with a series of floods that targeted popular
Internet sites such as Yahoo.Given the state of the art in defending against such attacks, it would5S. Staniford, V. Paxson, and N. Weaver.  August 2002.  
ÒHow to Own the Internet inYour Spare Time,Ó in 
Proceedings of the USENIX Security Symposium, August 5-9, 2002, SanFrancisco, California, USA. USENIX Association, Berkeley, Calif.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONSbe very difficult to deal with attacks from even a few thousand coordi-nated hosts.  Thus a hundred or a thousand times as many hosts would

utterly overwhelm any known defensive measuresÑwith the result thatattackers could launch many DDOS attacks simultaneously against a wide
range of services.  For example, they could plausibly target 
all of the root
name servers (of which 13 are currently deployed and operated by various
organizations) and all of the major Internet news outlets 
and the cyber-
security analysis and response sites.  Or, they could use the machines to

overwhelm the components of the public telephone network.  Or they

could pursue both strategies at the same time.The skills required to launch worm-based attacks are not extremelydifficult to acquire, and the damage and confusion that they would cause
could be quite significant. Thus, they appear to constitute a major form of
Internet threatÑone for which, at present, there is little in the way ofdefense. However, Making the Nation Safer does provide recommenda-tions on some possible countermeasures for such cyberterrorism.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.615Measuring the InternetThe information collected by the committee provided a rough pictureof what occurred on and after September 11 with respect to Internet per-
formance.  The two key sources were reports from people and direct

measurements of Internet systems (such as links, routers, and hosts).The information that was available indicated some interesting con-trasts between September 11 and a ÒtypicalÓ day.  Network traffic loads

measured in several ISP networks the day of the attacks were generally
lighter than normal.  However, demand on servers at the major news Web

sites was unprecedentedÑto such an extent that several of these systems
were rendered inoperative for a period of hours.  At the same time, sev-

eral measurements suggested that the impact of the events of September
11 on the Internet was modest. The effects on the network infrastructure
caused by physical damage in Lower Manhattan and at the Pentagon
were quite limited, and they appeared smaller, or no worse, than what
would result from other incidents.  For example, with respect to data on

the reachability of a particular set of Internet addresses, September 11 was
more or less equivalent to a fiber cutÑa nontrivial but relatively routine
event.  These data were supplemented by other informationÑpolls of

Internet users, for example.Measurements of Internet systems from the September 11 crisis, how-ever, were quite limitedÑin part because sources had usually discarded
the data before the committeeÕs analysis began (some five months after
the attacks) and in part because of inherent limitations in the data that
were collected and retained.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONSThe ability to report comprehensive details of the InternetÕs responseduring September 11, or during any crisis for that matter, is further con-
strained by a number of factors.  One of the consequences of the Internet
Õsfragmented and often proprietary measurement infrastructure is that data
are taken piecemeal in diverse ways and stored in various formats.  As a

result, information that was available to the committee generally permit-
ted only rough comparison with a normal or typical day in the context of
a particular set of data.  Measurement difficulties also arise from the size,

complexity, and diversity of the Internet and from the fact that a great
deal of the data that do exist are considered proprietary by the companies
that collect them.In the course of the committeeÕs work, it became clear that a numberof questions could not be answered with the available information.  These

included:¥How did Internet traffic vary from normal activity during and after theattacks?  Some traffic data were available from individual ISPs, but it wasnot always clear how to extrapolate from these localized observations to a
more generalized view.¥What was the mix of applications used before, during, and after the at-tacks? Again, some local data were available from some ISPs, but it was
unclear, as above, if they constituted a collective picture.¥How much demand was there on news services before, during, and afterthe attacks?  Some news services were so overwhelmed by demand that
their monitoring systems shut down.¥How much connectivity was lost as a result of the attacks?  How many
users were affected, and for how long?  How quickly was connectivity restored?

Answering these questions would require data from a large number of
ISPs or from a carefully targeted sample of ISPs.These unanswered questions suggest that a more robust assessmentof crisis events in the future will require new approaches to gathering
network measurement data.  In addressing how measurement of the

Internet may be improved, this chapter discusses methods and tools for
measurement; the data available from September 11; types of measure-
ments required to fully assess the Internet under crisis; challenges to be
faced in gathering and analyzing these measurements; and suggestions
for the future.NETWORK MEASUREMENT METHODS AND TOOLSSince the InternetÕs inception, measurement has been a significantelement of networking research, starting with the Network MeasurementThe Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.63MEASURING THE INTERNETCenter at the University of California, Los Angeles, in 1970.  Early on,
when the system was operated as a government-funded research net-
work, measurement was simpler owing to the explicit research character,
relatively modest scale, and simple topology of the network, and to the
absence of proprietary constraints.  With commercialization and sustained

rapid growth, the network has become much larger and more complexÑmaking comprehensive measurement harder and more expensiveÑand ahost of commercial interests have further limited how and where mea-
surements can be made and who can make them.  At the same time,

measurement remains an important activity, particularly from the per-
spective of network operations.These constraints notwithstanding, the continued interest in measur-ing a wide range of Internet characteristics both for operation and re-
search has led to the development of an array of tools (though research-
ersÕ access to them has not been unfettered).
Active Measurement ToolsActive measurement tools are based on the concept of sending probepackets into the network and measuring their behavior as they flow
through it. The probe packets are typically emitted from a general-pur-
pose end-host such as a personal computer. Probe packets are sent to-
ward a destination host by providing a target IP address (or domain
name) to the measurement tool.  The injection of probe packets into the

network provides an indication of the routing behavior, propagation de-
lay, queuing delay, and loss that would be experienced by normal data
packets.  When (and if) the probes arrive at a destination, either their

arrival is logged or response packets are returned to the sender. When a
response packet is returned, its arrival back at the original sender is
logged, constituting the conclusion of one measurement.  Active probing

can also be done by approximating the behavior of typical applications,
such as sending a request for a Web page.Active probes are important because one can gain crucial insight intonetwork conditions for a specific end-to-end path at a specific time, which
may not be possible if one monitoring occurs at only a single point.  Fur-

thermore, active measurements generally do not require special partici-
pation by intermediate nodes, making them easy to deploy and execute.While active probe tools provide important data about specific end-to-end conditions, there are a number of drawbacks to their use. First, the
act of placing a probe into the network causes a perturbation (dubbed the
ÒHeisenberg effectÓ by analogy to the uncertainty principle in physics)
that may lead to a change in the networkÕs operating conditions. Becauseof this problem, common practice is to use active measurement tools toThe Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONSsample the network at sufficiently low rates so as not to significantlyperturb the networkÑavoiding, for example, significant additions to con-gestion. However, the resultant measurement data are limited in their
ability to capture events at time scales finer than the sampling rate and are
constrained by the necessarily small number of source and receiver loca-
tions.  A second drawback is that any one system used to conduct active

measurements is limited by routing protocols and Internet topology to
measuring only a portion of the Internet. Finally, active measurement
tools are limited in their ability to assess aspects of volume (for example,
the total amount of traffic flowing along a given path). Some of these
limitations of active probes can be addressed by passive measurement
tools.Passive Measurement ToolsPassive measurement methods are based on logging different aspectsof traffic observed at specific vantage points in the network. The data that
can be collected by passive means may have a variety of forms, from
access logs to packet traces to detailed activity counters on routers. These
data can be collected either at end-hosts or at nodes within the network.
Passively collected data can be displayed in real time (as is often done by
network operators) or placed in a repository for offline analysis.Passive measurement data can provide great insight into the activi-ties on a link or at a node.  However, they have some significant draw-

backs. Such data are almost always considered proprietary and are rarely
made available for general analysis. Passive collection of network data
can result in extremely large data sets, which greatly complicate archiving
and analysis. Passive measurement tools are also prone to various types
of errors that require careful attention. The subsections below describe
several common passive measurement tools.Web Access LogsLogging access activity is a standard feature in Web server softwarethat is usually enabled by content providers.  Log entries contain the time

at which a particular Web file was requested, the IP address of the re-
quester, the name and size of the requested file, and the status code re-
turned to the requester.  Content access logs can be used to assess many

aspects of server behavior, including load, content being requested, and
the sources of requests.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.65MEASURING THE INTERNETPacket-Trace CollectionPacket traces can be a summarization of traffic (IP flow measure-ments) or the details of individual packets on a given link.  Such measure-

ments require access to a network device (such as a router, switch, or link
splitter) or access to a broadcast local area network.  A standard tool for

logging individual packets is Òtcpdump,Ó1 which uses packet filters to
capture selected packet activity from the network interface. A typical log
entry from tcpdump consists of a time stamp, the source/destination IP/
port numbers, the transport protocol name, details from the packet header,
and details of the packet payload.  Collection of this information, espe-

cially the packet payload itself, provides valuable insights into network
use.  However, almost all organizations that collect such detailed traces

are unwilling or unable to share the traces with other parties, owing to
privacy and confidentiality concerns. Border Gateway Protocol
Because of the InternetÕs distributed and very dynamic operation, theindividual ISPs must continuously keep each other informed about their
own networkÕs reachability.  The protocol that they use for this purpose is
called the Border Gateway Protocol (BGP).  By examining changes in the

routing information provided by BGP, one can trace changes in the status
of the Internet.  Each commercial ISP (e.g., UUNET or ATT) or network of

a major organization (e.g., the National Science Foundation or the Massa-
chusetts Institute of Technology) uses BGP to inform all other ISPs and
network operators that it provides connectivity for particular sets of ad-
dresses and that packets destined for those addresses should be sent to it.Such advertising of connectivity is called a BGP route announcement.Thus, ISPs adjacent to UUNET would repeat UUNETÕs route advertise-ment to their neighbors, with the added information that the relaying ISP
had connectivity and thus could relay packets through to UUNET, if
needed.  If a neighbor
Õs connectivity to UUNET failed for some reason,then it needs to tell its own neighbors that it can no longer relay packets
through to UUNET; this information is advertised using a BGP route
withdrawal.  BGP update messages are logged for public use at a number

of Òlooking glassÓ sites, such as Route Views.
2The size of a BGP routing table, which indicates how many announcedpaths are available, gives an overview of network status.  As of June 2002,
1Tcpdump. Online at <www.tcpdump.org>.2Route Views,  University of Oregon.  Online at <http://www.antc.uoregon.edu/
routeviews>.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONSa typical core BGP table contained roughly 100,000 entries (the exact sizedepends on the vantage point).  A significant drop in the size of a core

routing table is an indication of some sort of connectivity loss.  Observing

the route advertisements and withdrawals also provides information on
the InternetÕs health.  If a route is withdrawn for an extended period of
time, one may assume that some form of network outage has taken place.
This failure may result from infrastructural damage, misconfiguration by
an ISP, or simply scheduled maintenance.  The withdrawal of all routes to

a particular part of the network indicates a significant loss of connectivity.
Routes that are repeatedly withdrawn and announced are an indication
either of unstable links or instability in the routing system itself.BGP tables are constructed and updated through exchanges amongpeer networks.  However, each table only provides information on the

network as seen from a given vantage point.  A drop in connectivity seen
at that point might, therefore, represent a local failure rather than some-
thing more widespread.  Assessing the overall status of the network thus
requires examining many, carefully selected BGP tables that in aggregate
reflect the shape of the entire network.3Simple Network Management ProtocolThe Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) 4 is an important
component in the daily operation of large-scale networks.  It is the proto-
col used by network management systems to communicate with network
elements such as routers and switches. SNMP enables network manage-
ment systems both to query network elements for data and to send data to
network elements.  Data that are maintained and available from network
elements through the SNMP are specified by a Management Information
Base (MIB).  This data set is gathered passively by network elements.

Most of the items in the MIB data set are simple activity counters, such as
the number of packets transferred on a specific link.  One of the main uses

of SNMP MIB data is to ensure that a network is performing within ac-
ceptable operational limits.  Management systems are configured to pro-

vide multiple ÒviewsÓ into the network based on its topological configu-
ration, enabling network managers to assess in nearly real time the state
of their systems.SNMP MIB data are ubiquitous in a network and could be very useful3Q. Chen, H. Chang, R. Govindan, S. Jamin, S. Shenker, and W. Willinger. 2002.  ÒTheOrigin of Power Laws in Internet Topologies Revisited,Ó in 
Proceedings of  IEEE Infocom
2002, June. New York, N.Y.4W. Stevens. 1994. TCP/IP Illustrated, Vol. 1: The Protocols. Addison-Wesley, Boston.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.67MEASURING THE INTERNETin assessing the state of the Internet during a crisis.  However, they are
typically considered proprietary and are only available to the operators
running a specific network.MEASUREMENT CHALLENGESProprietary DataAs indicated above, business and legal considerations can mean thatmost data about Internet behavior during crisis conditions may never be
made public. If these data were available, the assessment of Internet be-
havior during a crisis, or indeed, at any other time, would be greatly
simplified. There would be challenges in organizing and normalizing the
data, but these procedures would readily lend themselves to scientific
methods.  However, convincing large network providers to make their

data publicly available is at best an uphill battle and at worst a pipe
dream.  An alternative approach would be to mandate reporting by ISPs

to an agency such as the Federal Communications Commission (indeed,
reports of certain types of outages in the public telephone network must
be so filed under present rules).Consistency in Data and AnalysisThere is no guarantee that data gathered at different sites are consis-tent. Time stamps, units, and field descriptions for data can all be differ-
ent. Owing to sampling and the possibility of measurement errors, there
are also issues of the basic accuracy of particular measurements.  Further-

more, even if the data are consistent, the tools and data analysis methods
must also be consistent in order to evaluate and validate results.RepresentativenessThe heterogeneity of the Internet infrastructure and its users, applica-tions, protocols, and media all render it difficult if not impossible to make
representative statements about overall Internet behavior on the basis of a
small number of measurements.  This heterogeneity manifests itself in

several ways, such as:¥Available bandwidth.  Wireless users with a low-bandwidth connec-tion to the Internet exhibit dramatically different behavior from users
with corporate high-bandwidth connections.  High-bandwidth users are

much more likely to access multimedia content such as video streams.¥Network congestion.  The levels of congestion in the Internet vary
The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONSdramatically. Many parts of the United States have high-bandwidth linkswith relatively low utilization.  In contrast, other parts of the network

have modest capacity and high utilization, which in turn result in high
loss rates for packets traversing them.¥Connectivity.  Some parts of the network are richly connected with
many alternate paths, while other parts of the Internet are dependent on
only a single link for connectivity.Such factors make it virtually impossible to assess the health of theInternet without measurement data from a large and diverse set of van-
tage points.THE FUTURE: TARGETED ASSESSMENT DURING A CRISISThis section discusses what data would be required for a more robustassessment of Internet characteristics during crisis events (or any other
time) and how these data might be gathered.Global Network MonitoringA thorough analysis of Internet behavior during crisis events requiresclean, consistent data from a number of vantage points across all network
layers. In a general sense, this means that the following data are required
from sufficient numbers and types of protocols, networks, geographic
points, and time scales:¥Application and service-level data such as Web server logs,¥End-to-end connectivity, delay, and loss data such as those gath-ered by active probes,¥Packet traffic data such as IP flow or router Management Informa-tion Base logs, and¥Global interdomain routing data.Only modest quantities of data from each category in this list wereavailable for September 11.  Better understanding of future events will

depend on the consistency, perspective (geographic and topological loca-
tion), and time scale of measurement data.Perhaps the most extreme means for gathering data robustly during acrisis would be to construct a measurement infrastructure targeted for
this specific purpose.  But a more practical approach would be the cre-

ation of a well-defined data repository into which network operators

could submit data collected throughout the event.  This approach would
The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.69MEASURING THE INTERNEThave the significant benefit of not requiring the facilitator of the reposi-tory to deploy and manage measurement systems. It might also enable
data gathering from areas of the Internet that would otherwise be inacces-
sible.  The drawbacks of this approach would be the difficulties associated

with maintaining consistency in submitted data and relying on others to
choose where the data are gathered.  It would also require the establish-

ment of well-defined policies on submission, privacy, and the use of data.
Another challenge would be in calibrating methods of analysis for com-
paring or aggregating different data sources.Maintaining a robust set of network data would also provide a firmerbasis for simulating Internet behavior.  Models could be used to assess

how the Internet might perform in different failure modes.  This capability

could provide key insights into Internet vulnerabilities and potentially
alleviate circumstances in which connectivity was lost, as occurred in
several instances on September 11.Targeted Measurement During a CrisisEffective assessment of Internet behavior during a crisis would begreatly enhanced by the ability to adjust the scope of what is being mea-
sured in accordance with the specific situation.  This kind of targeted

assessment would be facilitated by the establishment of a general reposi-
tory of contact information for network operators, content providers, and
groups that run network-monitoring infrastructures.  Two examples of

such lists are Jared MauchÕs compilation of information on network op-erations5 and CAIDA
Õs compilation of Internet measurement activities.6When a crisis arises, measurement data could quickly be solicited fromgroups on this list in areas that are topologically close (from an Internet
perspective) to the geographic location of the crisis. Maintaining such a
repository would require resources; however, restricting the objective to
targeted measurement of medium to large-scale events would make this
effort much more manageable.  Making sense of measurements taken

during particular network events also requires the capture of a baseline
Ònormal day.Ó75See <http://puck.nether.net/netops>.6See <http://www.caida.org/analysis/performance/measinfra>.7The characterization of a typical Internet day is discussed in more detail in ComputerScience and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, 2001, Looking Over theFence at Networks: A Neighbor's View of Networking Research, National Academy Press, Wash-ington, D.C.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AppendixesThe Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.73Appendix AParticipants in March 5-6, 2002,
Workshop
Fred Baker, CiscoAristotle Balogh, Verisign
Paul Barford, University of Wisconsin, Madison
K. Claffy, Cooperative Association for Internet Data Analysis
David D. Clark, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Chase Cotton, Sprint Technology Services
Sean Donelan, SBC Communications
Stuart I. Feldman, IBM Research
Geoffrey S. French, Veridian
Deirdre Kostick, AT&T
Timothy Lance, NYSERNet
William LeFebvre, CNN Internet Technologies
Geraldine MacDonald, America Online
Bruce Maggs, Akamai/Carnegie Mellon
David Moore, Cooperative Association for Internet Data Analysis
Andrew T. Ogielski, Renesys
Craig Partridge, BBN Technologies
Vern Paxson, International Computer Science InstituteÕs Center forInternet ResearchJohn S. Quarterman, Matrix NetSystems
Lee Rainie, Pew Internet and American Life
Jennifer Rexford, AT&T LabsÐResearch
David Safford, IBM Research
Steve Schneider, State University of New York, Institute of Technology
Anthony Townsend, New York University
Mary K. Vernon, University of Wisconsin, MadisonThe Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74Appendix BCommittee Member andStaff Biographies
Craig Partridge, Chair, is a chief scientist at BBN Technologies (a Verizoncompany), where he leads a variety of Internet-related research efforts.
His current major projects involve an innovative way to trace Internet
packets to their origin and the use of signal processing techniques to
perform traffic analysis.  In the mid-1980s, Dr. Partridge designed the

process by which Internet e-mail is routed. He is the chairman of the
Association for Computing MachineryÕs Special Interest Group in DataCommunication (one of the two major professional societies in data
communications). He is the former editor-in-chief of ACMÕs ComputerCommunication Review and of the 
IEEE Network Magazine, and a consultingeditor for Addison-WesleyÕs Professional Computing series.  A member
of the technical advisory boards of Matrix.Net and Arbor Networks,
Dr.Partridge is a former consulting professor at Stanford University and

he spent 1990 as a visiting research fellow at the Swedish Institute of
Computer Science.  He is a fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Elec-

tronics Engineers (IEEE) and holds A.B., M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees from
Harvard University.  Dr. Partridge was a member of the Computer Sci-

ence and Telecommunications Board (CSTB) committee that authored TheInternetÕs Coming of Age, and he is also a member of CSTBÕs Committee onInternet Navigation and the Domain Name System.Paul Barford is an assistant professor of computer science at the Univer-
sity of Wisconsin, Madison.  His research interests include wide area

networks and protocols, Internet measurement, network performance
The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.75APPENDIX Bmodeling and analysis, and the World Wide Web.  Dr. Barford is on the
Technical Advisory Board of epicRealm, Inc., and serves on the program
committees of ACM SIGMETRICS 2003, the IEEE Workshop on Internet
Applications 2003, the 2002 Institute for Pure and Applied Mathematics
(IPAM) Workshop on Large Scale Communications Networks, and the
2002 International Performance and Dependability Symposium.  Dr. Barford

is the leader of the Badger Internet Group (BIG), which conducts research
in network performance and network management.  He received his Ph.D.

in computer science from Boston University in December 2000.David D. Clark graduated from Swarthmore College in 1966 and re-ceived his Ph.D. from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in
1973.  He has worked since then at the MIT Laboratory for Computer

Science, where he is currently a senior research scientist in charge of the
Advanced Network Architecture Group.  Dr. Clark
Õs research interestsinclude networks, network protocols, operating systems, distributed sys-
tems, and computer and communications security.  After receiving his

Ph.D., he worked on the early stages of the ARPANET and on the devel-
opment of token-ring local-area-network technology.  Since the mid-1970s,

Dr. Clark has been involved in the development of the Internet.  From

1981 to 1989, he acted as its chief protocol architect and chaired the Internet
Activities Board.  His current research area is protocols and architectures
for very large and very high speed networks.  Specific activities include

extensions to the Internet to support real-time traffic, explicit allocation of
service, pricing, and new network technologies.  In the security area,

Dr.Clark participated in the early development of the multilevel secure

Multics operating system.  He developed an information security model

that stresses integrity of data rather than disclosure control.  Dr. Clark is a

fellow of the ACM and the IEEE and is a member of the National Acad-
emy of Engineering.  He received the ACM Special Interest Group in Data

Communication (SIGCOMM) award and the IEEE award in International
Communications, as well as the IEEE Hamming Award for his work on
the Internet.  He is a consultant to a number of companies and serves on

several technical advisory boards.  Dr. Clark chaired the committee that

produced the CSTB report Computers at Risk:  Safe Computing in the Infor-
mation Age.  He also served on the committees that produced the CSTB
reports Toward a National Research Network; Realizing the Information Future:The Internet and Beyond; and The Unpredictable Certainty: Information Infra-structure Through 2000.  He currently chairs the Computer Science and
Telecommunications Board of the National Academies.Sean Donelan is director-Internet security at SBC Communications.  He
has extensive experience with peering, fiber-optic cable cuts, data centerThe Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONSsecurity, cracking, power outages, and other networking topics.  Before
joining SBC, Mr. Donelan was design engineer at Equinix, where he was
responsible for the technical standards of Equinix Internet Business Ex-
change centers and identifying new technologies.  Before joining Equinix,

he was a principal technical staff member at AT&T Laboratories. There he
worked on Internet service for Concert, the joint venture between AT&T
and British Telecommunications. He also acted as the lead Internet ser-
vice provider (ISP) representative to the U.S. Year 2000 Coordination
Center for ISPs that were not represented by first-tier providers. Prior to
joining AT&T, Mr. Donelan was at Data Research Associates (DRA) for 14
years. He served in a variety of positions, from database programmer to
senior network architect. He was responsible for building a nationwide
backbone network that provides Internet and database services to more
than 3,000 libraries. At DRA, Mr. Donelan wrote the first commercial
library catalog search engine on the World Wide Web.Vern Paxson received his M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the University ofCalifornia, Berkeley.  He is a senior scientist at the International Com-

puter Science InstituteÕs Center for Internet Research in Berkeley and astaff computer scientist at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,
and he serves on the technical advisory boards of a number of Internet-
related companies. Dr. PaxsonÕs research focuses on Internet measure-ment and on detection and analysis of Internet attacks.  His doctoral

thesis, which pioneered the use of Òmeasurement infrastructureÓ for con-
ducting large-scale Internet measurement studies, was awarded the
Sakrison Memorial Prize of the University of California, Berkeley, for
outstanding dissertation research; this work was also cited as best student
paper from ACM SIGCOMM for a paper derived from one of its chapters.
Dr. PaxsonÕs study of Internet routing was awarded the IEEE Communi-cations SocietyÕs William R. Bennett Prize Paper Award, and he was againawarded the Bennett Prize for his paper (with S. Floyd) ÒDifficulties inSimulating the InternetÓ in 
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking.  His
work on the ÒBroÓ intrusion detection system was awarded best paper atthe USENIX Security Symposium, and subsequent research on detecting
backdoors led to a USENIX Security Symposium best student paper award
for his student coauthor (Y. Zhang).  Dr. Paxson serves on the editorial

board of IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking.  He has been active in the
Internet Engineering Task Force (<www.ietf.org>), chairing working
groups on performance metrics, Transport Control Protocol (TCP) imple-
mentation, and endpoint-congestion management, and he has served on
the Internet Engineering Steering Group as an area director for transport.
Dr. Paxson has coauthored 10 requests for comments (RFCs) specifying
Internet Engineering Task Force standards and practices.  As current chair
The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.77APPENDIX Bof the Internet Research Task Force (<www.irtf.org>), he is an ex officiomember of the Internet Architecture Board (<www.iab.org>).  Dr. Paxson

served as program committee co-chair for the 2002 ACM SIGCOMM
conference, and he is program committee chair for the 2003 USENIX Secu-
rity Symposium.  He was a founding member (in 2001) of the Internet

Measurement Workshop, and continues to serve on its steering committee.
Paxson was a member of the committee that produced CSTBÕs LookingOver the Fence at Networks: A NeighborÕs View of Networking Research.Jennifer Rexford is a member of the network management and perfor-
mance department at AT&T LabsÐResearch in Florham Park, New Jersey.Her research focuses on routing protocols and traffic measurement, with
the goal of developing new methods and tools for operating large Internet
Protocol networks.  Dr. Rexford serves on the steering committee for the

Internet Measurement Workshop, the editorial board of IEEE/ACM Trans-actions on Networking, and the advisory boards of ACM SIGCOMM, ArborNetworks, and MentorNet.  She is a senior member of the IEEE and co-

author of the book Web Protocols and Practice: HTTP/1.1, Networking Proto-cols, Caching, and Traffic Measurement (Addison-Wesley, 2001) with
Balachander Krishnamurthy.  Dr. Rexford received her B.S.E. degree in

electrical engineering from Princeton University in 1991, and her M.S.E.
and Ph.D. degrees in computer science and electrical engineering from
the University of Michigan in 1993 and 1996, respectively.Mary K. Vernon is a professor and Vilas Associate both in the computer
sciences department and industrial engineering department at the
University of Wisconsin, Madison. Her research targets the development
and state-of-the-art application of computer systems performance model-
ing techniques that can be used to design new near-optimal computer/
communication system architectures with known performance proper-
ties. Dr. Vernon has made contributions to commercial bus arbiters, cache
coherence protocols, mesh interconnection networks with wormhole rout-
ing, the Sequent Symmetry bus design, commercial memory system de-
sign methods, analysis of parallel shared memory system architectures
with complex modern processors, the Cray UNICOS operating system
semaphore architecture, production parallel system job scheduling poli-
cies, the design of large parallel and distributed applications, scalable
protocols for on-demand streaming with packet loss recovery, optimized
media content delivery networks, media content delivery cost models,
customized mean value analysis  modeling techniques, LogP modeling

techniques, task graph analysis techniques, interpolation approximation
techniques, and Petri net modeling techniques. Her current research in-
cludes development of analytic modeling methods, networked systemsThe Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONSsecurity, scalable multimedia delivery protocols and content distributionnetworks, design of widely distributed adaptive applications, and job
scheduling policies for the TeraGrid. Dr. Vernon received the National
Science Foundation (NSF) Presidential Young Investigator Award in 1985,
the NSF Faculty Award for Women in Science and Engineering in 1990,
the ACM Fellow Award in 1995 for Òfundamental contributions to perfor-mance analysis of parallel computer architectures and for leadership in
the computing research community,Ó and a University of Wisconsin,
Madison Vilas Associate Award in 2000. She is a co-inventor on two U.S.
patents for bus arbitration protocols and on four recent U.S. patent appli-
cations for new streaming media delivery protocols. She has published
more than 80 technical papers, including three that have won best-paper
awards. She has served on the editorial boards of IEEE Transactions onParallel and Distributed Systems and 
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineer-ing, the 1993 NSF Blue Ribbon Panel for High Performance Computing,the NSF Computer Information Science and Engineering Advisory Board,
the board of directors of the Computing Research Association, external
advisory committees for various engineering colleges and computer sci-
ence departments, and as recent chair of the ACM SIGMETRICS.StaffJon Eisenberg, Study Director, is a senior program officer with the Com-puter Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB) of the National

Academies.  At CSTB, he has been study director for a diverse body of

work, including a series of studies exploring networking technologies
and Internet and broadband policy. Current studies include an examina-
tion of emerging wireless technologies and spectrum policy and a review
of the National Archives and Records AdministrationÕs digital materialspreservation strategy.  In 1995-1997 he was a AAAS Science, Engineering,

and Diplomacy Fellow at the U.S. Agency for International Development
where he worked on environmental management, technology transfer,
and telecommunications policy issues. He received his Ph.D. in physics
from the University of Washington in 1996 and a B.S. in physics with
honors from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst in 1988.As its Director, Marjory Blumenthal manages the Computer Science and
Telecommunications Board of the National AcademiesÑa 20-memberBoard of leaders from industry and academiaÑand its many expertproject committees and staff. She designs, develops, directs, and oversees
collaborative study projects, workshops, and symposia on technical, stra-
tegic, and policy issues in computing and telecommunications. These ac-
tivities address trends in the relevant science and technology, their uses,The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.79APPENDIX Band economic and social impacts, providing independent and authorita-tive analysis and/or a neutral meeting ground for senior people in gov-

ernment, industry, and academia. Marjory is the principal author and/or

substantive editor of numerous reports and articles. The majority of her
work has been interdisciplinary.  Before joining CSTB, Marjory was man-

ager, Competitive Analysis and Planning, for GE Information Services.
There she directed an analytical team supporting business development,
product marketing, and field sales and developed business alliances for
domestic and international network services. Previously she was a project
director at the former Office of Technology Assessment, evaluating com-
puter and communications technology trends and their social and eco-
nomic impacts. There, among other things, she produced an internation-
ally acclaimed study of computers in manufacturing and their
implications for industries and employment.   Marjory is a member of the

Santa Fe Institute Science Board, the Advisory Board of the Pew Internet
& American Life Project, the TPRC Board of Directors, the editorial board
of ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, and the ACM, AEA, and
IEEE.  In 1998 Marjory was a visiting scientist at the Massachusetts Insti-

tute of Technology, Laboratory for Computer Science.  At MIT she devel-
oped and taught a course on public policy for computer science graduate
students and pursued personal research interests. Marjory did her under-
graduate work at Brown University and her graduate work (as an NSF
graduate fellow) at Harvard University.David Padgham, research associate, began with CSTB in 1998, workingon, among other things, the studies that produced Trust in Cyberspace,Funding a Revolution, and Realizing the Potential of C4I. More recently, hehas assisted with the research and production of Broadband: Bringing Homethe Bits, LC21: A Digital Strategy for the Library of Congress, The InternetÕsComing of Age, Looking Over the Fence at Networks, and Information Technol-ogy Research, Innovation, and E-Government.  Currently, he is providing
research support for two CSTB projects: one focusing on privacy in the
information age and one looking at digital archiving and the National
Archives and Records Administration. He holds a masterÕs degree inlibrary and information science (2001) from the Catholic University of
America in Washington, D.C., as well as a bachelor of arts degree (1996) in
English from Warren Wilson College in Asheville, N.C.Kristen Batch is a research associate with the Computer Science and
Telecommunications Board. She will be involved with upcoming projects
focusing on wireless communication technologies and telecommunica-
tions research and development.  While pursuing an M.A. in International

Communications from American University, she interned at the NationalThe Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80THE INTERNET UNDER CRISIS CONDITIONSTelecommunications and Information Administration, in the Office ofInternational Affairs, and at the Center for Strategic and International
Studies, in the Technology and Public Policy Program. She also earned a
B.A. from Carnegie Mellon University in literary and cultural studies and
in Spanish, and she received two travel grants to conduct independent
research in Spain.D.C. Drake joined the staff of CSTB in September 1999.  He is currently
handling work on a number of projects, including one on critical informa-
tion infrastructure protection and the law and another on a research
agenda for counterterrorism.  He came to Washington, D.C., in January

1999 after finishing a masterÕs in international politics and communica-tions at the University of Kentucky and earning a B.A. in international
relations and German from Rhodes College in 1996.  He has worked for

the Hanns-Seidl Foundation in Munich, Germany, and in Washington,
D.C., for the National Conference of State LegislaturesÕ International Pro-
grams Office and for the Majority Staff of the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee.Janet Briscoe is the administrative officer for the Computer Science and
Telecommunications Board.  She has been a part of the team since 1997.

Janet has over 15 years of experience in administrative management.  Her

areas of expertise include process improvement, problem solving, prob-
lem resolution, troubleshooting, time management, and organizational
effectiveness. Prior to joining CSTB, Janet worked as a support services
manager for Norrell Corporation (1991-1996), where she was contracted
to provide administrative management services to two of Norrell
CorporationÕs clients (Ernst & Young and IBM).  She also worked as a
word-processing manager for Shannon & Luchs (1986-1991).  Janet is very

active in her local church and community, where she serves in several
leadership positions.  She is also a volunteer for Junior Achievement of

the Washington, D.C., area.  Janet holds a B.S. degree in organizational

management from Columbia Union College.