DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/10633Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry andChemical Engineering238 pages | 6 x 9 | HARDBACKISBN 978-0-309-38463-6 | DOI 10.17226/10633Committee on Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st Century; Board onChemical Sciences and Technology; Division on Earth and Life Studies; NationalResearch CouncilBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee on Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyBoard on Chemical Sciences and TechnologyTHE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSWashington, D.C.www.nap.eduBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS ¥ 500 Fifth Street, N.W. ¥ Washington, D.C. 20001NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the
National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy ofSciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the
committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard forappropriate balance.Support for this study was provided by the National Research Council, the U.S. Department ofEnergy (DE-AT-01-EE41424, BES DE-FG-02-00ER15040, and DE-AT01-03ER15386), the NationalScience Foundation (CTS-9908440), the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DODMDA972-01-M-0001), the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (R82823301), the American
Chemical Society, the American Institute of Chemical Engineers, the Camille and henry Dryfus Foun-dation (SG00-093), the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NA1341-01-2-1070 and43NANB010995), the National Institutes of Health (NCI-N01-OD-4-2139 and NIGMS-N01-OD-4-
2139), and the chemical industry.All opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed herein are those of the au-thors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the organizations or agencies that provided support
for this project.International Standard Book Number: 0-309-08477-6Library of Congress Control Number: 2003100913Additional copies of this report are available from:
The National Academies Press500 Fifth St., NW
Box 285Washington, DC 20055800-624-6242
202-334-3313 (in the Washington Metropolitan Area)http://www.nap.eduCopyright 2003 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Printed in the United States of AmericaBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of
distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to thefurtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. Upon the
authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandatethat requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. Dr.Bruce M. Alberts is president of the National Academy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the
National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. It is
autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with theNational Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. TheNational Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting
national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achieve-ments of engineers. Dr. William A. Wulf is president of the National Academy of Engi-neering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciencesto secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination
of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The Institute acts under the respon-sibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to be anadviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical
care, research, and education. Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medi-cine.The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in
1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the AcademyÕspurposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. Functioning in
accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the Council has become theprincipal operating agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the NationalAcademy of Engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the
scientific and engineering communities. The Council is administered jointly by both Acad-emies and the Institute of Medicine. Dr. Bruce M. Alberts and Dr. William A. Wulf arechairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the National Research Council.www.national-academies.orgBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ivCOMMITTEE ON CHALLENGES FOR THE CHEMICAL SCIENCESIN THE 21ST CENTURYRONALD BRESLOW, Columbia University, Co-ChairMATTHEW V. T
IRRELL, University of California, Santa Barbara, Co-ChairJACQUELINE K. B
ARTON, California Institute of TechnologyMARK A. B
ARTEAU, University of DelawareCAROLYN R. B
ERTOZZI, University of California, BerkeleyROBERT A. B
ROWN, Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyALICE P. G
AST,1 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
IGNACIO E. G
ROSSMANN, Carnegie Mellon UniversityJAMES M. M
EYER,2 E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Co.
ROYCE W. M
URRAY, University of North Carolina, Chapel HillPAUL J. R
EIDER, Amgen, Inc.WILLIAM R. R
OUSH, University of MichiganMICHAEL L. S
HULER, Cornell UniversityJEFFREY J. S
IIROLA, Eastman Chemical CompanyGEORGE M. W
HITESIDES, Harvard UniversityPETER G. W
OLYNES, University of California, San DiegoRICHARD N. Z
ARE, Stanford UniversityStaffJENNIFER J. J
ACKIW, Program OfficerCHRISTOPHER K. M
URPHY, Program OfficerRUTH MCDIARMID, Program OfficerSYBIL A. P
AIGE, Administrative AssociateDOUGLAS J. R
ABER, Senior ScholarDAVID C. R
ASMUSSEN, Program AssistantDOROTHY ZOLANDZ, Director, BCST1Committee member until July 2001; subsequently BCST liaison to the committee in her role as co-chair of the Board on Chemical Sciences and Technology.2Committee membership ended March 2002, following MeyerÕs retirement from DuPont.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vBOARD ON CHEMICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGYALICE P. G
AST, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Co-ChairWILLIAM KLEMPERER, Harvard University, Co-ChairARTHUR I. B
IENENSTOCK, Stanford UniversityA. WELFORD CASTLEMAN, JR., The Pennsylvania State UniversityANDREA W. C
HOW, Caliper Technologies Corp.THOMAS M. C
ONNELLY, JR., E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Co.
JEAN DE GRAEVE, Institut de Pathologie, Li‘ge, BelgiumJOSEPH M. D
ESIMONE, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, and North Caro-lina State UniversityCATHERINE FENSELAU, University of MarylandJON FRANKLIN, University of MarylandMARY L. G
OOD, University of Arkansas, Little RockRICHARD M. G
ROSS, Dow Chemical CompanyNANCY B. J
ACKSON, Sandia National LaboratoriesSANGTAE KIM, Eli Lilly and CompanyTHOMAS J. M
EYER, Los Alamos National LaboratoryPAUL J. R
EIDER, Amgen, Inc.ARNOLD F. S
TANCELL, Georgia Institute of TechnologyROBERT M. S
USSMAN, Latham & WatkinsJOHN C. T
ULLY, Yale UniversityCHI-HUEY WONG, Scripps Research InstituteStaffJENNIFER J. J
ACKIW, Program OfficerCHRISTOPHER K. M
URPHY, Program OfficerRUTH MCDIARMID, Program OfficerSYBIL A. P
AIGE, Administrative AssociateDOUGLAS J. R
ABER, Senior ScholarDAVID C. R
ASMUSSEN, Program AssistantDOROTHY ZOLANDZ, DirectorBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiPrefaceAt the start of this project, the Committee solicited input from the chemicalsciences community. The request for input was sent via e-mail to a large number
of scientists and engineers, and a general request for information appeared in
Chemical & Engineering News.1 The committee received many valuable ideas in
response to these requests. Additional input from the broader community was
obtained as the committee wrote this report, when individual members of the
committee consulted with their colleagues to obtain specific and detailed techni-
cal input. The committee is pleased to acknowledge all these contributors; a list-
ing of their names and affiliations is presented in Appendix C.This study was conducted under the auspices of the National ResearchCouncilÕs Board on Chemical Sciences and Technology with assistance providedby its staff. The committee also acknowledges this support.Ronald Breslow and Matthew V. TirrellCo-Chairs
Committee on Challenges for the ChemicalSciences in the 21st Century1ÒYour Ideas, Please!Ó Madeleine Jacobs, Editor-in-Chief, 
Chemical & Engineering News, 78(14),April 3, 2000.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ixAcknowledgment of ReviewersThis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for theirdiverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures ap-
proved by the NRCÕs Report Review Committee. The purpose of this indepen-dent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institu-
tion in making its published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the
report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness
to the study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript remain confiden-
tial to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. We wish to thank the fol-
lowing individuals for their review of this report:Richard C. Alkire, University of Illinois, Urbana-ChampaignJohn L. Anderson, Carnegie Mellon University
John A. Armstrong, IBM
Edwin A. Chandross, Bell Laboratories
Pablo G. Debenedetti, Princeton University
Louis C. Glasgow, DuPont Company
Louis L. Hegedus, ATOFINA Chemicals, Incorporated
Nancy B. Jackson, Sandia National Laboratories
William Klemperer, Harvard University
Tobin J. Marks, Northwestern University
Kathlyn A. Parker, SUNY, Stony Brook
Michael P. Ramage, Exxon-Mobil (retired)
Martin Saunders, Yale University
Randy Schekman, University of California, Berkeley
Gabor A. Somorjai, University of California, BerkeleyBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERSKarl K. Turekian, Yale UniversityPaul S. Weiss, The Pennsylvania State UniversityAlthough the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive com-ments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recom-
mendations nor did they see the final draft of the report before its release. The
review of this report was overseen by Pierre C. Hohenberg, Yale University, and
R. Stephen Berry, University of Chicago. Appointed by the National Research
Council, they were responsible for making certain that an independent examina-
tion of this report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and
that all review comments were carefully considered. Responsibility for the final
content of this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the institu-
tion.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiContentsEXECUTIVE SUMMARY1
Grand Challenges, 11INTRODUCTION11

2THE STRUCTURES AND CULTURES OF THE
DISCIPLINES: THE COMMON CHEMICAL BOND16
3SYNTHESIS AND MANUFACTURING: CREATING
AND EXPLOITING NEW SUBSTANCES AND
NEW TRANSFORMATIONS22

Goals, 23
Progress to Date, 25
Challenges and Opportunities for the Future, 29
Why All This Is Important, 404CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL TRANSFORMATIONS
OF MATTER41

Goals, 41
Progress to Date, 42
Challenges and Opportunities for the Future, 52
Why All This Is Important, 545ISOLATING, IDENTIFYING, IMAGING, AND
MEASURING SUBSTANCES AND STRUCTURES55

Goals, 55
Progress to Date, 57
Challenges and Opportunities for the Future, 68
Why All This Is Important, 70Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiCONTENTS6CHEMICAL THEORY AND COMPUTER MODELING:
FROM COMPUTATIONAL CHEMISTRY TO PROCESS
SYSTEMS ENGINEERING71

Goals, 75
Progress to Date, 81
Challenges and Opportunities for the Future, 89
Why All This Is Important, 947THE INTERFACE WITH BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE95
Goals, 96
Progress to Date, 105
Challenges and Opportunities for the Future, 111
Why All This Is Important, 1218MATERIALS BY DESIGN123
Goals, 124
Progress to Date, 126
Challenges and Opportunities for the Future, 138
Why All This Is Important, 1469ATMOSPHERIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMISTRY148
Goals, 149
Progress to Date, 149
Challenges and Opportunities for the Future, 155
Why All This Is Important, 15910ENERGY: PROVIDING FOR THE FUTURE160
Goals, 161
Progress to Date, 162
Challenges and Opportunities for the Future, 169
Why All This Is Important, 17011NATIONAL AND PERSONAL SECURITY171
Goals, 172
Progress to Date, 172
Challenges and Opportunities for the Future, 174
Why All This Is Important, 17812HOW TO ACHIEVE THESE GOALS180
Chemists and Chemical Engineers, 181
Educators, 184Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSxiiiThe Media, 184The General Public, 185
Government and Private Foundations, 186
Industry, 189
Grand Challenges, 190APPENDIXESABiographical Sketches of Steering Committee Members, 197

BStatement of Task, 202

CContributors, 203
INDEX209
Who of us would not be glad to lift the veil behind which thefuture lies hidden; to cast a glance at the next advances of our
science and at the secrets of its development during future cen-
turies?David Hilbert, 1900, ParisBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Executive SummaryThis report continues the tradition of the last half-centuryÑcarrying out aperiodic examination of the status of the chemical sciences. Where are we, how
did we arrive at the current state, and where are we headed? These studies have
been conducted, at the request of federal agencies, by committees of the National
Research Council and its Board on Chemical Sciences and Technology (BCST).
The reports that result from these efforts can be used by students and other re-
searchers, agency officials, and policy makers in setting their own agendas and
advancing the case for the field. The earlier reviews in the chemical sciences
were Chemistry: Opportunities and Needs1 (the Westheimer report), 
Opportuni-ties in Chemistry2 (the Pimentel report), and 
Frontiers in Chemical Engineering:Research Needs and Opportunities3 (the Amundson report).
This report, which constitutes the overview for the committeeÕs study of
Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st Century, departs from the ear-
lier practice of treating chemistry and chemical engineering as separate disci-
plines. Here, research, discovery, and invention across the entire spectrum of
activities in the chemical sciencesÑfrom fundamental, molecular-level chemis-
try to large-scale chemical processing technologyÑare brought together. This
reflects the way the field has evolved, the synergy and strong couplings in our1Chemistry: Opportunities and Needs, National Research Council, National Academy Press, Wash-ington, D.C., 1965.2Opportunities in Chemistry, National Research Council, National Academy Press, Washington,D.C., 1985.3Frontiers in Chemical Engineering: Research Needs and Opportunities, National Research Coun-cil, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1988.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERuniversities between research and education in chemistry and chemical engineer-ing, and the way chemists and chemical engineers work together in industry. The
committee uses the term chemical sciences, or occasionally chemical sciencesand engineering, to represent the field in which chemists and chemical engineerswork. The disciplinary structures of chemistry and chemical engineering are dis-
cussed in Chapter 2 to explore their implications for future developments. We
conclude that science has become increasingly interdisciplinary, and it is critical
that the disciplinary structures within our fields not hinder the future growth of
chemical sciences into new areas. Interdisciplinary refers here both to the strong
integration from the molecular level to the process technology level within the
chemical sciences and to the intersections of the chemical sciences with all the
natural sciences, agriculture, environmental science, and medicine, as well as
with materials science, physics, information technology, and many other fields of
engineering.Chapters 3 to 11 of the report then take up particular areas of fundamental orapplied chemistry and chemical engineering. Each chapter starts with a specific
list of some important challenges for the future. Then the chapter has a section on
goals of the field, a section on progress to date to meet those goals, a section on
challenges and opportunities for the future, and finally a section on why this is
important.Chapter 3 examines synthesis and manufacturing, with an emphasis on theunique aspect of the chemical sciences. A key goal of the chemical sciences is the
creation of molecules and materials that do not exist in nature. Just as astrono-
mers endeavor to investigate and understand the inner secrets of the stars, chem-
ists and chemical engineers seek to unravel the fundamental principles that gov-
ern the properties and reactions of atoms and molecules. But in the chemical
sciences it is also common to extend the goal beyond what does exist to thesynthesis and study of what could exist, and to the manufacturing of new chemi-cal products. Synthetic chemistry combines both aspects. The combined efforts
of chemists and chemical engineers can be used to invent new ways to make
molecules and new ways to manufacture themÑwhether these molecules providenew substances or just a new source of known substances. The ability to design
and synthesize new substances offers the possibility of improvement on what is
found in natureÑwith both accomplishments and future opportunities that rangefrom lifesaving drugs to materials that can help to make our lives safer and more
pleasant. We conclude that synthesis and process engineering play a central role
in our field. Synthesis is the key to creating the substances we study and work
with; larger scale chemical processing is the only way most chemical technolo-
gies can be developed and realized.Chapter 4 discusses chemical and physical transformations of matter, boththose that occur naturally in the environment and in living organisms and those
that are invented by chemical scientists. The study of transformations spans the
range from efforts to gain a fundamental understanding of naturally occurringBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY3catalysts such as enzymes to the design of new catalysts for industrial processes.A century ago, chemists had only begun to interpret chemical transformations in
terms of atoms, molecules, and chemical bondsÑand now they are seeking waysto observe the details of reaction for an individual molecule. Dramatic changes
have taken place in the chemical and physical processing of materials, where
product properties and flow characteristics can be understood on the basis of
intermolecular forces. This fundamental understanding can be used to design
manufacturing methods with unprecedented reliability. In both synthesis and
manufacturing, biochemical methods are increasingly important.The time scales for which measurements are made also have undergone aphenomenal evolution. A hundred years ago, it was difficult to measure events
taking place at a time scale of less than a second, and by the middle of the 20th
century, the limit had changed by only a few orders of magnitude. But as de-
scribed in Chapter 4, advances in the chemical sciences have moved the frontier
to the investigation of processes that take place on the femtosecond (10Ð15 s) time
scaleÑthe time scale at which individual chemical bonds are made and broken.We conclude that the opportunities for detailed understanding of chemical reac-
tion pathways and of the mechanisms of physical transformations represent an
exciting challenge for the future that will add to the fundamental science of our
field and to its ability to manipulate reactions and processes for practical applica-
tions.The broad topic of analysis is treated in Chapter 5, which covers isolating,identifying, imaging, and measuring chemical substances and determining their
molecular structures. The changes in capability and methodology are astounding.
A century ago, Jacobus vanÕt Hoff and Emil Fischer received the first two Nobelprizes in chemistry, respectively, for proposing the theory of tetrahedral carbon
and for synthesizing all eight stereoisomers of glucose to corroborate that theory.
These ÒsimpleÓ determinations of chemical structure required years of work. By
the mid-20th century, spectroscopic techniques had made it possible to investi-
gate far more complicated structures, and to detect them at much lower levels.
But measurements at the parts per million level were still a challenge, and struc-
ture determination was no easy taskÑeven when nuclear magnetic resonancebecame available in the 1960s. Chemical instrumentation has changed the fron-
tiers for measurement in astonishing ways since then. The speed of measure-
ments has been reduced from hours to small fractions of a second, and measure-
ments can be repeated quickly to provide high throughput for multiple samples.
The control of chemical processes in real time is drastically improved with new
measurement techniques. Routine analysis can be done on samples in the range of
milligrams to micrograms rather than on samples of a gram or more. The size of
molecules that can be analyzed in detail has grown from organic molecules with
molecular weights of several hundred daltons to proteins and nucleic acid poly-
mers that are millions of times larger. And the sensitivity of modern instruments
has moved the frontiers of detection from the level of one mole toward that of aBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERsingle molecule, an astonishing change of more than 20 orders of magnitude. Weconclude that the area of analysis and structure determination presents important
and exciting needs and opportunities, challenges such as detecting toxic or explo-
sive materials in the environment, detecting land mines, and making chemical
manufacturing processes more efficient and environmentally friendly via real time
control.Chapter 6 deals with computation and theory, from the most fundamentalaspects to the role that this subject plays in manufacturing. The computer revolu-
tion has made it possible to approach a number of important goals: predicting the
properties of unknown substances, predicting the pathways of chemical and physi-

cal processes, and designing optimal processes for manufacturing useful sub-
stances. However, these goals have not yet been fully achieved. When they have
been, and the challenges in this field are met, we can expect to be able to create
and manufacture new substances that have drastically shortened development
times, thus bypassing substantial amounts of empirical experimental work and
optimally meeting our needs in areas such as medicine and advanced materials.
We conclude that this area of research has tremendous promise and importance,
and that the opportunities should be pursued vigorously.Chapter 7 describes the interface of chemistry with biology and medicine,ranging from the basic understanding of the molecular processes of biology,

through the contributions of chemistry in modern agriculture, to the important
role that medicinal chemistry plays in our health. Much, indeed most, of the
progress in modern biology has relied on discovering the chemistry that underlies
biological phenomena. Among the myriad examples are discovery of the molecu-
lar structure of DNA and sequencing the human genome. However, we still face
enormous tasks in our efforts to fully understand the chemistry of biological pro-
cesses. Modern medicinal chemists have invented, and chemical engineers have
learned how to manufacture, the medicines that have let us conquer many dis-
eases, but there is still much to do. New technologies such as microarrays for
gene sorting are driving biochemical sciences, while others such as engineering
of tissue regeneration are arising from advances at the biochemical frontier. We
conclude that this area is extremely important in both the opportunities for funda-
mental discovery and the challenges and opportunities for curing human diseases.Chapter 8 deals with the design and manufacture of materials, an area inwhich chemistry and chemical engineering play the central role; there is consid-
erable overlap with the field of materials science, which is built on chemistry,
chemical engineering, electrical engineering, and physics. We are familiar with
such advances as modern plastics, paints, fabrics, and electronic materials, but
great opportunities and challenges for the future still remain. As one example,
materials with useful superconducting properties will have a huge impact on our
lives if they can be developed in a way that permits practical transmission of large
electrical currents over long distances without resistive loss. We conclude that
the opportunities for the invention and production of novel materials with excit-Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY5ing new properties make this one of the areas of greatest opportunity for futureresearch and development.Chapter 9 addresses atmospheric and environmental chemistry, where thereare both fundamental and practical challenges. In the fundamental area, chemists,
chemical engineers, and other environmental scientists need to explore the de-
tailed chemistry that occurs on our planetÑin the atmosphere, the oceans, thelakes and rivers, and in the earth itself. This is part of the general drive to under-
stand the world we live in. However, there are great practical consequences as
well. We need to learn how we can live in a world with an increasing population
that needs and desires many of the products of modern technology, while we at
the same time ensure that we do not damage the environment. The goal is a
system that is fully sustainableÑthat will safely provide the energy, chemicals,materials, and manufactured products needed by society while neither irrevers-
ibly depleting the earthÕs scarce raw materials nor contaminating the earth withunhealthy by-products. We conclude that the basic understanding that will result
from meeting the challenges in this area is absolutely critical for the future of the
inhabitants of the earth, human and otherwise.Chapter 10 deals with energy, including alternative sources and possible ap-proaches to solving problems that have serious environmental consequences. In
our quest for suitable sources of energy, appropriate ways to transfer it, and effi-
cient ways to use it, we need to develop an approach that is sustainable and will
not exhaust our resources or pollute our environment. We conclude that the prac-
tical challenges in dealing with energy needs are enormously important, and that
we will need significant new developments in basic science in order to meet those
challenges.Chapter 11 addresses national and personal security, both the role that thechemical sciences can play in dealing with terrorist threats and the other ways in
which national and personal security depend on current and future advances.
There are serious challenges in this area. How can we detect chemical or biologi-
cal attacks? How can we deal with them when they are detected? How can we
provide improved materials and weapons to our armed forces, and to our civilian
police? What can we contribute to increase the security of the average citizen?
We conclude that this is an area where the chemical sciences are particularly
central and relevant.The final chapter of this report, Chapter 12, provides our view of some of thesteps that might be taken to enhance the effectiveness of chemistry and chemical
engineering in contributing to human welfare and understanding. We conclude
that chemists and chemical engineers need to be prepared to work increasingly in
multidisciplinary teams, and that this will change the way we educate future

chemical scientists. We conclude that chemists and chemical engineers must put
much more effort into effective communication with the media, and with students
from kindergarten up. We also urge that our profession make much more effort to
attract women and minorities.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERWe urge that educators revise undergraduate and high school courses inchemistry to make them broadly appealing to students with a variety of interests,
and that teachers in grades K-12 invite chemical scientists to speak with their
students about the challenges and opportunities waiting for those who choose to
become scientists. We also urge that students get into research as soon as pos-
sible, so they can learn what it is that scientists find so exciting.We urge that we cooperate with the media in explaining the achievementsand goals of the chemical sciences, and that the general public encourage their
sons and daughters to consider careers in science to help solve the challenges we
have identified. We urge government agencies and private foundations to support
the fundamental research that underlies applied science, in addition to supporting
the applied science itself. We urge that chemically based industry also support
university research and education, and continue progress in Green Chemistry,
with its important environmental benefits.We conclude that the chemical sciences and engineering have not only agreat past but an even more exciting future, but that we will need to communicate
more effectively with our fellow citizens, and will need their support so that we
can indeed make the contributions that we see as possible.The project on Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st Century willproduce a series of reports in addition to this overview. These reports, each writ-
ten by an independent committee and using input obtained at a corresponding
workshop, also avoid the traditional disciplinary constraints of chemistry and
chemical engineering. Instead, each workshop is organized around a specific area
of societal needÑmaterials and manufacturing, energy and transportation, na-tional security and homeland defense, health and medicine, computing and com-
munications, and environment. These topics were also discussed in the earlier
BCST report, Critical Technologies: The Role of Chemistry and Chemical Engi-neering.4 Each report addresses the same set of questions in relation to the par-
ticular area of its focus:¥Discovery: what were the major discoveries and advances in the chemicalsciences during the last several decades?¥Interfaces: what were the major discoveriesÑand what are the chal-lengesÑat the interfaces between the chemical sciences and such areas as biol-ogy, environmental science, electronics, medicine, and physics?¥Challenges: what grand challenges exist in the chemical sciences today,and how will advances at the interfaces create new challenges in the core disci-
plines?¥Infrastructure: what changes in structure and support will be required topermit future advances in the chemical sciences?4Critical Technologies: The Role of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, National Research Coun-cil, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1992.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY7We believe our report and its sequels will be of value to those who want toknowÑand critically evaluateÑthe status and future goals of the many importantsectors of the chemical sciences. What are they aiming to do, and how close are
they to some of the goals? How should the chemical sciences be measured, as a
field, against some of these goals? The chemical sciences must remain ambitious
if the United States is to maintain its scientific and technological leadership, and
if we are to make the maximum possible contribution to human welfare. The field
will need to maintain its health and vigor if it is to attract an appropriate share of
the very best minds. It will be necessary for chemists and chemical engineers to
produce major new discoveries, revolutionary new technologies, and important
new additions to the quality of life for our society. The chemical sciences and
engineering must also stand ready to play a major role in assisting our nation and
shaping its policies to benefit all of our population, and indeed all of the world.The report closes with our vision of Some Grand Challenges for the Chemi-cal Sciences. These are intended not to constrain the activity of research but to
challenge the creativity of practicing scientists and engineers, to stimulate young
people to join them in meeting these challenges, and to engender the enthusiasm
of decision makers that is needed to support continued efforts of chemists and
chemical engineers in their work on the Molecular Frontier.In this report we have tried to show, illustrating our arguments with a seriesof challenges, that the fields of chemistry and chemical engineering are extraordi-
narily broad in their range, and that they include many important areas in which
opportunities for research abound. We have purposely not tried to prioritize these
areas and challenges. Is it more important to fight terrorism, to cure cancer, or to
prevent the degradation of our environment? Is it more important to understand
the chemistry of life or to refine theory to the point at which we can predict the
exact substance that should be created for some desired property and then predict
how to manufacture it? These all are critical to our future, and all are challenges
for the chemical sciences. Thus we hope that the great range of opportunities in
the chemical sciences will resonate with the interests of many young people mak-
ing career choices, and with a society that needs to encourage their choices.The Committee on Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st Centuryhas attempted to view the roles and missions of chemistry and chemical engineer-
ing as broadly as possible. As we continue to push forward the frontiers of sci-
ence, we will increasingly do so by working with our colleagues in other disci-
plines. In this way, the chemical sciences will be able to contribute in remarkable
ways to an improved future for our country, for humanity, and for our planet. The
astonishing developments in science and engineering during the 20th century have
made it possible to dream of new goals that might previously been considered
unthinkable. A few of these are listed here as grand challenges, building on the
challenges that are listed at the head of each chapter of the report. In some in-
stances they may be realistic immediate goals, while in other cases they may be
achieved in a more distant future. We encourage our colleagues in chemistry andBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERchemical engineering to give serious thought to these challenges, and to producethe advances in fundamental and applied research that will so greatly enhance
scientific understanding and human welfare.Some Grand Challenges for Chemists andChemical Engineers¥Learn how to synthesize and manufacture any new substance
that can have scientific or practical interest, using compactsynthetic schemes and processes with high selectivity for thedesired product, and with low energy consumption and benign
environmental effects in the process. This goal will require con-tinuing progress in the development of new methods for synthesis
and manufacturing. Human welfare will continue to benefit from new

substances, including medicines and specialized materials.¥Develop new materials and measurement devices that will pro-
tect citizens against terrorism, accident, crime, and disease, inpart by detecting and identifying dangerous substances andorganisms using methods with high sensitivity and selectivity.
Rapid and reliable detection of dangerous disease organisms, highlytoxic chemicals, and concealed explosives (including those in landmines), is the first important step in responding to threats. The next
important step for chemists and chemical engineers will be to devisemethods to deal with such threats, including those involved in terror-ist or military attacks.¥Understand and control how molecules reactÑover all timescales and the full range of molecular size. This fundamental
understanding will let us design new reactions and manufacturing

processes and will provide fundamental insights into the science ofchemistry. Major advances that will contribute to this goal over thenext decades include: the predictive computational modeling of
molecular motions using large-scale parallel processing arrays; theability to investigate and manipulate individual molecules, not justcollections of molecules; and the generation of ultrafast electron
pulses and optical pulses down to x-ray wavelengths, to observemolecular structures during chemical reactions. This is but one areain which increased understanding will lead to a greater ability to im-
prove the practical applications of the chemical sciences.¥Learn how to design and produce new substances, materials,
and molecular devices with properties that can be predicted,tailored, and tuned before production. This ability would greatly
streamline the search for new useful substances, avoiding consider-
Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY9able trial and error. Recent and projected advances in chemicaltheory and computation should make this possible.¥Understand the chemistry of living systems in detail. Under-stand how various different proteins and nucleic acids and small
biological molecules assemble into chemically defined functional
complexes, and indeed understand all the complex chemical
interactions among the various components of living cells.Explaining the processes of life in chemical terms is one of thegreat challenges continuing into the future, and the chemistry
behind thought and memory is an especially exciting challenge.This is an area in which great progress has been made, as
biology increasingly becomes a chemical science (and chemis-
try increasingly becomes a life science).¥Develop medicines and therapies that can cure currentlyuntreatable diseases. In spite of the great progress that has
been made in the invention of new medicines by chemists, and
new materials and delivery vehicles by engineers, the chal-lenges in these directions are vast. New medicines to deal with
cancer, viral diseases, and many other maladies will enormously
improve human welfare.¥Develop self-assembly as a useful approach to the synthe-sis and manufacturing of complex systems and materials.Mixtures of properly designed chemical components can orga-
nize themselves into complex assemblies with structures fromthe nanoscale to the macroscale, in a fashion similar to biologicalassembly. Taking this methodology from the laboratory experi-

mentation to the practical manufacturing arena could revolution-
ize chemical processing.¥Understand the complex chemistry of the earth, includingland, sea, atmosphere, and biosphere, so we can maintain
its livability. This is a fundamental challenge to the natural sci-
ence of our field, and it is key to helping design policies that will
prevent environmental degradation. In addition, chemical scien-tists will use this understanding to create new methods to deal
with pollution and other threats to our earth.¥Develop unlimited and inexpensive energy (with new waysof energy generation, storage, and transportation) to pave
the way to a truly sustainable future. Our current ways of
generating and using energy consume limited resources andproduce environmental problems. There are very exciting pros-continuesBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERpects for fuel cells to permit an economy based on hydro-gen (generated in various ways) rather than fossil fuels,ways to harness the energy of sunlight for our use, and
superconductors that will permit efficient energy distribution.
¥Design and develop self-optimizing chemical systems.Building on the approach that allows optimization of bio-logical systems through evolution, this would let a systemproduce the optimal new substance, and produce it as a

single product rather than as a mixture from which thedesired component must be isolated and identified. Self-optimizing systems would allow visionary chemical scien-

tists to use this approach to make new medicines, catalysts,and other important chemical productsÑin part by combin-ing new approaches to informatics with rapid experimental

screening methods.¥Revolutionize the design of chemical processes tomake them safe, compact, flexible, energy efficient,
environmentally benign, and conducive to the rapidcommercialization of new products.
 This points to the
major goal of modern chemical engineering, in which many
new factors are important for an optimal manufacturing pro-
cess. Great progress has been made in developing GreenChemistry, but more is needed as we continue to meet
human needs with the production of important chemicalproducts using processes that are completely harmless tothe earth and its inhabitants.¥Communicate effectively to the general public the con-tributions that chemistry and chemical engineering
make to society. Chemists and chemical engineers needto learn how to communicate effectively to the generalpublic Ñ both through the media and directly 
Ñ to explain
what chemists and chemical engineers do and to conveythe goals and achievements of the chemical sciences inpursuit of a better world.¥Attract the best and the brightest young students intothe chemical sciences, to help meet these challenges.They can contribute to critical human needs while following
exciting careers, working on and beyond the molecularfrontier.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.111IntroductionChemistry and chemical engineering have changed very significantly sincethey were last reviewed by committees of the U.S. National Research Council.
They have broadened their scopeÑinto biology, nanotechnology, materials sci-
ence, computation, and advanced methods of process systems engineering and
controlÑsuch that much of what is done and taught in chemistry and chemical
engineering departments is now quite different from the classical subjects. For
this reason, it was important to review chemistry and chemical engineering again,
describing both their current state and the challenges that lie ahead.1 As will be
seen, many of these challenges are already the subject of active research, while
others should stimulate new research.This report breaks new ground: research, discovery, and invention across theentire spectrum of activities in the chemical sciencesÑfrom fundamental, mo-
lecular-level chemistry to large-scale chemical processing technologyÑare be-
ing summarized together for the first time. We use the term chemical sciences, oroccasionally chemical sciences and engineering, to represent the field in whichall chemists and chemical engineers work. Chemistry was reviewed in 1965 by a
committee led by Frank Westheimer, in a report with the title Chemistry: Oppor-tunities and Needs.2 In 1985 a team led by George Pimentel produced 
Opportuni-ties in Chemistry.3 Frontiers in Chemical Engineering: Research Needs and Op-1The committeeÕs Statement of Task is provided in Appendix B.2Chemistry: Opportunities and Needs, National Research Council, National Academy Press, Wash-
ington, D.C., 1965.3Opportunities in Chemistry, National Research Council, National Academy Press, Washington,D.C., 1985.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERportunities4 was issued in 1988 under the leadership of Neal R. Amundson. Our
ambitious integration of the entire range of chemical sciences into one reportÑpresaged by the publication in 1992 of Critical Technologies: The Role of Chem-istry and Chemical Engineering5Ñreflects the way the field has evolved, thesynergy and strong couplings in our universities between research and education
in chemistry and chemical engineering, and the way chemists and chemical engi-
neers function in industry.The structure of the disciplines of chemistry and chemical engineering isdiscussed in more detail in the next chapter, with the aim of further probing these
couplings. Although the emphasis in this report is on an integrated, seamless
view of the chemical sciences, we recognize the well-developed disciplinary

structures of chemistry and chemical engineering, and the effects of such disci-
plinary structures on future developments.The current state of integration between the two traditional aspects of thechemical sciences, chemistry and chemical engineering, is extensive. Ideas and
progress in fields such as polymers, catalysis, bioscience and technology and
many others respect no boundaries between traditional academic departments.
Those working in applied areas quickly utilize advances in basic science, while
discoveries and problems in applied chemistry and engineering often stimulate
basic scientific investigations. Since the connections between discovery and ap-
plication are so strong, both activities are described together in the succeeding
chapters. It is also important to recognize the existing and emerging strong inte-
gration between the chemical sciences and other fields from biology to solid state
physics to electrical engineering. As the discussion will show, basic and applied
chemical science and engineering place the field in a central role in the world of
science and technology.The interaction between fundamental research and applications is not a lin-ear, unidirectional one in which basic ideas are spawned in isolation and flow
inexorably to important applications. A more realistic representation of the inter-
action, applicable to the chemical sciences, is the quadrant diagram of Stokes
(Figure 1-1).6 Neils Bohr and Thomas Edison, respectively, personify pure sci-
ence and pure empirical invention. Stokes points to PasteurÕs work in microbiol-ogy and LangmuirÕs work on surface chemistry as examples of practical prob-lems that provoked a successful drive for deeper fundamental understanding. Such
examples are abundant in the chemical sciences, particularly because of the strong
historical couplings between chemistry and chemical engineering and also be-
cause of the research and development efforts of major chemical companies and4Frontiers in Chemical Engineering: Research Needs and Opportunities, National Research Coun-
cil, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1988.5Critical Technologies: The Role of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, National Research Coun-cil, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1992.6PasteurÕs Quadrant, Donald E. Stokes, Brookings Institution Press, Washington, D.C., 1997.
Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION13RESEARCH IS INSPIRED BY:Considerations of Use?
NOYES
Quest forYESPure basic researchUse-inspired basic
Fundamental(Bohr)research (Pasteur)
Understanding?NOPure applied
research (Edison)the relationships they have had with universities. The main point of the quadrant
model is that just as fundamental science is appropriately not always aimed at
producing technology, neither does science always precede technology. The in-
teractions between basic research and applications are dynamic and cyclical, with
mutual feedback spurring greater discovery and innovation. The spirit of this
statement permeates our report.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and ChemicalEngineering presents an overview. Here we describe, in broad strokes, the gen-eral goals, accomplishments to date, and future plans of the chemical sciences.
After some discussion of the structure of the field in Chapter 2, there is a se-
quence of five chapters (Chapters 3 through 7) on the fundamentals of the chemi-
cal sciences and technology: synthesis and manufacturing, chemical and physical
transformations, analysis and control, theory and computation, and the interface
with biology and medicine.A series of workshops, organized in concert with this report, has focused inmore detail on the areas of societal benefit to which the chemical sciences con-
tribute. Each workshop, organized by a separately appointed committee, has pro-
duced its own reportÑparticularly aimed at identifying opportunities in both ba-sic and longer-term research. It is anticipated that these focused reports will
motivate work in directions that can have profound impacts on our society. The
areas addressed by these workshops are materials, energy and transportation, na-
tional security and homeland defense, information and communication, health
and medicine, and environment. These topics are also chapters of the earlier BCST
report, Critical Technologies: The Role of Chemistry and Chemical Engineer-ing,7 and are discussed in this report as well, in an overview fashion, in Chapters6 through 11.FIGURE 1-1The quadrant model of scientific research.7Critical Technologies: The Role of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, National Research Coun-cil, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1992.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERDividing the enterprise of the chemical sciences strictly into fundamentalsand areas of societal benefit cannot, of course, be done with any degree of purity,
so every chapter has significant elements of both. This is particularly true in the
sections on theory and computation (Chapter 6) and on the interface with biology
and medicine (Chapter 7). We close in Chapter 12 with our vision of grand chal-
lenges for the chemical sciences.Our report was greatly helped by suggestions and contributions from manyindividual chemists and engineers, who were asked to suggest major challenges
for our fields. They are listed in Appendix C.Recent reports and books, besides the direct ancestors of this report (theWestheimer, Pimentel, and Amundson reports noted above), have addressed as-
pects of the chemical sciences and engineering. In 1999, the Royal Society of
Chemistry of Great Britain produced a fascinating book, The Age of the Mol-ecule,8 describing some of the outstanding achievements of chemistry in recent
years. A report on the aims and needs of the future for the U.S. chemical industry
was issued in 1996 with the title Technology Vision 2020.9 The 1992 NRC report
Critical Technologies was noted above, and several relevant reports have emergedfrom the NRCÕs Chemical Sciences Roundtable, including Assessing the Value ofResearch in the Chemical Sciences,10 The Impact of Advances in Computing andCommunications Technologies on Chemical Science and Technology,11 and 
Re-search Teams and Partnerships: Trends in the Chemical Sciences,12 The NRC
ÕsBoard on Chemical Sciences and Technology has also produced several focused
reports that addressed research opportunities in such areas as catalysis,13 polymer
science and engineering,14 free electron lasers,
15 and computational chemistry.
168The Age of the Molecule, Royal Society of Chemistry, London, U.K., 1999.
9Technology Vision 2020: The U.S. Chemical Industry, The American Chemical Society, American
Institute of Chemical Engineers, The Chemical Manufacturers Association, The Council for Chemi-cal Research, and the Synthetic Organic Chemical Manufacturers Association, Washington, D.C.,1996.10Assessing the Value of Research in the Chemical Sciences, National Research Council, National
Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1998.11The Impact of Advances in Computing and Communications Technologies on Chemical Scienceand Technology, Report of a Chemical Sciences Roundtable Workshop, National Research Council,
National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1999.12Research Teams and Partnerships: Trends in the Chemical Sciences, Report of a Chemical
Sciences Roundtable Workshop, Washington, D.C., 1999.13Catalysis Looks to the Future, National Research Council, National Academy Press, Washington,
D.C., 1992.14Polymer Science and Engineering. The Shifting Research Frontier, National Academy Press,
Washington, D.C., 1994.15Free Electron Lasers and Other Advanced Sources of Light: Scientific Research Opportunities,National Research Council, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1994.16Mathematical Challenges from Theoretical/Computational Chemistry, National Research Council,
National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1995.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION15In 1996, Chemistry Today and Tomorrow: The Central, Useful, and CreativeScience17 was written by Ronald Breslow, at that time the president of the Ameri-
can Chemical Society. Three books18 by Philip Ball also merit specific mention:
Made to Measure: New Materials for the 21st Century, Designing the MolecularWorld: Chemistry at the Frontier, and Stories of the Invisible: A Guided Tour ofMolecules. All these efforts have aided the goal of conveying the immense im-portance of the chemical sciences and engineering to a broad range of readers.
This report is intended to continue the tradition.We hope that this overview will be of value and interest to many readers whowant to knowÑand critically evaluateÑthe status and future goals of the manyimportant sectors of the chemical sciences. We want readers to understand what
the chemical sciences and engineering are aiming to do, and how close they are to
achieving some of the goals. We want to provide insight into how the field should
be measured against some of these goals. The chemical sciences have an ambi-
tious agenda for the United States to maintain leadership in this important field
and attract an appropriate share of the very best minds. It will be necessary for
chemists and chemical engineers to produce major new discoveries, revolution-
ary new technologies, and important new additions to the quality of life for our
society. The chemical sciences and engineering must also stand ready to play a
major role in assisting our government and shaping its policies to benefit all of
our population.Finally, it is critical to recognize that this report is missing one serious com-ponent: the future discoveries that we do not see clearly from our present posi-
tion. The history of science repeatedly shows that major discoveries open up
whole new areas of understanding and of practical applications that were not
anticipated. The aim of this overview is not to attempt to predict the future with
great clarity but rather to be certain that the future is as rich and productive as it
can be. But as we examine the future of our fields, there is one prediction we need
to make: Chemists and chemical engineers will come up with inventions anddiscoveries that are not encompassed in any such survey, and we will all sayÑwhy didnÕt we think of that?17Chemistry Today and Tomorrow: The Central, Useful, and Creative Science, Ronald Breslow,
American Chemical Society, Washington, D.C., 1997.18Made to Measure: New Materials for the 21st Century, Philip Ball, Princeton University Press,1997; Designing the Molecular World: Chemistry at the Frontier, Philip Ball, Princeton University
Press, 1994; Stories of the Invisible: A Guided Tour of Molecules, Philip Ball, Oxford University
Press, 2001.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Some Challenges for Chemists and Chemical Engineers¥Create new understanding of our physical world and use that under-
standing to produce a better world.¥Ensure that the traditional division of chemistry and chemical engi-
neering into subdisciplines does not impede scientific and technologi-cal progress.¥Collaborate with scientists and engineers in other scientific disciplines
to more easily advance science and technology.¥Consider the properties and behavior of organized interacting systems
and processes, thereby responding to the trend of chemistry andchemical engineering to incorporate integrated, rather than reduction-ist, approaches.162The Structures and Cultures of theDisciplines: The Common Chemical Bond
The first chapter of this report emphasizes the strong coupling and integra-tion across the spectrum of chemical sciences and engineering. However, both
chemistry and chemical engineering have traditional subdisciplines that define
undergraduate education, graduate student training, and some aspects of the re-
search agenda. The aims of these subdisciplines must be understood as part of the
overall picture of the present and the future of our field.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE STRUCTURES AND CULTURES OF THE DISCIPLINES17In chemistry, standard subdivisions are analytical, biochemical, inorganic,organic, physical, and theoretical. The subdivisions in chemical engineering are:
applied chemistry, kinetics and reaction engineering, process systems engineer-
ing, thermodynamics and chemical property estimation, and transport processes
and separations. These subfield categories are primarily used for pedagogical
clarity and organizational management in academia, but they are not typically
used in industrial chemical research and development. However, the subfield limi-
tations as artifacts and tools should be recognizedÑthese categories are sepa-
rated by boundaries that are neither essential nor rigid. This report has a central
theme that creativity and progress often, perhaps even usually, occur across such
boundaries. Thus as chemical science and technology move forward, it will be
appropriate to examine whether the traditional disciplinary substructure contin-
ues to serve the chemical sciences well, or whether it is an impediment to progress.
Chemistry, as a recognized discipline, is much older than the recognized field of
chemical engineering with that name.1 However, this does not reflect the true
history of the two fields. Humankind has been doing useful things with chemistry
for a very long timeÑgoing back to ancient Egypt and even to prehistoric timesÑ
and applied chemistry is the ancestor of the modern discipline of chemical engi-
neering.Chemists seek to relate the properties of all substances, both natural andman-made, to their detailed chemical composition, including the atomic arrange-
ments of all the chemical components. Chemists want to do this not only for
existing substances but also for new substances that do not yet exist. For instance
medicinal chemists make new substances as potential cures for disease. Under-
standing how the properties of substances are related to their molecular structures
helps chemists and chemical engineers design new molecules that have the de-
sired properties, allows them to develop or invent new types of transformations
for carrying out the syntheses, and assists them as they design ways to manufac-
ture and process the new substances.Chemistry is still one of the natural sciences, but in a special and unusualway. Chemists want to understand not only the substances and transformations
that occur in the natural world, but also those others that are permitted by natural
laws. Consequently, the field involves both discovery and 
creation. Chemistswant to discover the components of the chemical universeÑfrom atoms and mol-
ecules to organized chemical systems such as materials, devices, living cells, and
whole organismsÑand they also want to understand how these components inter-
act and change as a function of time. However, chemical scientists consider not
just the components of the chemical universe that already exist; they also con-1The formal origin of chemical engineering as a discipline is considered to date to 1888 when it wasintroduced as an option in the chemistry department at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology(Frontiers in Chemical Engineering: Research Needs and Opportunities, National Research Council,National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1988, p. 11).Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERsider the unknown molecules and substances and interactions that could exist.
Thus there is a field of synthetic chemistry, in which new molecules and sub-
stances and chemical transformations are created, rather than discovered in na-
ture.New chemical compoundsÑconsisting of new moleculesÑare being cre-ated at the rate of more than one million each year. However, the number of
possible molecules that are reasonably small and simpleÑabout the size of atypical medicinal agent and composed of the same few common elementsÑex-ceeds the number of known compounds by a factor of well over 1030. The chemi-cal sciences produce tangible benefit to society when someone designs and engi-
neers the production of a new and useful substance. Clearly, there is much to do
in the creation and understanding of molecules that do not yet exist, and in devel-
oping the novel transformations that will be needed to make them.Chemical scientists are concerned with the physical properties of substances.Are they solids, liquids, or gases? How much energy do they contain? They are
also concerned with chemical properties. Can they be transformed to other sub-
stances on heating, or with light? Can they interact with other substances; for
instance, can they dissolve in water, and why? Can they react with other sub-
stances to undergo a transformation to something new? Thus, the chemical sci-
ences are concerned with substances, with their transformations, both chemical
and physical, and with the design and control of processes to achieve these trans-
formations on scales of practical commercial and beneficial value to society.
Chemical scientists seek to fully understand the detailed mechanisms of these
transformations, and to measure the rates of reactions, and to build predictive
models of reaction sequences and networks for process design and control.As part of the overall goal, chemical scientists also want to understand thebiological properties of both natural and man-made substances. This includes not
only learning the detailed molecular structures of all the substances in living
things, but also understanding the transformations that go on in the life process.
They want to understand these properties of pure substances, and they want to
extend that understanding to organized systems of substancesÑincluding thoseas complex as a living cell, a whole living organism, and the complex multichem-
ical system that is the earth itself. Chemical science is integral to all of bioengi-
neering and biotechnology. Biosystems, from molecular assemblies to cells to
organisms, require insight from synthetic and physical chemistry as well as analy-
sis of complex chemical networks if they are to be understood and exploited for
the benefit of society.Investigating a single compound, a single reaction, or a single process maywell fall within the expertise of a single discipline or subdiscipline, but the situa-
tion is different when the investigations are extended to systemsÑfull assem-blages of related components that address the same functionÑor to processes,where integrated systems of operations work in concert to produce a product.
Understanding, developing, and manipulating systems and processes often re-Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE STRUCTURES AND CULTURES OF THE DISCIPLINES19quire the synergistic advantages of the entire range of the chemical sciencesÑfrom fundamental chemistry, to chemical engineering, and even to other advanced
areas of science and technologyÑto create scientific understanding and benefitfor society. Chemical engineers have concerned themselves with design, scale-
up, and construction of large chemical systems and processes. This requires mas-
tery of chemical and physical transformations of matter. Chemical engineers bring
quantitative, analytical, and computational tools to the design and development
of chemical operations, systems, and processes. Chemical engineers have also
made enormous contributions to fundamental science.The evolution of chemical engineering as a distinct discipline within thechemical sciences occurred, largely over the course of the 20th century, through a
series of leading paradigms. Chemical engineering emerged from applied chem-
istry by introducing an organized approach to the design of chemical process
systems for manufacturing chemical products. The paradigm of unit operationsÑthe individual steps of an overall processÑcharacterized chemical engineering inthe first half of the 20th century. During this time, the chemical industry, espe-
cially in the United States and Germany, was being built into a leading, and thriv-
ing, productive economic force with power and stability. Impressive success in
this period was exemplified by the creation of a robust industry to produce poly-
meric materials in large volumes by the 1940sÑwhen 15 years earlier the mereexistence of such large molecules was being questioned on fundamental chemical
grounds.In the 1950s, and over the next roughly 30 years until the 1980s, chemicalengineering research improved, advanced, and made more efficient both the de-
sign process and the ultimate designs of chemical plants. Similar progress was
made in the understanding of chemical and physical transformations through ap-
plications of applied mathematics and computation. Academic research produced
major advances in mathematical modeling and analysisÑbased on rapidly emerg-ing new information on chemical kinetics, reaction mechanisms, and transport
phenomena. This progress changed the process-design endeavorÑfrom one basedpredominantly on empirical experience embodied in heuristics and correlations,
to a more reliable, quantitatively predictive activity. The design of refineries and
other facilities for production of large-volume commodity products was enor-
mously influenced by predictive models based on science and applied mathemat-
ics. The abstraction necessary to produce general models for design purposes, as
well as the maturing of chemical engineering as an academic discipline, had the
effect of divorcing chemistry from chemical engineering to some extent, relative
to the earlier period during which chemical engineering had emerged as a branch
of chemistry.The application of new methods for chemical research in industry during thisperiod was reinforced by several factors. These included steady hiring of univer-
sity graduates, the engagement of many university faculty members in the chemi-
cal sciences as consultants, the substantial growth of research divisions in manyBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERcompanies doing long-range research, and the mutual understanding and align-ment of goals between universities and industry.All of these factors began to change in the 1990s. Fundamental chemicalresearch began to overlap with and penetrate chemical engineering to an unprec-
edented extent. This has been characteristic for interdisciplinary fields such as
polymers, catalysis, electronic materials synthesis and processing, biological sci-
ence and engineering, pharmacology and drug delivery, nanoscale science and
engineering, and computational science and engineering. These fields of research
have become not just accepted but actually central to both chemistry and chemi-
cal engineering departments, and they cut across the traditional subdisciplinary
boundaries discussed in the first paragraph. The nature of the efforts of chemists
and chemical engineers in these areas are sometimes difficult to separate in a
meaningful or useful way. Some research emphasizes fundamental curiosity or
solving puzzles of nature, some aims to test intriguing or provocative hypotheses,
and some seeks to improve our ability to address technological or societal prob-
lems.There is no doubt that chemistry and chemical engineering have reached ahigh level of integration across the entire spectrum of the chemical sciences.
ChemistsÑwho have traditionally worked at the end of the spectrum nearest topure, basic researchÑare also aware of the societal and technological benefit oftheir work. Indeed, such benefits are commonly cited to justify the costs of the
research. Furthermore, chemists are increasingly involved in constructing, ana-
lyzing, and using complex systems and assemblies, from cells to clouds, from
energy production to earth systems. This merges naturally with the systems ap-
proach of engineering. Approaching the chemical sciences from the traditionally
chemical engineering end of the spectrum, we find chemical engineers increas-
ingly entering, and in some cases leading, in more basic fields of chemistry be-
cause more science input is needed to solve technological problems or because
the tools of the chemical engineer are more suited to discovery in certain areas.
The evolution toward integration in the chemical sciences is quite consistent with
the idea that they are gravitating toward PasteurÕs quadrant of Figure 1-1, in whichthe interplay between basic and applied research is more cyclical than linear.A new kind of relationship is emerging between universities and industry inthe chemical sciences, influenced in part by the Bayh-Dole Act of 1980, which
allowed universities to retain intellectual property rights from federally funded
research.2 As large industrial organizations have fewer and smaller departments
doing long-range or basic research, they look to universities both for fundamental
research and for students. In contrast to previous decades, in which many compa-2For further discussion of this topic, see: Research Teams and Partnerships: Trends in the ChemicalSciences, National Research Council, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1999; Reducingthe Time from Basic Research to Innovation in the Chemical Sciences, National Research Council,National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., in press, 2003.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE STRUCTURES AND CULTURES OF THE DISCIPLINES21nies simply supported university research and teaching without looking for a spe-cific return, current university-industry partnerships are often focused on specific
shorter-term production of new data, knowledge, and insight. This has produced
at least two identifiable trends in the nature of these relationships. In some cases,
the interactions have become focused but strongÑin terms of financial support ofthe academic partner from industryÑenabling an unprecedented level of breadthand depth in concentration on subjects of mutual interest. In other cases, in order
for university research to achieve technological or societal relevance, it has be-
come necessary for university researchers to strike out on their own, to take prom-
ising leads from basic research and convert them into more fully developed tech-
nology. This means using research as a starting point and developing it into the
seed of a start-up company. When large companies invest less in developing their
own basic science, such start-up ventures become important in providing path-
ways that lead from discovery and invention to sources of new business develop-
ment.When taken together, the factors introduced in this chapter explain the moti-vation and rationale for this integrated report on challenges facing the chemical
sciences, chemistry and chemical engineering. The chemical sciences will unlock
our ability to understand the mysteries of our worldÑfrom new synthesis andcatalysis to life itself. The chemical sciences will produce answers to our future
energy needs and environmental challenges. The chemical sciences will produce
the materials of the future, and they will produce practical biotechnology from
biology. In this spirit, chemists and chemical engineers together are moving be-
yond the molecular frontier. The central challenge will be to create new under-
standing of our existing and potential physical world, and to use that understand-
ing to produce a better world.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.223Synthesis and Manufacturing: Creating andExploiting New Substances and NewTransformations
Some Challenges for Chemists and Chemical Engineers¥Develop methods that will enable synthesis of all important molecules
in reasonable yields using compact synthetic schemes, so that no use-
ful compound is inaccessible to practical synthesis.¥Develop novel transformations that perform with the selectivities typi-
cal of enzymatic reactions, so that geometric factors are more impor-
tant than the intrinsic reactivity of a molecule.¥Use computer methods to design important target molecules and de-
sign efficient ways to make them.¥Exploit combinatorial methods to discover important properties in syn-
thetic materials.¥Design synthetic procedures that can be varied systematically for the
purpose of optimizing specific properties of the reaction products.¥Understand fully the basic chemical and physical properties of sur-
faces, especially those of solid catalysts.¥Develop versatile and reliable synthetic methodologies for hard matter
(microstructured materials such as nanoparticles and porous solids)that are as effective as those for synthesis of soft matter (complex
organic and biomolecules).Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNTHESIS AND MANUFACTURING23¥Synthesize new substances that can spontaneously self-assemble intocomplex organized systems with important properties.¥Incorporate enzymes, native or modified, as catalysts in the synthesisand manufacture of important materials.¥Devise good manufacturing processesÑefficient and environmentallybenign, producing no unwanted by-products, and using little energyÑfor all important products.¥Intensify manufacturing processes, so that compact chemical plantscan make required amounts of product efficiently, safely, and with mini-
mal environmental impact.GOALSThe long-term goal of the basic science in synthesis is to develop the abilityto create all the substances and organized chemical systems and transformations
that are possible under the limits of natural laws, not just those that occur in
Nature. The importance of such an extension of Nature is clear in medicinal chem-

istry, for instance, but it is also part of the basic science of chemistry itself. In
most cases, only enough of the new molecules will be created to permit an evalu-
ation of their properties.Of course, in reality new chemical substances are not synthesized at randomwith no purpose in mindÑthe numbers that have still not been created are too
staggering for a random approach. By one estimate,1 as many as 10
200 molecules
could exist that have the general size and chemical character of typical medicines.
Instead, chemists create new substances with the aim that their properties will be
scientifically important or useful for practical purposes. As part of basic science,
chemists have created new substances to test theories. For example, the molecule
benzene has the special property of Òaromaticity,Ó which in this context refers to
special stability related to the electronic structure of a molecule. Significant effort
has gone into creating new nonbenzenoid aromatic compounds to test the gener-
ality of theories about aromaticity. These experiments helped stimulate the appli-
cation of quantum mechanical theory to the prediction of molecular energies.Synthesis is achieved by performing chemical transformations, some ofwhich are already known and some of which must be invented. Thus another goal
of the basic science of synthesis is to invent new types of transformations, both
because novel transformations are part of the universe of chemistry and also be-
cause they are the tools that make it possible to create interesting and useful new
substances.1A. W. Czarnik, Accts. Chem. Res. 1996, 
29, 112-113.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERAs another part of this field, it is also important to invent overall strategies toachieve multistep syntheses involving a sequence of transformations. Knowing
how to perform simple transformations is like knowing the legal moves in chess;
achieving the synthesis of a complicated molecule requires the strategic combi-
nation of many simple transformations, just as winning at chess requires a strat-
egy to combine a sequence of legal moves. Some of the achievements in synthe-
sis have involved the invention of general strategies to attack particular classes of
difficult problems. These efforts will be directed toward the synthesis of many
kinds of substances with a variety of descriptions, such as organic and inorganic
compounds, polymers and ceramics, and hard materials and soft materials.A special aspect of synthesis is the synthesis of natural products, chemicalcompounds found in nature. For example, once the chemical structure of penicil-
lin had been determined, synthetic chemists set out to make it from simple chemi-
cals using nonbiological techniquesÑeven though the mold makes it very well.A synthetic procedure for making penicillin would also provide the opportunity
for making analogous compounds. The structure of penicillin represented a chal-
lenge because it could not be made by the chemical transformations then known.
Thus both new transformations and new strategies had to be invented. In this
case, the result then allowed chemists to use these new transformations to make
other related antibiotics, which are now used commonly as medicines. However,
the original impetus for the synthesis was more basic. When chemists saw a struc-
ture in a natural compound that was too challenging for the current synthetic
methodology, they created new methods and strategies that helped fill the chemi-
cal universe with more effective tools.The goal of applied chemistry and chemical engineering is to learn how tomanufacture useful new substances. Exploratory chemists often use methods that
produce only small samples of the new material and are not suitable for large
scale manufacturing, so entirely new schemes of synthesis must be invented. Also,
manufacturing equipment and processes have to be developed that meet all the
other criteriaÑefficient high-yield processes with inexpensive starting materials,easy isolation of pure products, and no environmental problems. A further more
basic goal is to develop the general principles that can be applied to solve new
problems.In both synthesis and chemical manufacturing there is a general need to de-velop separation methods as well as synthesis methods. Until every synthetic
reaction is perfectÑwith respect to atom economy, so no side-products areformed, and by performing the reaction without added solvents or catalystsÑit isnecessary to isolate the desired product and purify it. This is one of the most
expensive aspects of some manufacturing processes, particularly in pharmaceuti-
cal manufacture. Thus there are two goals related to separations. One is to learn
how to isolate and purify the desired compounds with high efficiency, and the
other is to develop synthetic processes that do not need such separations. For
manufacturing, a further goal is to eliminate solvents or at least replace them withBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNTHESIS AND MANUFACTURING25harmless, inexpensive, and easily removed or recovered solvents. One interestingapproach is to substitute water for organic solvents; another is to use unusual
solvents such as supercritical carbon dioxide or even supercritical water. Syn-
thetic transformations often involve adding catalysts, substances that direct chemi-
cal reactions along less energetic but more efficient pathways. Solid catalysts that
can be simply filtered away, or retained in a reactor as the other components pass
through, are also desirable.Atom economy is a goal only relatively recently understood. If all the atomsin the reactants are found in the desired product, we say that there is excellent
atom economy. However, in many chemical reactions additional products are
formed containing some of the atoms of the reactants. This is true in displacement
and elimination reactions. It is also true if the reaction is not perfectly selective,
and additional undesired products are formed. In most cases, the extra chemicals
produced in displacement or elimination reactions or in nonselective reactions
must be removed, and disposing of them adds cost and the potential for environ-
mental problems (see Chapter 9 for further discussion of related matters).PROGRESS TO DATEFew known and thermodynamically feasible molecular structures are pres-ently seen as impossible goals for synthesis. New transformations and effective
strategies permit chemists to synthesize highly complex molecules, such as new
natural compounds discovered in the continued chemical exploration of the natu-
ral world. Again, the point of such work is to develop new chemistry that permits
an approach to structures of the type found in nature. This expands the power of
chemistry and allows medicinal chemists to synthesize complex structures.Synthetic efforts have also extended to compounds of theoretical and practi-cal interest. A variety of novel cyclic, bridged, caged, interlocking, knotted, and
otherwise topologically unusual structures have been prepared in both the or-
ganic and inorganic arenas. These studies have provided new insights into struc-
ture and reactivity: for example, new zeolitic materials have valuable properties
as catalysts, and highly strained caged organic structures have shown intriguing
energetic properties.An interesting example is the work to synthesize the alkaloid strychnine.Robert Burns Woodward (Nobel Prize, 1965) was the first chemist to synthesize
this very complicated structure, which has many places where the detailed spatial
orientation of chemical bonds was important. The synthesis was accomplished by
a team of students and postdoctoral associates that he directed. The world did not
need a new source of highly toxic strychnine, which is widely available in nature,
but the synthetic challenge required Woodward to develop new approaches to
some synthetic problems. The general approachesÑinvolving new reactions andnew strategiesÑdeveloped for strychnine and other biologically relevant mol-ecules taught chemists how to tackle other challenging synthetic problems andBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERindicated the kind of complex molecule that was accessible through synthesis.Continuing developments of new strategies and new chemical reactions in the
1980s and 1990s led to several new syntheses of strychnine by other chemists,
using less than half the number of steps of the original Woodward synthesis. Such
work, expanding the tools of synthesis, has greatly increased our ability to syn-
thesize useful medicines.There are natural targets whose syntheses have important practical applica-tions. For example, paclitaxel (marketed as Taxol by Bristol-Myers Squibb) is an
anticancer compound originally isolated from the bark of a species of yew tree,
but for a long time it seemed that natural sources would not be sufficient to meet
the need. Consequently, many chemists developed synthetic approaches to
paclitaxel from readily available materials, although these are not yet fully prac-
tical for manufacturing. The quest continues, and a semisynthetic route has been
developed starting with a compound isolated from yew needles that can be har-
vested without destroying the tree. An alternative approach has employed plant-
cell cultures in bioreactors to produce paclitaxel from yew needles (see Chapter 7
for discussion of related matters).Some established methods to achieve particular transformations are not ap-plicable in all situations, and some are not practical in large-scale manufacturing.
Consequently, new methods are still being sought even for the simplest transfor-
mations. For example, the oxidation of an alcohol to a ketone or an aldehyde has
long been performed in the laboratory by using certain compounds of chromium
as the oxidant, but the aldehydes are themselves often oxidized further by the
chromium reagents. Now, new oxidants have been developed that do not have
this problem. Also, chromium oxidants are not practical in manufacturing. Their
cost is high, and more seriously, the chromium-containing waste products are not
environmentally tolerable. A better process for manufacturing would be to use
the oxygen from air as the oxidant, resulting in water as a product. Catalysts for
air oxidation already exist. However, it may be necessary to develop improved
catalysts to perform this inexpensive and environmentally benign process.This illustrates a general difference between the reactions used in manufac-turing and those used in laboratory research. Whenever possible, manufacturing
involves catalytic processes, with inexpensive reagents. In laboratory research,
the immediate goal may be just to make a small sample of a new compound to
determine its properties; consequently, there is less concern about the cost of
reagents or the environmental effect that a large-scale version would create. The
goal is to make the new compound as quickly as possible, to see if its properties
make it worth manufacturing or simply to expand our basic knowledge.Some manufacturing processes use the special properties of zeolites, inor-ganic substances that have interconnected cavities of well-defined size and shape.
Reactions can be catalyzed inside the cavities, and they are normally selective for
the shape of the substrate that can enter the cavities, and for the shape of theBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNTHESIS AND MANUFACTURING27products being formed. Selective absorption into the cavities also makes zeolitesuseful in separations.Many laboratory syntheses of important structural types of compounds aretoo long or complex to work well in manufacturing. Chemists working in the
process area are thus often engaged in inventing new approaches that use the
most modern reactions, in order to develop compact synthetic schemes with small
numbers of acceptable steps. The modern reactions that make this possible are
being invented by chemists involved in basic discovery and creation, usually in
universities. The pressure on industrial process chemists to develop practical

schemes for manufacturing important products means that they do not normally
have the time for the basic research that can lead to new chemical reactions.How do synthetic chemists invent and create new reactions? After recogniz-ing the challengeÑa transformation that cannot be done easily with current meth-odsÑthey look for inspiration in several places. One is biochemistry. If livingcells already perform a transformation related to the desired one, it may be pos-
sible to invent an analog of the natural processÑa biomimetic process. For ex-ample, in living cells there are enzymes that synthesize amino acids, and they do
it with complete selectivity for the geometric orientation of the bonds. Chemists
have now invented ways to do this without enzymes, but inspired by what is
known about the natural process. For many practical purposes, the results are
more useful and general for manufacturing.Another inspiration comes from the chemists who study reaction mecha-nisms, learning how transformations occur (Chapter 4). The insights from such
basic work often suggest new reactions that should be possible. For example,
much work has gone on recently to understand the catalysis of chemical reactions
by soluble complexes of certain metals such as palladium and platinum. They
catalyze transformations, often of great importance in manufacturing, that other-
wise may be impossible. Other work has helped us understand catalysis by metal
particles, in which the special chemical properties of the metal surfaces play the
key role. The insights from this work have stimulated the invention of other pro-
cesses, while at the same time these applications have stimulated more work
aimed at basic understanding. Work in synthesis is at least as important in show-
ing chemists new parts of their universe as it is in solving practical problems.Another important area is the use of photochemistryÑchemistry that resultsfrom light absorptionÑto perform transformations that are not otherwise pos-sible. The practical applications of photosynthesis were based on fundamental
work to learn the new pathways that light absorption makes possible, but the
work on these synthetic methods has also added to our basic understanding of the
reaction mechanisms. The important natural process of photosynthesis also in-
spires some work in photochemistry, where the challenge is one of producing
artificial photosynthetic systems that could use sunlight to drive the formation of
energetic materials.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERFinally, it is not possible to discount the component of intellectual creativityfor such inventions. To quote George Bernard Shaw, ÒYou see things; and yousay, ÔWhy?Õ But I dream things that never were; and I say, 
ÔWhy not?ÕÓ Chemists
looking at their universe often see that some parts are missing, and they set out to
create them. For example, a Nobel Prize was awarded to Herbert Brown and
Georg Wittig in 1979 for the invention of new types of useful transformations
that were unprecedented in nature. This effort to create goes beyond chemical
reactions and extends to molecules and organized molecular systems that origi-
nate in the imagination of an individual chemist.A Nobel Prize to Geoffrey Wilkinson and Ernest O. Fisher in 1973 recog-nized their creation, and understanding, of a new class of substancesÑunrelatedto anything found in natureÑcalled metallocenes. Originally, these organometal-lic sandwich compounds (and their Òopen-facedÓ versions) were of interest purely
as new occupants of the chemical universe, as if a new type of planet had been
created in the astronomical universe. However, some versions of such sandwich
compounds have been shown more recently to act as catalysts for very significant
reactions, and they are now applied in the manufacturing of polymers.Synthetic inspiration can come from an attempt to make drastic improve-ments in the properties of existing substances. For example, some metals and
metal compounds become superconducting at extremely low temperatures. Su-
perconductors are attractive materials because they conduct electricity without
any loss caused by resistance below a characteristic transition temperature, al-
though above that temperature they are poor electrical conductors (and some are
even insulators). More practical, high-temperature superconductors, first devel-
oped by Johannes G. Bednorz and Karl A. Muller, a mineralogist and a physicist,
have great current and potential uses throughout science, including chemistry and
chemical engineering. For example, most modern nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) instruments have electromagnets wound with superconducting wires.

Once an electric current is started in the wires, the source of electricity is discon-
nected, and the current keeps flowing as long as the temperature is kept very low
by cooling the magnet with liquid helium. There is a great effort to invent new
materials that would be superconducting at higher and more easily attained tem-
peratures. Recently chemists and other scientists have been able to create new
superconducting materials based on inorganic ceramics, which have considerably
higher superconducting transition temperatures than the materials of Bednorz and
Muller.Since synthesis is such a central part of chemistry and chemical engineering,many other Nobel Prizes have recognized synthetic achievements. For example, a
Nobel Prize in 1990 went to Elias J. Corey both for his contributions to the devel-
opment of theory and methodology in organic synthesis and his application of
them to the synthesis of important biologically active substances. It also recog-
nized his formalization, and even computerization, of the strategies that success-
ful multistep syntheses follow. Karl Ziegler and Giulio Natta received a NobelBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNTHESIS AND MANUFACTURING29Prize in 1963 for inventing a new general method to synthesize important poly-mers, a method that uncovered much new basic science. A Nobel Prize in 1984
went to Robert Bruce Merrifield for his invention of a general approach to the
synthesis of polypeptides and proteins, in a style directly reminiscent of the bio-
logical method used in such synthesis.Although much of the preceding discussion involved the synthesis of newmolecules by organic and inorganic chemists, there is another area of chemistry
in which such creation is importantÑthe synthesis of new atoms. The periodictable lists elements that have been discovered and isolated from nature, but a few
have been created by human activity. Collision of atomic particles with the nuclei
of existing atoms is the normal source of radioactive isotopes and of some of the
very heavy elements at the bottom of the periodic table. Indeed nuclear chemists
and physicists have created some of the most important elements that are used for
nuclear energy and nuclear weapons, plutonium in particular.An exciting goal has recently shown signs of progress. Theory has suggestedthat beyond the bottom of the usual periodic table, where the elements become
quite unstable and have only a fleeting existence, there should be an Òisland ofstability,Ó a group of elements more stable to nuclear decay than those coming
earlier in the periodic table. Recently nuclear chemists have obtained evidence
for such special stability in the predicted elements. They are not stable enough for
long-term isolation, but their properties help confirm theories of nuclear structure
and stability.CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE FUTUREThere is a healthy integration of the various branches of chemistry and chemi-cal engineering. This integration brings together synthesis and measurement,
theory and experiment, and design and manufacturing. The integration extends to
the related disciplines with which chemistry and chemical engineering share the
intellectual frontiers of science and technologyÑbiology, physics, and electron-ics to name just a few. This has opened great new opportunities.Within chemistry, synthetic chemists will increasingly make use of the spe-cial properties of metal-based catalysts, both solid and as soluble complexes, to
devise new transformations that are selective and efficient. Chemical engineers
are increasingly involved in product design, in addition to process design, requir-
ing the integral participation of the chemical engineer in the molecular concep-
tion and design of the products. Physical chemists and chemical engineers will
increasingly understand the surface chemistry and properties of solid catalysts;
that understanding will help in the design of even better catalysts. Inorganic chem-
ists will create many new types of molecules that combine inorganic and organic
components, and that have applications and interest in both inorganic and organic
chemistry. Chemical reactor modeling has advanced the field of electronic mate-
rials production significantly.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERTheoretical chemists will increasingly be able to predict the properties ofunknown molecules, and thus stimulate synthetic chemists to make the interest-
ing ones. As chemical engineers open new frontiers in biological engineering,
they team effectively with chemists and biologists to influence biosystems and
processes from metabolism to cell adhesion. The synergy with biology is particu-
larly strong in medicinal chemistry, where computer methods are used to design
drugs. In every pharmaceutical company the computer-aided-design group works
from the molecular structure of an important protein, that had been determined by
structural chemists, and guides and rationalizes the work of the synthetic groups.
Some important new medicines have been designed this way, and many more
will come in the future.Development of New Synthetic MethodologyIn spite of the impressive progress achieved by synthetic chemists in the pastseveral decades, the state of the art of methods for chemical synthesis remains at
an early stage of development. There is a great need for new reactions and syn-
thetic methods to permit any substance, of any complexity, be it organic or inor-
ganic in structure, to be synthesized with high chemical efficiency, in a small
number of steps, and with minimal cogeneration of any waste products. Synthetic
methodology is the software of the chemical sciences. Just as there is an explicit
expectation that there will be a constant evolution and improvement of the soft-
ware and the operating systems that drive our computers, so should the chemical
community expect that there will be constant improvement and evolution of the
armament of methodologies available for the practicing preparative chemist and
the chemical industries. An explicit goal of the chemical community should be to
make continual improvements in synthetic methodology, thereby expanding the
range of challenging molecules that are accessible to practical synthesis.CatalysisSome aspects of synthetic chemistry have changed in response to environ-mental needs. For example, in the pharmaceutical industry the classical methods
produce, on the average, about nine times as much disposable waste as desired
product. This has led to the demand for procedures that have atom efficiency, in
which all the atoms of the reacting compounds appear in the product. Thus (as
discussed earlier) the demand for atom economy offers additional opportunities
for creative invention of transformations.There are still numerous major important targets for synthesis. As a simpleexample, we currently manufacture ammoniaÑfor use in fertilizers and otherimportant productsÑby causing nitrogen to react with hydrogen at high tempera-ture and pressure. Yet microorganisms in the roots of some legumes are able to
convert nitrogen to ammonia at ordinary temperatures and pressures (althoughBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNTHESIS AND MANUFACTURING31not using gaseous hydrogen). We need to understand their chemistry, even if it isnot as practical as is our current method of manufacturing ammonia. Similarly,
the enzyme methane monooxygenase is able to use atmospheric oxygen to con-
vert methane to methanol, whereas chemical systems tend to oxidize the methane
further. We need to develop catalysts for this important process that could con-
vert the methane in natural gas into a useful chemical. The catalysts for both of
these processes will surely include the inorganic chemistry of metallic elements.Combinatorial ChemistrySome new aspects have been introduced into the style of synthesis recently,and these aspects hold great promise. One has to do with what are called combi-natorial methods, where syntheses are carried out to make many different (but
related) products at one time. Sometimes these are in a mixture, but with the
different products attached to separate polymer beads, while at other times the
simultaneous reactions are performed in many different small vessels. For ex-
ample, a library of amide products might be produced by allowing a single re-
agent to react with a large group of different amines. For such libraries of prod-
ucts, different schemes have been devised to identify the individual components.
Then the various products can be tested for a desirable property. In pharmaceuti-
cal chemistry, the library of products is put through biological screens, usually
automated, to determine whether any of the products binds particularly well to an
enzyme of interest or to another biological receptor. When one product has been
identified as a good binder, normal synthetic procedures are used to make enough
for thorough testing.At one time, some people predicted that the ability of combinatorial methodsto produce literally thousands of new products at one time would diminish the
need for synthetic chemists in the pharmaceutical industry. However, the oppo-
site has turned out to be true. The large number of leads produced by combinato-
rial methods requires many more synthetic chemists to continue research on these
compounds in a more traditional way. Companies are increasing, not decreasing,
their cadre of synthetic chemists. In addition, combinatorial methods have pro-
voked radically new approaches to screening the libraries rapidly for good lead
compounds, generating a new field called high throughput analysis and new op-
portunities for chemists.Biomimetic SynthesisAs we increasingly understand the chemistry performed by living systems, inparticular that catalyzed by enzymes, we will continue to develop biomimetic
methods to achieve some of the special selectivities that enzymes show. Enzymes
can selectively bind a particular molecule out of the mixture of substances in the
cell, then hold it in such a way that the geometry of the enzyme-substrate com-Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERplex determines what happens next in a sequence of chemical reactions. For ex-ample, in an enzyme-substrate complex the reaction may take place at a particular
part of a molecule even if that is not the most chemically reactive siteÑin con-trast to normal synthetic chemistry, where changes take place at the reactive func-
tional groups. Alternatively, enzymatic reaction might produce just one of sev-
eral possible stereochemical consequences. For example, an enzyme might bind a
natural L-amino acid but not the mirror image and thus distinguish the L -amino
acids that human cells contain from the D-amino acids sometimes found inbacteria.The selective introduction of chirality is a problem of much current interestin synthesis, and it is generally solved by using the same concept that governs
enzymatic reactions. The nonchiral substrate interacts with a chiral reagent or
catalyst, and the selective conversion of the substrate to a chiral product follows.
Pioneering work to develop such methods was recognized in 2001 by Nobel prizes
to William S. Knowles, Ryoji Noyori, and K. Barry Sharpless. In synthesis the
binding often involves quite different forces than are used in enzymes, and the
reagents and catalysts are much smaller than are protein enzymes. New proce-
dures increasingly involve the formation of well-defined molecular complexes
between substrate and catalyst, or substrate and reagent, that may allow chemists
to overcome the classical domination of selectivity by the reactivity of functional
groups. Donald J. Cram, Jean-Marie Lehn, and Charles J. Pedersen received
Nobel prizes in 1987 for their work on molecular complexes.There is another approach that is increasingly part of synthesis: the use ofenzymes as catalysts. This approach is strengthened by the new ability of chem-
ists and molecular biologists to modify enzymes and change their properties.
There is also interest in the use of artificial enzymes for this purpose, either those
that are enzyme-like but are not proteins, or those that are proteins but based on
antibodies. Catalytic antibodies and nonprotein enzyme mimics have shown some
of the attractive features of enzymes in processes for which natural enzymes are
not suitable.Self-AssemblyHistorically, chemistry has been largely reductionist, breaking natural mate-rials such as wood down to their pure components so they could be analyzed. It
has since become more integrationist, putting together pure chemicals into com-
plex organized structures. This is true in the new areas of nanoscience and

nanotechnology, where synthesis is needed to make organized arrangements of
many chemical componentsÑnanostructuresÑwith the distant goal of makingtiny molecular machines and even molecular scale computers. Integration is also
exploited as chemists begin to synthesize organized structures that imitate some
of the properties of living cells. The processes carried out by living cells depend
on the spatial organization of many different chemical components. Chemists, inBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNTHESIS AND MANUFACTURING33particular synthetic chemists, also need to start building such organization intostructures with many different cooperating chemical componentsÑboth to un-derstand them and to create useful microscopic devices. Such organization is
most favorably based on spontaneous self-assembly of the chemical components,
driven by their own selective molecular recognition and interactions. This is as if
the components of an automobile would automatically fall into the correct places,
rather than being placed there by machines. In chemistry such spontaneous self-
assembly is possible on the molecular scale, but needs to be developed.A vital aspect of chemical self-assembly is selection. In a mixture of com-pounds the correct pairings of chemicals must occur, so the system must have a
way to choose those correct pairings. An exciting new challenge is to develop
ways to impose a process of selection on the mixture of components, so that
unwanted interactions are suppressed. In biology mutants are selected because
they convey an advantage to a cell. Chemists need a similar tool, for example a
library of possible catalysts from which the system would use their relative cata-
lytic activities to self-select the one that is the most potent. This would remove
the current need to screen the entire library for such activity. An even more desir-
able goal, difficult to reach currently, would be to develop chemical systems that
could vary their own structures in a drive to produce the optimum of some desired
property such as catalytic potency or strength of binding to a receptor. Such a
chemical system could optimize itself according to the needs of humankind.ManufacturingChemical manufacturing systems involve the implementation of chemicalsynthesis schemes to transform one composition of matter to another on scales
from the very small (micrograms) to very large (hundreds of billions of kilograms
per year). These materials and processes enable modern life. They may be inor-
ganic, organic, or even biological, and they span the range from metals and con-
crete to glass, paper, and plastic; from advanced composites and electronic mate-
rials to fertilizers, agrochemicals, and dyes; from drinking water and fuels to safe
refrigerants; and from pharmaceuticals to packaging for secure nuclear wastes.
No matter what composition is produced, no matter what the purpose, and no
matter what the scale, process systems engineers face relentless demands. These
demands are for increased capital efficiency and reduced costs for materials, la-
bor, and energyÑall while producing material of high and consistent quality anddoing so reliably, safely, sustainably, and with minimal environmental impact.Specific new challenges to process systems engineering are both economicand social. Globalization of the chemical enterprise has opened new markets that
are linked to the general increase in the standard of living throughout the world.
At the same time, globalization has resulted in growing worldwide competition.
This, along with the introduction of electronic commerce, is producing greater
market efficiencies. It is also producing reduced manufacturing margins at a timeBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERof increased investor demands for predictable earnings growth, despite the inher-ent cyclical character of very-large-scale capital-intensive industry.Sustainability, hazard reduction, and protection of health and the environ-ment remain great concerns for the process industries. Many of the raw materials
usedÑespecially those derived from oil, gas, and some plants and animalsÑhavebeen and in some cases continue to be depleted at rates either large compared to
known reserves or faster than replenishment. In addition, there is the desire for
products, intermediates, solvents, catalysts, and other materials produced or se-
lected for use in chemical manufacture to be as safe and nontoxic as possible
during their use and to be recoverable or benignly degradable after their use.Also, by the very nature of chemical transformations, there are almost al-ways unused chemicals remaining. These chemical leftovers include contami-
nants in the raw materials, incompletely converted raw materials, unavoidable
coproducts, unselective reaction by-products, spent catalysts, and solvents. There
have long been efforts to minimize the production of such waste products, and to
recover and reuse those that cannot be eliminated. For those that cannot be re-
used, some different use has been sought, and as a last resort, efforts have been
made to safely dispose of whatever remains. The same efforts apply to any left-
overs from the production of the energy from the fuels produced or consumed by
the processing industries. Of particular immediate and increasing concern are the
potential detrimental effects of carbon dioxide emissions to the atmosphere from
fossil fuel combustion, as discussed further in Chapters 9 and 10.The chemical enterprise must meet the societal and environmental challenges
it faces. This will necessitate starting from different raw materials, producing
new products, using new sources of energy, and paying much greater attention to
the creation and disposal of waste. Taking these steps will require innovations in
the chemistry used, in catalysts to facilitate this chemistry, in reactors to manu-
facture the products via this new chemistry, and in separations techniques to pu-
rify the resulting products and recover everything else.The future will likely see greater use of more abundant or renewable rawmaterials, and greater reuse of materials such as carbon dioxide, salts, tars, and
sludges that are currently discarded as waste. Exploiting some of these alternative
raw materials and chemistries may involve greater energy input than required for
raw materials presently in use, and the source and impact of any such increased
energy requirements will need to be carefully considered. Many of these goals are
incorporated in the principles of green chemistry.2Chemistries such as gasification, carboxylation, carbonylation, partial oxida-tion, and salt splitting may see much greater emphasis in manufacturing. These
chemistries will need concurrent development of more selective catalytic and
biocatalytic systems and promoters, as well as processes requiring much less ex-2http://www.acs.org/.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNTHESIS AND MANUFACTURING35otic materials of construction than we now have available. Demands for greatercapital, energy, and material efficiency will require the development of process
systems that are more tightly integrated. Such systems will need greater mass and
energy recycling, more by-product reuse, and advances in computer-aided,
plantwide process control. Only with such advances will it be possible to main-
tain safety, reliability, flexibility, operability, and economic performance in highly
integrated systems.Some of the new process engineering technologies for manufacturing willinvolve new devices and the exploitation of new phenomena that will change the
traditional way we look at unit operations in chemical engineering. In the area of
reaction engineering, new units might include centrifugal or high shear reactors,
very short contact time reactors, or rotating packed-bed reactors. In these units,
process intensification (see box) is often a major driving force for reducing the
size of the device or equipment. Other novel reactor technologies include micro-
wave reactors that have the objective of reducing the energy use and bulk tem-
perature of reaction mixtures by performing selective heating on the particles of
the catalyst. Novel separations technologies include membrane absorption and
membrane distillation, centrifugal distillation columns, and simulated moving bed
adsorbers.An interesting trend in process intensification is not only the reduction in thesize of equipment, but the integration of different functions and phenomena. For
instance, microreactors are devices of very small dimensions that have a structure
consisting of different layers with micromachined channels (10 to 100 microns in
diameter). The layers perform different functions such as mixing, catalytic reac-
tion, heat exchange, and separation. The very high heat-transfer rates (e.g., 20,000
W/m2K) allow exothermic processes to be operated isothermally. Also, very lowreaction-volume/surface-area ratios make microreactors attractive for processes
involving highly toxic components.Process intensification also can be achieved by reconfiguring standard equip-
ment. A good example is the use of divided wall columns for distillation, in which
various separations that are commonly performed in separate columns are inte-
grated into one single column. This is accomplished through clever rearrange-
ment of trays and divisions between them, yielding significant savings in both
capital cost and energy. Another way of achieving process intensification is by
expanding the functions in the device. An example is reactive distillation in which
hold-up catalyst is added over a subset of trays in a column to perform simulta-
neous reaction and separation. The methyl acetate column developed by Eastman
Chemical (see box) provides an excellent illustration of the dramatic cost reduc-
tions that can be achieved with this technology. Specifically, a single reactive
distillation column replaced a large complex plant that consisted of one reactor
and nine conventional columns. This not only reduced the required capital invest-
ment to one-fifth of the original cost, but it also greatly reduced the energy con-
sumption.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIEREmerging Platforms for Process Intensificationand MiniaturizationChemical engineers have responded successfully for years to pres-sures to improve the efficiency and reduce the cost of chemical process
operations and to design and construct chemical plants as safely andexpeditiously as possible. In this regard, the unit operations concept haslong been a useful organizing principle for the synthesis of chemical pro-
cess flow sheets, while economies of scale and energy efficiency have
dictated construction of the very large petrochemical plants that havedominated the scene for decades.However, this situation is hardly static. For instance, hybrid processmethods and apparatus for performing chemical operations in a highlyintegrated fashion are continually being introduced that defy simple clas-
sification according to the traditional unit operations schemeÑand rendersomewhat naive the view of the process flow sheet as an orderly network
of discrete and well-defined steps. At the same time, the mix of technical,

economic, and social factors that drive chemical plant siting, design, andcapacity decisions is continually evolving to reflect emerging social issuesrelated to environmental acceptability and public safety, especially where
the transportation, storage, and use of hazardous chemicals are con-cerned. Bigger is not necessarily better, and the future may conceivably
witness the construction of smaller, modular, less centralized, and more
flexible chemical plants capable of Òon-demandÓ chemical production.
Several technological responses to these emerging trends can begathered under the umbrella of process intensification. This term encom-
passes a wide range of methods and equipment for performing chemicalprocessing steps more quickly and compactly, thereby increasing theDemands for greater capital, energy, and material efficiency will require thedevelopment of more integrated process systems involving greater mass and en-
ergy recycle, as well as advances in computer-aided process control to maintain
safety, reliability, flexibility, and operability in such highly integrated systems.
Capital efficiency will also drive the need for greater process intensification as
discussed above, making more material more quickly and in less space. New
methods will need to be developed exploiting new phenomena to increase the
intrinsic rates of mass transfer (for reactors and separations devices), heat transfer
(again associated with separations and reactions devices), and reaction kinetics.
In addition, the synergistic combination of multiple tasks into single devices such
as reactive distillation will become more widespread. Such advances could result
in new reactor configurations and new separations and other processing equip-
ment exploiting different phenomena than at present, resulting in smaller, sim-
pler, less energy-demanding processes, and less environmental impact.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNTHESIS AND MANUFACTURING37volumetric productivity and reducing the footprint of the chemical plant.Efforts at process intensification, underway for several decades, havefocused primarily on downsizing process equipment and boosting its
throughput; static-mixer-based devices, compact heat exchangers, struc-tured packings, catalyst monoliths, and centrifugal contactors have allbeen used for this purpose. In recent years, considerable energy has
also been devoted to the design of multifunctional apparatus capable ofconducting several process steps in a synergistic fashion. Such taskintegration is exemplified by the reactive distillation process for methyl
acetate production.continuesThe task-integrated methyl acetate column is much simpler than a conventionalplant. Courtesy of Eastman Chemical Company.A family of approaches to achieving high volumetric productivity that isreceiving considerable attention in this age of miniaturization involves theuse of apparatus with very small flow channels with dimensions of sev-
eral microns and up. The steep concentration and temperature gradients
realized in such equipment encourage rapid heat and mass transfer andpromote greater uniformity of reaction conditions. Not only the rate butalso the selectivity and yield of chemical conversions can, in principle, be
significantly improved. Devices based on both silicon chip and micro-channel architectures are currently being considered for performing rapidmixing, heat-exchange, and catalytic reaction in a highly compact and
intrinsically safe manner.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERThe silicon chip as a miniaturized chemical reactor. Courtesy of Felice Frankel.Micro heat exchangers based on microchannel architecture. Top left and bottom:Reprinted with permission from W. Ehrfeld et al., Microreactors: New Technologyfor Modern Chemistry. Wiley-VCH: Weinheim, Germany, 2000. Top right: Cour-tesy of the Institut fuer Mikrotechnik Mainz, GmbH.Chemically functional membranes afford yet another intriguing plat-form upon which process-intensified chemistry can be performed. For
example, an enzyme membrane reactor process is used to produce aBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNTHESIS AND MANUFACTURING39chiral intermediate for the cardiac drug diltiazem. This membrane systemperforms a number of tasks in a highly integrated and effective fashionincluding:¥reversible biocatalyst immobilization;¥ minimization of mass transfer resistance through efficient substrate/
enzyme contact;¥separation of immiscible organic and aqueous process streams,along with separation of the reactants and products contained within
them; and¥coupling of the enzymatic reaction with a subsequent complexationreaction designed to remove an inhibitory by-product in the form of a

water-soluble adduct.Still other types of chemically functional membranesÑparticularly ad-sorptive microfiltration membranes containing affinity ligands or other
complexants bound to interior pore wall surfacesÑare capable ofAqueous SolutionContaining
Bisulfite Anion(2R, 3S) Ð MMPGin SolventEnzyme in Microporous
Hollow-fiber
Membrane(2R, 3S) Ð MMPG(2S, 3R) Ð MMPGin SolventAqueous SolutionContaining Adduct Formed

Between Aldehyde and 

Bisulfite AnionOHCO2CH3CH3OHOHCO2HCH3OHStereoselective
Enzymatic
Hydrolysis
(2S,3R)-Methyl Methoxyphenylglycidate(2S,3R)-Methoxy
phenylglycidic Acid
Enzyme membrane reactor for production of diltiazem intermediate. A solution ofthe racemic ester in organic solvent enters the port at the bottom of the reactorand flows past the strands of microporous, hollow-fiber membrane that contain an
enzyme. The enzyme catalyzes hydrolysis of one enantiomer of the ester thatundergoes decarboxylation to 4-methoxyphenylacetaldehyde (which in turn formsa water-soluble bisulfite complex that remains in the aqueous phase). The other
enantiomer of the ester remains in the aqueous stream that leaves the reactor viathe port at the top. Courtesy of Sepracor, Inc.continuesBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERWHY ALL THIS IS IMPORTANTThe most distinctive aspect of the chemical sciences and engineering is theability to create new molecules and chemical systemsÑfrom minute to commod-ity quantitiesÑwithout being limited to the study of those that already exist innature. The expansion of our chemical universe through synthesis leads to great
new scientific insights. Moreover, chemical synthesis is the activity that has made
chemistry and chemical engineering so vital to human health and welfare. The
opportunities and challenges for the future are unlimited. The promise of better
medicines and better materials depends on the ability of synthetic chemists to
create new transformations and to use them in the creation and manufacture of
new substances. It is no surprise that synthesis is still the active concern of a large
fraction of practicing chemists, and will remain so.The development and implementation of techniques will be critical for allaspects of chemical manufacturingÑfrom synthesis and analysis to optimization,evaluation, design, control, supply-chain management scheduling, and operation
of chemical process systems. This will need to be done in a way that is consistent
with societal and economic objectives and constraints. And it will be critical no
matter what the chemistry or biochemistry, whether isolated or in supply-chain
networks, dedicated or general purpose, batch or continuous, microscale or
macroscale. These constraints will require the further creation and exploitation of
a science base that includes novel representations of the underlying chemical and
physical phenomena. Similarly, it will demand computationally efficient formu-
lation and solution methods, as well as the expansion and incorporation of ad-
vanced process systems engineering expertise and judgment.dramatically downsizing adsorptive separation equipment. Operation ofthese so-called Òaffinity membranesÓ in a flow-through mode sidesteps
the rate-controlling diffusive mass transfer resistances characteristic of
particulate adsorbents used in packed bedsÑand so improves volumetricproductivity. Interestingly, nature abounds with examples of processintensification realized with the aid of adsorptive membranes and enzyme
membrane reactors.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.414Chemical and PhysicalTransformations of Matter
GOALSA principal goal of the chemical sciences is to understand and manipulatechemical and physical transformations of matter. We are using the term transfor-Some Challenges for Chemists and Chemical Engineers¥Perfect the tools to study reaction mechanisms of chemical and bio-
chemical reactions, so the processes can be observed directly and
more efficient syntheses can be designed rationally.¥Develop reliable computer methods to predict the detailed pathways
and rates of unknown chemical reactions, avoiding the need for creat-
ing and measuring them to determine their practicality.
¥Understand the chemistry and properties of large molecules, including
biopolymers, to the level that small-molecule chemistry is understood.¥Understand the behavior of molecules and substances in unusual en-
vironments: at extreme temperatures or pressures, absorbed on solidsurfaces, or under shear flow.¥Understand the chemistry of molecules and substances in their ex-
cited states, or at or near their critical points, and at the nanoscalelevel in which surface characteristics can dominate bulk properties.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERmation very generally here to mean a change in composition, state, or organiza-tion of matter, or movement or rearrangement of material by flow, heat or diffu-
sion, which describes the very essence of chemical science and technology. We
need to understand the mechanisms of chemical reactions that we invent, as well
as the transformations that occur in living systems and in the environment. Such
an understanding will aid in the design of new transformations.In this domain of transformations of matter, the full scope of the chemicalsciencesÑfrom basic to applied to technological innovationÑis easily seen. For
example, it is a fundamental challenge to understand how efficient catalysts, such
as natureÕs enzymes, are able to perform transformations with very high speeds
and selectivities. Such insight would be useful in applied chemistry to design
catalysts or conditions for the transformations. Catalysis has been key to a large
number of new chemical products and processes in the last half century. Catalytic
chemical reactors are the central elements in chemical process systems in which
thermodynamic phase behavior, flow, heat transfer, and diffusion all play key
roles in performance. Many processes arising in chemical science and technology
involve physical transformations in addition to, or even without, chemical reac-
tions, such as phase change, polymer and particulate processing flows, or diffu-
sion in liquids, solids, and membranes. This chapter provides an overview of
chemical and physical transformations of matter that are the heart of the chemical
science enterprise.PROGRESS TO DATEA chemical transformation can occur when molecules collide with sufficientenergy. Typically, reaction happens when the molecules are heated or irradiated
to provide the energy necessary to overcome the activation barrier that separates
reactants from products. A catalyst reduces the magnitude of the activation bar-
rier by changing the pathway of the reaction. As described in Chapters 3, 7, and
10, catalysis is fundamental to biology, to synthesis, to manufacturing, and to
energy saving and generation.Many intermediates along the path of a reaction cannot be directly observedwith current instrumental technology, making this objective one of the long-stand-

ing goals of the chemical sciences. In 1999, Ahmed Zewail received the most
recent of the several Nobel Prizes recognizing developments of methods to fol-
low fast reactions. He was able to witness the bond-breaking and bond-making
process on the time scale of 10Ð15 seconds, which some say is the limiting time
scale for chemical reactions. In 1994, George A Olah received a Nobel prize for
work establishing the properties of reactive carbon cations, which are intermedi-
ates in many important transformations.Whereas the detailed molecular structures involved throughout the entire pro-
cession from starting materials through the transition states to products in a chemi-
cal reaction are so far not directly observable, there are certain classical ways inBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL TRANSFORMATIONS OF MATTER43which reaction mechanisms are effectively deduced. One route is through the useof kinetics, the observation of how the rate of a reaction depends on concentra-
tions of its various components, and on temperature and sometimes pressure. If
the rate doubles when either of two reactants is doubled in concentration, we
know that both are together in the transition state, while if the reaction speeds up
as the pressure is increased we know that the system has a decreased volume at
the transition state. Chemical kinetics studies can also facilitate the design of
chemical reactors and processes.A related technique for revealing mechanisms measures the rates of relatedreactions, using reacting molecules that differ in a small way from each other. A
classical approach involves measurement of isotope effects. For example, when a
hydrogen atom in a reactant is replaced by a deuterium atom, the isotope with
twice the mass, the rate of the reaction will be affected depending on what that
hydrogen atom is doing at the transition state. This technique has contributed to
our knowledge of mechanisms for a large number of reactions and has been par-
ticularly useful in exploring the mechanisms of enzyme reactions. Enzymes will
often have such strict geometric requirements that significant changes in the size
of the substrate can change the rate for geometric reasons. However, the change
from hydrogen to deuterium does not involve such a geometric problem.One interesting feature of the hydrogen versus deuterium rate effect is that itcan be used to detect a very special phenomenonÑquantum mechanical tunnel-ing by the hydrogen. In this process, the hydrogen essentially disappears from
one position and then reappears a short distance away without traversing the in-
termediate space. This is possible because all atoms have the character of both a
particle and a wave, and waves can diminish in one spot and build up in another
without necessarily rolling across the intervening region. Such tunneling has been
demonstrated in some enzymatic reactions and invoked to help explain their very
high rates. More detailed understanding of quantum mechanical phenomena is
essential to a clearer picture of chemical reaction mechanisms and rates.Evidence on the mechanism of reactions can also come from examining theexact molecular geometry of the overall process, its stereochemistry. For example,
if a reactant with defined handedness (chirality) is converted to a product that is
an equal mixture of the left- and right-handed forms, the loss of handedness indi-
cates that a particular geometry must have been involved along the path. If a
right-handed molecule is converted only to a left-handed product, we say that an
inversion of configuration has occurred, and this also tells us a lot about how the
reaction occurred.Chemists are also interested in developing reactions that produce new asym-metric centers within molecules. There is significant interest in the development
of new catalysts that produce centers of asymmetry, or handedness, within mol-
ecules that have no preferred handedness to start. Simple chiral molecules gener-
ated by these asymmetric catalysts are important building blocks for new medi-
cines and research tools.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERSeeing Chemistry in MotionChemical processes happen over a range of time scales that chal-lenges our comprehension. Some chemical reactions, such as thechange of diamond to graphite under normal conditions of temperature
and pressure or the spontaneous conversion of left-handed to right-handed amino acids, are so slow that their rate of change is measured in
millions of human lifetimes or longer. Contrast these processes with the
direct breaking of a chemical bond when a molecule absorbs light. Sucha photodissociation process is so fast that it typically takes 10 to 100femtoseconds (i.e., between 10 x 10Ð15 and 100 x 10
Ð15 seconds); this is
the time required for light to travel about 3 to 30 microns). As the 20thcentury came to a close, chemical scientists were delighted that theypossessed the tools to make kinetic measurements over the full range of
reaction rates.Different changes take place on widely different time scales; conse-quently, the complex nature of chemical transformations often can be
separated into a set of discrete steps. Each step that takes place on adifferent time scale requires the use of different experimental tools tostudy it. For example, consider the conformational change and folding of
RNA, a key molecule transferring genetic instructions from DNA to build
proteins, and a molecule that itself carries out biological transformations.For these molecules conformational changes occur on the time scale of
a few seconds. This information has been readily obtained by studying
fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) of a single RNA moleculetagged with fluorescent dyes. The energy transfer is a sensitive function
of distance between energy donor and acceptor in the molecule. There-fore, by labeling two sites of the RNA by donor and acceptor molecules,
it is possible to follow the RNA conformation as a function of time.
(A) Conformational change of RNA illustrating motion of the P1 duplex in the Tetra-hymena Group I ribozyme. Cy3 dye attached onto P1, and Cy5 attached on theother end of RNA acts as donor and acceptor, respectively. FRET between Cy3
and Cy5 signals conformational change occurring in RNA molecule. (B) FRETtime traces from single ribozyme molecules showing P1 docking and undocking.FRET is defined as IA/(ID + IA), where IA and ID are the fluorescence signals from
acceptor and donor, respectively. (C) Histograms of the dwell times in the undocked(top) and docked states (bottom) obtained from the FRET time trajectories. Thesolid lines are single exponential fits of the data giving rate constants for docking
(kdock = 1.62 
 0.08 s-1 ) and undocking (k
undock = 0.224 
 0.015 s-1), respectively.
Reprinted with permission from X. Zhuang, L. E. Bartley, H. P. Babcock, R. Russell,T. Ha, D. Herschlag, S. Chu, Science, 288, 2048 (2000). Copyright 2000, Ameri-
can Association for the Advancement of Science.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL TRANSFORMATIONS OF MATTER45continuesBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIER(A) Structures of calmodulin with and without Ca2+ ion binding. Courtesy of Mikael
Akke, Lund University, Sweden. (B) Linewidths of 43Ca-NMR spectrum of Ca2+/calmodulin mixture as a function of temperature (circles), together with best fit to
the kinetics (solid line). By analyzing the temperature dependence, the activation
barrier is determined. Adapted from T. Drakenberg, S. Fors”n, H. Lilja, J. Mag.Res. 53, 412 (1983). Reprinted from Journal of Magnetic Resonance, 53, T.Drakenberg et al., 43Ca NMR Studies of Calcium Binding to Proteins: Interpreta-
tion of Experimental Data by Bandshape Analysis, 412-422, (1983), with permis-
sion from Elsevier Science.The binding of calcium ion to calmodulin, a major biochemical regulatorof ion pumps and receptors, occurs on a time scale about a thousandtimes shorter than that observed for RNA conformational change. This
Ca2+-calmodulin binding, which can be followed successfully by nuclearmagnetic resonance (NMR), occurs in about ten milliseconds.Other chemical changes can be much faster than the RNA conforma-tional changes illustrated here. Photodissociation of sodium iodide (NaI)

in the gas phase occurs on the time scale of a few picoseconds (10
Ð12seconds). To measure this phenomenon, NaI molecules are irradiated bya sub-picosecond ultraviolet pulse of radiation, and the subsequent
events are clocked by another short light pulse that detects the newbornFree calmodlinCa2+ - calmodulin complex
(A)(B)Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL TRANSFORMATIONS OF MATTER47These examples illustrate only a small part of the range of time scalesthat chemists and chemical engineers examine in their studies of chemicalphenomena. By visualizing chemical transformations, chemical scientists
obtain a deeper fundamental understanding of how chemical reactions
occur and even develop the ability to create favorable conditions to con-trol some of these reactions.sodium atoms. The illustrations show the time evolution of the Na-atom
wave function.(A) Potential energy curves for the excited states of sodium iodide showing thecrossing of the ground state with the excited state (B) Time evolution of free (empty
squares), and bound (filled circles) Na fragments observed by laser-induced fluo-
rescence. Motion of the NaI wave packet as a fraction of the molecules cross from
the ionic ground state to the covalent repulsive excited state causes oscillations in
the observed signals. Reprinted with permission from A. H. Zewail, Science, 242,1645 (1988). Copyright 1988 American Association for the Advancement of Science.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERUsually we talk about reactions in solution, but recently techniques havebeen developed to follow reactions that occur in a vacuum when a stream of
reactant A and a stream of reactant B cross each other in a defined direction, as
with molecular beams. From the direction in which the products are ejected and
their energies, much fundamental information can be deduced about the details of
the molecular processes. Lasers, which emit light-energy in a highly focused
beam, are sometimes used to put energy into one of the reactants in a defined
way. Such a technique reveals less about the nature of the transition state than
about what is called the dynamics of the processÑhow molecules collide so as toreact, and how the products carry away the energy of the overall reaction. The
development and application of such techniques were recognized by a Nobel Prize
in 1986 to Dudley Herschbach, Yuan Lee, and John Polanyi.The interaction between experiment and theory is very important in the fieldof chemical transformations. In 1981 Kenichi Fukui and Roald Hoffmann re-
ceived a Nobel Prize for their theoretical work on the electronic basis of reaction
mechanisms for a number of important reaction types. Theory has also been in-
fluential in guiding experimental work toward demonstrating the mechanisms of
one of the simplest classes of reactions, electron transfer (movement of an elec-
tron from one place to another). Henry Taube received a Nobel prize in 1983 for
his studies of electron transfer in inorganic chemistry, and Rudolf Marcus re-
ceived a Nobel Prize in 1992 for his theoretical work in this area. The state of
development of chemical reaction theory is now sufficiently advanced that it can
begin to guide the invention of new transformations by synthetic chemists.Particular interest in recent times has centered on trying to understand thechemical mechanisms by which various biological processes occur. Such com-
plex events as the cleavage of RNA by the enzyme ribonuclease, the multi-step
synthesis of ATP in vivo (Paul Boyer and John E. Walker received Nobel prizes
in 1997 for working this out), and the activity of molecular motors that power
bacterial flagellae are now understood in molecular detail. George Wald received
a Nobel Prize in 1967 for discovering the chemical mechanism in the eye by
which light is transformed into a signal to the brain that produces vision. The
recent sequencing of the human genome has provided a molecular foundation
from which other complex biological processes might be tackled at a molecular
level.The basic science of chemical reactions has been put to good use for morethan half a century in the fuels, plastics, environmental, and biotechnology fields.
One story illustrates well the societal benefit of learning to guide the pathways of
chemical reactions, in this case via catalysis and process design. The 1997 Draper
Prize of the National Academy of Engineering, the engineering professionÕs high-est honor, went to Vladimir Haensel for his 1947 invention of platinum-catalyzed
reforming of petroleum. The prize citation explains how, while working for Uni-
versal Oil Products Co. (now called UOP), Haensel sought to improve the pro-
cess by which gasoline was produced from crude oil; thermal cracking of petro-Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL TRANSFORMATIONS OF MATTER49leum over a clay catalyst yielded only modest amounts of very low-octane gaso-line. Haensel proposed using platinum as a catalyst for the refining process, de-
spite the challenges posed by the expense and availability of platinum. He devel-
oped a simple method that was efficient in producing more gasoline from the
same amount of petroleum and that also produced a remarkably higher-grade
fuel. Platinum reforming produces vast amounts of aromatic hydrocarbons, the
raw materials used in the manufacturing of plastics and synthetic fibers such as
polyester. Platinum-catalyzed reforming has reduced U.S. reliance on foreign oil,
broadened the worldÕs long-term energy outlook, helped reduce pollution due tocombustion, and saved billions of dollars in transportation costs. These are revo-
lutionary effects on energy, transportation, materials production, and our envi-
ronment.For examples such as platinum reforming, designing the reactors is as essen-tial for technological success as is detailing the chemistry. The chemical knowl-
edge and new catalysis are embedded in the process, but other factors are neces-
sary as well. These include transporting materials through the process equipment,
mass transfer between the fluid and catalyst, controlling pressure and its effects
on physical properties and phase behavior, and mixing and separation processes.
Advances in these physical aspects of transformation processes have been essen-
tial to modern chemical manufacturing. Effective technological implementation
requires integrated knowledge and use of chemical and physical transformation
fundamentals.Important physical transformations between states of matter, not necessarilyinvolving chemical reaction, can occur on changes in temperature or pressure or
application of external forces or fields. Such phase transitions have been central
to quantitative research in chemical sciences, at least since the time of Robert
Boyle in the mid-17th century and, in a more modern context, Sadi Carnot, R.J.
Clausius, and J. Willard Gibbs in the 19th century. Suitable choices or changes in
temperature, pressure, and other controllable properties can produce abrupt
changes (first-order transitions) in the state of a substanceÑfor example, boilingor freezing, or formation of systems having two phases coexisting with distinct
phase boundaries between them.Equations of state relate the phase properties to one another and are an essen-tial part of the full, quantitative description of phase transition phenomena. They
are expressions that find their ultimate justification in experimental validation
rather than in mathematical rigor. Multiparameter equations of state continue to
be developed with parameters tuned for particular applications. This type of ap-
plied research has been essential to effective design of many reaction and separa-
tion processes.The last several decades have seen the growing scientific importance of phe-nomena near critical points, those conditions of system properties where two co-
existing phases, such as liquid and vapor, become identical. This is exemplified
by the 1982 Nobel Prize awarded to Kenneth Wilson for his theoretical studies ofBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERcritical phenomena and continuous or second-order phase transitions. Super-critical fluid processing is exploiting knowledge about this domain of phase be-
havior for new applications in separations, chemical reactions, and materials pro-
duction. Supercritical carbon dioxide is now used as a solvent in improved,

environmentally benign methods for decaffeination of coffee and for dry clean-
ing (Chapter 9).Phase behavior in complex fluids such as polymer blends and block copoly-mers has been a rich area of the chemical sciences. Near-critical and other transi-
tional phenomena are frequently prominent. Since molecular movement in vis-
cous systems such as these is comparatively slow, phase transitions can be studied
more easily in time, and manipulated by quenching and other external influences.
Processes for controlled growth of ordered materials are often readily influenced
by diffusion, a variety of external fields, and the influence of interacting bound-
aries, or flow.Flow processes in materials that contain structural elements, such as poly-mers and suspensions, can influence important physical and chemical transfor-
mations. Thinning or thickening of fluids under shear flow, structural rearrange-
ments that affect physical properties, and flow of granular media are just a few
examples where flow produces major changes in a chemical product, often per-
manent and sometimes helpful. Alignment of polymer molecules in fibers and
films is essential to produce high strength. For example, ultra-high molecular
weight polyethylene fibers, which appear gel-like when produced, are used in
bulletproof vests. Arranging the fibers to cross at 0 degree and 90 degree angles
causes the material to have excellent protective properties. Paints, coatings, inks,
toners, and adhesives often contain particulate additives precisely for the purpose
of producing interactions that respond to the imposition of flow. The science of
these interactions is advancing rapidly, through theory and experiment. Extend-
ing molecular theories to the length scales of particles has produced detailed de-
scriptions of the behavior of hard spheres, polymer-coated particles, and associat-
ing colloids. Experimental insight has come from rheology (the study of the
changing form and flow of matter), light scattering, and microscopy, often using
national facilities for synchrotron x-rays and neutrons. Frequently systems can be
observed under flow to illuminate the Òtransition statesÓ of these physical trans-
formations.The importance of physical transformations in making chemical productsimplies a vast opportunity for understanding structures of many kinds of impor-
tant chemical products at higher levels and longer length-scales than those of
individual molecules. Structured chemical products will be a rapidly growing
area, particularly with the investments of financial and intellectual resources that
are currently being made in nanoscale science and engineering. In the past 15
years we have seen an accelerating explosion in the ability to formulate, charac-
terize, and predict phase behavior and the resulting transport processes for col-
loids, surfactant solutions, and block copolymers in particular. Control over syn-Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL TRANSFORMATIONS OF MATTER51thesis and interparticle forces has allowed selective addition of nonadsorbing,associative, and diblock copolymers, and external electric and magnetic fields
have been used to control equilibrium phase behavior and rheology.Chemists have synthesized a spectacular array of submicron- and nano-par-ticles with well-defined size and atomic structure and very special properties.
Examples include CdSe quantum dots and novel spheres and rods. Transport en-
ters the picture via fundamental studies of the physical processes that affect the
synthesis, which must be understood for even modest scale-up from the milli-
gram level. Likewise, processes for assembling fascinating face-centered-cubic
crystals or ordered multilayers must concentrate on organizing the particles via
flow, diffusion, or action of external fields. Near-perfection is possible but re-
quires careful understanding and control of the forces and the rates.Block copolymers consist of two or more sections of polymer, of which eachsection is made of a single type of monomer. Block copolymers are representa-
tive of a class of structured chemical products where physical chemistry and syn-
thetic chemistry must go hand in hand to create the desired product. The vast
effort invested in copolymer microphase separation has recently spawned a num-
ber of novel efforts. Studies of the relationship between molecular architecture,
ordered-phase morphology, and mechanical properties have shown that multi-
block copolymers offer special advantages in product properties that result from
the molecular connectivity over the multiple domains that they create. Equally
important to mechanical properties are the new transport properties and mem-
brane separation capabilities that structured, composite chemical products can
deliver. Another example is the development of block copolymer nanolithog-
raphy. Ordered monolayers with spherical or cylindrical morphologies are cast,
and the minority phase is then removed to permit etching or deposition through
the gaps in the remaining continuous phase. The results are holes or posts with
lattice spacings on the order of 10 nm over remarkably large areas. In both these
examples, transport processes limit the rate of annealing due to thermal motion,
but when driven by flow or external fields, may conspire to provide even longer-
range order. Application of external fields in physical transformations produces
effects analogous to those of catalysis in chemical reactionsÑenhancing the ratesand selecting the products. Transport phenomena play crucial roles in both the
creation and performance of structured chemical products. This idea has little
parallel in mechanistic studies of reactions to synthesize simpler molecular chemi-
cal products.Transport phenomena present an important challenge in the progression to-ward smaller length-scales of microscale, nanoscale, and molecular scale. Chemi-
cal processing will need to exploit small-scale reactors in new applications. Un-
derstanding chemical and physical transformations at these length-scales will be
necessary for advances in microfluidics, for progress in developing new chemical
and biological sensor applications, and for realizing the promise of self-assembly
as a chemical processing method. Molecular models of structured fluids (poly-Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERmers, suspensions, composites), validated in part by single-molecule mechanicalmeasurements, will be crucial to the growth in this area.CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE FUTUREHow can we obtain direct information on the molecular details of a reactionpath and harness this for the design of new processes? While femtosecond spec-
troscopy has made it possible to observe reactions on a short time scale, a major
challenge is to devise ultrafast techniques, such as superfast electron diffraction,
that will permit observation of the actual molecular structure of a transition state,
not just its rate of passage. As a general goal, we want to be able to make moving
pictures of the reactions themselves, observing all the intermediate states and the
rates at which they interconvert. Such moving pictures can be generated even
now, by computer simulation of the reaction; the problem is to determine whether
those pictures are correct. Thus a second challenge is to interface with theoretical
chemistry in getting the best possible calculations, and then devise experimental
tests of the major theoretical predictions to see whether experiments confirm the
correctness of the calculations.Most mechanistic work has focused on chemical reactions in solution or ex-tremely simple processes in the gas phase. There is increasing interest in reac-
tions in solids or on solid surfaces, such as the surfaces of solid catalysts in con-
tact with reacting gases. Some such catalysts act inside pores of defined size,
such as those in zeolites. In these cases only certain molecules can penetrate the
pores to get to the reactive surface, and they are held in defined positions when
they react. In fact, the Mobil process for converting methanol to gasoline depends
on zeolite-catalyzed reactions.There is also increasing interest in reactions involving organometallic com-pounds, at the interface between organic and inorganic chemistry. Many such
reactions are useful in synthesis, where the organometallic reagents can have
important properties as catalysts. Many details of reaction mechanisms in orga-
nometallic chemistry are yet unclear; understanding these mechanisms will allow
the development of improved catalysts.Much work has been done to help understand how metal ions react or cata-lyze reactions in solution. Many enzymes also use bound metal ions to catalyze
their reactions, and there is still need to understand how they work. When we do
understand them in detail, we should be able to produce biomimetic catalysts for
useful processes in manufacturing.When molecules react thermally, at room temperature or on heating, they arein their lowest electronic states. However, when reactions occur on irradiation of
the molecules with visible or ultraviolet light, the processes involve species in
electronic excited states. Some of the details of such processes are known, but
there is still much to do. Since photoexcitation is important in many areasÑphotosynthesis, photography, electronic displays, solar cells, cancer-causing ul-Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL TRANSFORMATIONS OF MATTER53traviolet interactions with the skin, identification of interstellar molecules, degra-dation of materials and dyes by sunlightÑit is important to investigate these pro-cesses. As part of understanding the chemical universe with all the substances
and transformations that are possible, or at least learning their major features,
basic chemical science needs to understand transformations of excited states, not
just of ground states.The design of multicomponent processes remains an important challenge.Conventional process development has focused on single reactions and their op-
timization. New processes that involve reaction cascades, where the product of
one reaction feeds the next, will permit more efficient production of industrial or
biomedical products. A detailed understanding of biological metabolic networks
will facilitate the design of similarly complex artificial systems. Computational
analysis of such interconnected reaction networks will be important for reaction
modeling and design.It is a continuing challenge to understand the properties of enzymes. Theyare usually very effective catalysts, able to speed up reactions of many biological
substances in both the forward and reverse directions. Also, their activities can be
modified by inhibitors that bind to them, and many medicines such as choles-
terol-reducing drugs function as enzyme inhibitors. To some extent the details of
the catalytic mechanisms of enzymes have been elucidated, or at least guessed at.
However, there is not yet a real understanding of the factors that contribute to
enzymesÕ high effectiveness, and we do not yet have good examples of synthetic
analogs of enzymes that catalyze the same reactions with the same or better speeds
and selectivities. A full understanding of enzymes will enable the introduction of
synthetic catalysts, which will be of great value in manufacturing. The introduc-
tion of synthetic catalysts may also contribute to the development of a new class
of medicines. Medicines today operate mainly by binding to various biological
molecules, but they donÕt carry out catalyzed reactions in the body. If we fullyunderstand enzymes well enough to be able to make new catalysts of similar
effectiveness, such artificial enzymes could be an exciting class of molecular
machines and medicines. They could destroy undesirable species or toxins, or
promote the formation of materials that are present in insufficient quantities due
to some diseases. We are also learning how to recreate the process of evolution
through natural selection in a test tube.1 New enzymes can be evolved by apply-
ing selective pressure for improved properties or even for totally different func-
tions.By manipulating genes, chemists have learned to create new enzymes withnew functions. To do this rationally and predictably, it is critical to understand
the structures and mechanisms of the genes that are being modified. Enzymes and
other biological components often function in clusters, in multicomponent sys-1A. D. Keefe and J. W. Szostak. Nature 410 (6829) 715-718, 5 Apr 2001.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERtems. Thus even when we understand fully the chemical properties of a pureenzyme, a challenge remainsÑto understand the properties of interacting mol-ecules, including enzymes, assembled into well-defined structures.WHY ALL THIS IS IMPORTANTAny list of applications such as the examples presented in this chapter isalways too limited. It is more realistic to say that there are still big gaps in our
understanding of the molecular details of chemical and biochemical reactions.
The chemical universe is filled with transformations, both natural and invented.
We apply them in manufacturing, we admire them in biological chemistry, but
we do not yet know enough about their details. With understanding, when we
have it, will come greatly improved methods for synthesis and manufacturing.
Increased understanding of the details and special character of transformations
will also lead to applications not yet even thought of, as has happened with every
big advance in scientific understanding.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Some Challenges for Chemists and Chemical Engineers¥Improve the tools for imaging and determining structure so that de-
tailed chemical structures can be determined with tiny amounts of non-
crystalline material.¥Improve the ability of instruments to detect and quantify very low con-
centrations of important substances, even in very small volumes.¥Develop effective methods for detecting dangerous materials, even
when they are hidden.¥Understand the chemistry that occurs in interplanetary and interstellar
space, for which spectroscopy is the primary tool available.¥Develop instruments for on-line process control that bring the power of
modern analytical and structure-determination methods to chemical
manufacturing technology555Isolating, Identifying, Imaging, andMeasuring Substances and StructuresGOALSChemical scientists want to explore the natural world and identify all itschemical components. They also want and need to identify all of the new chemi-
cal substances produced directly and indirectly as a result of their synthetic andBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERmanufacturing endeavors. As described in Chapter 7, much of this has involvedlearning the nature of the substances that are part of, and produced by, living
organisms. Generally it is necessary to learn how to separate complex mixtures
into their pure components, and then determine the molecular structure of each
component. This sequence is also necessary for the substances that are created in
the laboratory or in manufacturing. If a mixture is produced, it must be separated
into its components, and each new species must have its chemical structure deter-
mined.Detecting known substances, and determining their quantity, is also impor-tant. In synthetic research, it is essential to know the relative proportions of vari-
ous reaction products. In manufacturing, it is important to detect any impurities in
the product and to determine whether they are present in a significant amount.
Analytical characterization is critical in pharmaceutical products, for instance.
Products for practical usesÑpaint or adhesives, for exampleÑwill typically con-
sist of several components. For proper and reliable performance it is important to
measure the amounts of each of the components as part of a manufacturing qual-
ity control system. Manufacturers also commonly need to analyze the raw mate-
rials they receive, measuring the amounts of various substances in them to be sure
that the material meets their requirements. Before it can be correctly processed
into steel, iron ore must be analyzed to determine how much of other components
need to be added to produce a metal alloy of the desired composition and proper-
ties.The determination of quantity in complex mixtures is also vital in health careand medicine. We are all familiar with the medical examinations in which a
sample of blood or urine is sent to a laboratory for analysis. The procedures used
have been developed by chemists, and are performed by trained chemical techni-
cians. The high level of automation achieved by the chemists who designed these
analytical procedures has greatly reduced the costs of such analyses. Clinical
analysis continues to be driven by a need for better methods to detect and mea-
sure important proteins, for example, that while present in tiny amounts are rel-
evant to our health and well-being.There is a constant need for better methods of chemical analysis, driven byour need to know ÒWhatÕs in that, how much is present, and how long will it
last?Ó The frontiers in this field lie in improving sensitivity to detect vanishingly
small quantities, to separate extremely complex mixtures of chemical substances,
and to assess the structures or compositions of components. Measurements using
very small or very dilute samples can present a major challenge in clinical medi-
cine or environmental analyses. Moreover, often we must deal with all of the
above determinations in extremely small spaces, such as that of a living cell.
Fundamentally new approaches may be needed to achieve these objectives. As an
important example, there is currently a need for sensitive methods to detectÑin a
high-throughput environmentÑexplosives in airplane baggage and in land mines
in war-torn areas (see also Chapter 11). These problems are being approached byBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ISOLATING, IDENTIFYING, IMAGING, AND MEASURING57developing very sensitive arrays of chemical detectors, sometimes called artifi-cial noses, that can detect and identify volatile components of explosives in very
small amounts. Other problems are learning to detect chemical and biological
warfare agents, both on the battlefield and in civilian areas, and to detect trace
components in our environment, either anthropogenic or of natural origin, that
offer health risks to living organisms: human, beast, insect, fungus, and plant.PROGRESS TO DATEStructure DeterminationA vital activity of the chemical sciences is the determination of structure.Detailed molecular structure determinations require identifying the spatial loca-
tions of all of the atoms in molecules, that is, the atomic distances and bond
angles of a species. It is important to realize that the three-dimensional architec-
ture of molecules very much defines their reactivity and function. However, mol-
ecules are dynamic, a feature that is not reflected by static pictures. This last point
requires further explanation. Because the atoms in all molecules move, even in
the limit of the lowest temperatures obtainable, molecular structures really de-
scribe the average position about some equilibrium arrangement. In addition, ro-
tations about certain bonds occur freely at common temperatures. Consequently,
some molecules exist in more than one structure (conformation). Some molecules
are so floppy that structural characterizations really refer to averages among sev-
eral structures. Yet other molecules are sufficiently rigid that molecular struc-
tures can be quite precisely determined.The techniques available to achieve molecular structure determinations arelimited. They include structural analysis with diffraction techniquesÑsuch aselectron, neutron, and x-ray diffractionÑand various absorption and emissiontechniques of electromagnetic radiationÑsuch as microwave spectroscopy andnuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). For molecules with unpaired spins a com-
panion technique of electron spin resonance spectroscopy (ESR) is highly infor-
mative.A number of other spectroscopies provide information that is related to mo-lecular structure, such as coordination symmetry, electronic splitting, and/or the
nature and number of chemical functional groups in the species. This information
can be used to develop models for the molecular structure of the system under
study, and ultimately to determine the forces acting on the atoms in a molecule
for any arbitrary displacement of the nuclei. According to the energy of the par-
ticles used for excitation (photons, electrons, neutrons, etc.), different parts of a
molecule will interact, and different structural information will be obtained. De-
pending on the relaxation process, each method has a characteristic time scale
over which the structural information is averaged. Especially for NMR, the relax-
ation rate may often be slower than the rate constant of a reaction under study.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERThe application of theoretical tools for predicting molecular structure, suchas ab initio calculations and density functional methods, are discussed in Chapter
6. These tools provide only a first approximation to the molecular structure. There
is much room for further development of theoretical molecular structure calcula-
tions, but even so such methods have already become a standard part of molecu-
lar structure determinations.The following section presents a variety of instrumental spectroscopic tech-niques for the determination either of molecular structure or of parameters related
to molecular structure. The applicability of each method, its particular advan-
tages as well as its limitations, are presented. It is not an exhaustive list. The
spectroscopic methods are discussed in order of increasing excitation energy.Nuclear Magnetic Resonance SpectroscopiesNMR has proven to be invaluable as a tool for structure determination,particularly of new compounds isolated from nature. All synthetic chemists use
NMR to see whether they have made the product they want, even if it is a previ-
ously unknown molecule. In fact, NMR has really revolutionized the practice of
organic synthesis. NMR is typically applied to molecules in solution, so it can be
used with noncrystalline materials, for which x-ray crystallography is not pos-
sible. It also can be used to learn whether the structure determined in the solid
state by x-ray methods is maintained in solution. This is particularly important
for proteins, which are flexible enough that they can change shape to some extent
when they dissolve. A Nobel Prize in 1991 went to Richard Ernst for inventing
new techniques in NMR that are important tools in the study of proteins. Kurt
Wthrich shared a Nobel Prize in 2002 for developing NMR methodology thatenables determination of the three-dimensional structures of biological macro-
molecules in solution.NMR finds its main application in the analysis of solutions, using 1H as themost sensitive nucleus; 13C, 19F, and 31P nuclei are also used frequently. NMRyields information on chemical functional groups of organic ligands and has revo-
lutionized work in synthesis. Multi-dimensional techniques can be used for find-
ing spatial connections between nuclei and gaining information on molecular
dynamics. An important recent advance is NMR on solids, not solutions, with
which it is possible to study the structures of polymers, of proteins in membranes,
and of chemicals immobilized on solid supports. The application of NMR to im-
aging the human body, or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), has revolutionized
the practice of medicine.The major current limitation of NMR is its sensitivity (ca. 10Ð4 M in 
1H, 13C,19F, 31P). It is expected that higher sensitivities will be reached in the future asmore powerful magnets with improved instrumentation and software become
available. The ultimate goal would be to perform NMR analyses of single mol-
ecules.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ISOLATING, IDENTIFYING, IMAGING, AND MEASURING59Rotational SpectroscopiesRotational spectra provide measurement of the moments of inertia of a chemi-cal species. Bond angles and bond lengths can be derived by making isotopic
substitutions and measuring the resulting changes in the moments of inertia. A
major drawback of rotational spectroscopies is the limited information contained
in a measurement of the moment of inertia. Consequently, while quite precise, it
is generally limited to smaller molecules. It is the chief technique used to identify
molecules in outer space, such as the components of interstellar gas clouds.Vibrational SpectroscopiesInfrared and Raman spectroscopies provide complementary information con-cerning the type of functional groups present, as well as bond strengths in a mol-
ecule. Recent experiments using infrared pulse sequences offer the tantalizing
possibility of bringing to infrared and Raman spectroscopies the same advantages
that have been realized in pulsed NMR spectroscopiesÑgreater sensitivity andhigher information content. A major limitation of vibrational spectroscopies has
been the congestion of overlapping features at lower frequencies. However this
congestion makes an infrared spectrum a literal fingerprint of the structure of
small molecules, so the identity of known molecules can be assessed from a li-
brary of their spectra. Some of the molecules in interstellar space have been iden-
tified by their infrared spectra. New resonant enhancement techniques can pro-
vide useful information about molecules on surfaces and at interfaces.Electronic SpectroscopiesThe interaction of species with shorter wavelengths of radiation causes elec-tronic excitation (bound-bound electronic spectroscopy) or even ejection (bound-
continuum photoionization). These events also show the fine structure of the
motions of the nuclei. In addition, nuclear motions moderate the energies of the
ejected electrons, and an analysis of the electron energy provides additional

chemical information. Thus, x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is an excel-
lent technique for determining an atomÕs electron binding energies, at least forspecies on the surface of the material under study. Valuable information about
surfaces can also be obtained from ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS),
a technique that reveals ionization potentials and molecular orbital orderings for
substances in general.By comparing the chemical shifts and peak heights of an unknown with stan-dards or known reference materials, some predictions of the unknown structure
can be made. In some exceptional but important cases, such as the photodetach-
ment of negative ions, the wavelength of light causing photoionization is in the
visible or even the near infrared, allowing extremely precise structure determina-
tions.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERAnother noteworthy example is x-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS).EXAFS data contain information on such parameters as coordination number,
bond distances, and mean-square displacements for atoms that comprise the first
few coordination spheres surrounding an absorbing element of interest. This in-
formation is extracted from the EXAFS oscillations, previously isolated from the
background and atomic portion of the absorption, using nonlinear least-square fit
procedures. It is important in such analyses to compare metrical parameters ob-
tained from experiments on model or reference compounds to those for samples
of unknown structure, in order to avoid ambiguity in the interpretation of results
and to establish error limits.The absorption spectra in the x-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES)region contain information concerning coordination geometry and metal ion va-
lence. EXAFS and XANES data can be obtained on samples in different physical
states or in solution and can be made element selective by tuning the wavelength
used for the study. A drawback of these absorption spectroscopies is the need to
bring the sample to a large dedicated facility.Nuclear Structure SpectroscopiesNuclei also have bound energy levels that can be accessed with gamma-raysources. Of great chemical interest is Mıssbauer spectroscopy, which takes ad-vantage of the recoil-free emission of gamma radiation from a solid radioactive
material. Because the gamma emission is recoil-free, it can be resonantly ab-
sorbed by stationary nuclei in a solid. Typically, the gamma ray source is me-
chanically vibrated back and forth to Doppler shift the energy of the emitted
gamma radiation. A detector records the frequencies of gamma radiation that are
absorbed by the sample as the energy of the gamma radiation is scanned by Dop-
pler shifting.The nuclear transitions are very sensitive to the local environment of theatom, and Mıssbauer spectroscopy is a sensitive probe of the different environ-ments an atom occupies in a solid material. By analyzing the chemical shifts and
quadrupole splitting in Mıssbauer spectra of samples containing Mıssbauer-ac-tive nuclei, information on the state of oxidation and the local structure can be
obtained. Only a few nuclei can be used for this purpose, so this method has
limited but powerful applications.Diffraction TechniquesX-ray, neutron, and electron diffraction techniques are used to determinecrystal structures and can thus be used for molecular structure determinations.
Because of its high resolution and applicability to small and often weakly dif-
fracting samples, x-ray crystallography and powder diffraction are by far the
methods of choice for most structure determinations on crystalline compounds,Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ISOLATING, IDENTIFYING, IMAGING, AND MEASURING61either single crystals or crystalline powders. Diffraction techniques are not appli-cable to amorphous phases at present, but the exciting possibility looms on the
horizon to use ultra-fast techniques to obtain diffraction patterns of possibly as
little as one biological molecule (see below).The intensity and tunability of synchrotron radiation have revolutionized theapplication of x-rays for studying the structure of macromolecules, enabling much
higher resolution information to be obtained on increasingly large and complex
molecular systems. The average bulk crystalline structure determined from dif-
fraction studies is expressed as simple, small, symmetric arrangements of atoms
in a unit cell. However, local deviations from this average structure are often the
driving force behind the collective behavior of a crystalline compound. Neutron
crystallography has the unique advantage of high contrast for the location of hy-
drogen atoms, so it affords information complementary to that normally obtained
from x-ray crystallography.As conventionally applied today, x-ray methods give rise to Òtime-averagedÓstructural information. Since many chemical processes, including the making and
breaking of chemical bonds, occur in the subpicosecond time domain, time-re-
solved structural information has been limited and only indirectly available. Re-
cent developments in electron diffraction and soon-to-be-available x-ray laser
sources could dramatically improve the investigation of structural dynamics.
Compressed electron pulses can be produced with reasonable intensities and
widths of a few picoseconds; these are being used to study relatively simple mo-
lecular reactions. X-ray free-electron lasers, based on using high energy linear
accelerators providing beams to long undulators, have the promise of easily reach-
ing pulse lengths of only a few hundred femtoseconds and, with additional mag-
netic and optical compression schemes, likely the regime of only a few femto-
seconds. Such x-ray free-electron lasers might have sufficient photons in a single
pulse to record an entire diffraction pattern, hence bringing the most powerful
tools used today for structural determination to bear on understanding chemical
and biological reactions.A major limitation of diffraction techniques has been the need to obtain crys-talline samples. If scientists could learn how to crystallize large molecules in a
routine manner, a breakthrough would result. In the biological area, this limita-
tion is keenly experienced for membrane-bound proteins, which are important in
many biological functions. Scientists are now devising techniques and strategies
to crystallize these proteinsÑif not in three-dimensional, then in two-dimensionallattices.Future development of spectroscopic structure-determination methods willdepend on the availability of more powerful photon and particle sources as well
as advances in photon and particle detectors. Impressive progress has been made
in molecular structure determinations based on advances in computation power
and in computational algorithms, such as fast Fourier-transform techniques, for
nearly every form of spectroscopy and diffraction analysis. Hajdu and co-work-Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERers1 have presented calculations estimating radiation damage of samples. They
suggest that useful structural information might be obtained before radiation dam-
age destroys the sample by using femtosecond x-ray pulses. Moreover, their cal-
culations indicate that sufficiently bright light sources might be capable of imag-
ing ultrasmall samples at sizes approaching that of a single biological molecule.Structure determination has greatly advanced with the invention of new waysto use x-ray crystallography, mainly new mathematical methods that permit the
interpretation of the observed patterns of diffraction of x-rays by a crystal, trans-
lating it into the molecular structures in the crystal. A Nobel Prize in 1985 to
Herbert Hauptmann and Jerome Karle recognized such an advance.Mass SpectrometryThe ÒweighingÓ of a molecule of a chemical substance and of its fragments
has great utility in both assessing molecular identity and determining molecular
structure. The determination of molecular weight is after all one of the most el-
emental aspects of puzzling out the structure and identity of an unknown sample
or a new substance. Furthermore, if the molecular mass can be determined with
sufficient accuracy, the elemental formula of the substance can be estimated or at
least the possible choices narrowed considerably. For materials such as those
encountered in biologically derived samples, where the quantities available are
very small, determining a molecular weight and elemental formula are extremely
important steps. Ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry (ICR-MS) has been
especially effective at exact mass determinations.Mass spectrometry requires that the material being studied be converted intoa vapor. Great strides have been taken in recent years to address this problem,
especially in enticing large, thermally fragile (bio)molecules into the vapor state.
Matrix assisted laser ionization-desorption (MALDI) and electrospray ionization
(ESI) are two current forefront methods that accomplish this task. Even compo-
nents of bacteria and intact viruses are being examined with these approaches.
John B. Fenn and Koichi Tanaka shared in the award of a Nobel Prize in 2002 for
their respective contributions to development of electrospray ionization and soft
laser desorption.A decade or so ago, mass spectrometry was regarded as a ÒmatureÓ area of
methodology. The invention of new ways to volatilize molecules, from solids and
from surfaces, has revolutionized and re-invigorated this field. It is an excellent
example of how new ideas can make even supposedly ÒdeadÓ areas find new life.
1Neutze, R.; Wouts, R.; Van der Spoel, D.; Weckert, E.; Hajdu, J. Nature, 406 (6797) p. 752, 2000.
Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ISOLATING, IDENTIFYING, IMAGING, AND MEASURING63Measurement Science, or Analytical ChemistryThe scope of this branch of chemistry encompasses both the fundamentalunderstanding of how to measure properties and amounts of chemicals, and the
practical understanding of how to implement such measurements, including the
design of the necessary instruments. The need for analytical measurements arises
in all research disciplines, industrial sectors, and human activities that entail the
need to know not only the identities and amounts of chemical components in a
mixture, but also how they are distributed in space and time. These sectors of
need include research in specific disciplines (such as chemistry, physics, materi-
als science, geology, archeology, medicine, pharmacy, and dentistry) and in in-
terdisciplinary areas (such as forensic, atmospheric, and environmental sciences),
as well as the needs of government policy, space exploration, and commerce.Practical needs for analysis come from the activities of industrial enterprisesand government functions that span manufacturing, shipping, communications,
domestic power, water supplies, waste disposal, forensic analysis, environmental
policies, international verification of quality and quantity (metrology), and far
from least of all, national security. The need for measurements of chemicals is
ubiquitousÑmeasurements of the mass and dimensions of chemical substancesand of their capacity to adsorb heat, to absorb or reflect light, and to respond to
pressure and temperature. Many measurements also must be made under varying
constraints of speed, cost, and location of the measurement.This enormous diversity of customers seeking analytical information placespressing and urgent demands on chemical scientists. In response, many great suc-
cesses have been achieved but, at the same time, fast-moving advances in sci-
ence, technology, and human activity continue to awaken sleeping giants that
demand new, better, faster, cheaper, more sensitive, and more selective measure-
ments.The following is an outline of some success stories in analytical measure-ments. They are categorized in terms of progress in improving sensitivity for
measuring very small quantities, of dealing with sample complexity, of measur-
ing large molecules, of making measurements in small dimensions, and of in-
creasing the throughput of new analytical information.SensitivityNearly every area of measurement science can boast of progress in measur-ing ever-smaller quantities of chemicals, but several stand out in their stunning
trace-analysis capabilities. Trace-metal analysis has come to be dominated by
methods that volatilize the sample and then either measure its spectroscopic emis-

sion or absorption, or measure the masses of the gaseous metal ions using mass
spectrometry. Volatilization is accomplished by various thermal means that in-
clude flames, furnaces, and inductively coupled or microwave plasmas. The com-Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERbination of the inductively coupled plasma with mass spectrometry allows high-sensitivity analysis of virtually every metallic element in the periodic table. These
methods are used world-wide for trace-metal analysis.Lasers have innumerable uses in measurement science; in the excitation ofmolecular emission (fluorescence) they have become workhorses of analytical
instruments and have produced remarkable levels of analytical sensitivity. Lasers
are widespread as components of detectors in commercialized chromatographic
instruments and clinical analyses. Laser-induced fluorescence has been carried to
the ultimate sensitivity of detecting single moleculesÑthere is no more sensitivemeasurement than this! The very idea of measuring ultralow concentrations loses
its meaning when one detects a single molecule, but the fruit of this remarkable
accomplishment is that one can contemplate measuring variations in properties of
individual molecules, including enzymes and other proteins. In addition, by fol-
lowing the time behavior of a single molecule it would be possible to unmask
many important aspects of structure, kinetics, and function of molecules that are
hidden by measurements over averages of many molecules. This sensitivity ad-
vance revolutionizes how chemical scientists think about measuring molecular
behavior, which in the past has always reflected averages of many molecules.
Single-molecule spectroscopy thus offers valuable information that cannot be
obtained by studying a bulk sample.In clinical analysis, one of the recent advances has been the use of antibodiesto detect biologically important substances, including medicines. Chemists and
chemical engineers devised ways to translate the binding of a molecule to an
antibody into a detectable signal, sometimes amplifying the signal by an enzyme-
catalyzed reaction that could be modulated by antibody binding. Such methods
have largely replaced related methods using radioactive tracers.Sample ComplexitySample complexity refers to measurements of mixtures of chemicals and totheir context. Complexity can mean large numbers of similar chemicals being
simultaneously present (petroleum for example), mixtures of very large similar
molecules (biomolecular systems), reactivity and thermal fragility of mixture
components, and the context of the analysis (such as detection of explosives in
airport luggage). The invention of various methods for separating the chemical
components of complex mixtures has benefited enormously from the techniques
generally known as chromatography and electrophoresis. These techniques and
the instruments used in them are constantly being improved.The principal analytical methods for complex samples are those that separatethe mixture by differential migration and then detect the separated components.
The separation methods are chromatography, electrophoresis, and field flow frac-
tionation; the detection methodsÑwhich need not be selective but must be sensi-tiveÑinclude absorption, laser-induced fluorescence, electrochemistry, and massBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ISOLATING, IDENTIFYING, IMAGING, AND MEASURING65spectrometry. Gas chromatography (GC), high-performance liquid chromatogra-phy (HPLC), and capillary electrophoresis (CE) have been extremely successful.
HPLC has become the backbone of the pharmaceutical industry, providing essen-
tial information on purity (chemical and isomeric) of candidate and manufactured
drug agents. GC is routinely the method of choice for gaseous or easily volatil-
ized mixtures, and is commonly used with a mass spectrometer to identify the
mixture components as well as to detect and measure their quantities. CE is the
most powerful existing separations method (by orders of magnitude), and it is
used for very difficult separations. As analytical chemistry has advanced into the
world of molecules that biology creates, CE is the method of choice for the hugely

complex mixtures of chemicals present in living organisms and their cellular sub-
components. CE has been employed for separation of the contents of individual
cells and subcellular compartments (organelles), and it is the enabling analytical
method for the Human Genome Project. An important frontier continues to be
practical ways to combine the merits of different separation methods, such as
HPLC-CE, to create hybrid separation techniques.Other analytical approaches to complex systems include methods that re-spond selectively to individual chemicals (or a selected class), the detection of
which is of paramount importance. Examples are chemical and biological war-
fare agents, industrial pollutants and toxins, and carbon monoxide in the air in our
homes. Attaining analytical selectivity outside a pristine laboratory setting is one
of the most difficult and widely unsolved analytical needs. Ion mobility spec-
trometry (IMS) and gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) are on trial
in airport security checkpoints. While one can point to many successes, including
the CO detector in your home, analytical chemistry continues to struggle for sen-
sitivity and selectivity in competition with nose-based odor detection by dogs!Macromolecules and BiomacromoleculesThe birth of polymer science provoked numerous new analytical challengesseveral decades ago; the existing thrust of chemical sciences into molecular biol-
ogy is now provoking many more challenges at a rapid pace. Polymers, along
with pharmaceuticals, are arguably the most important and beneficial substances
that synthetic chemistry has brought to the human race. Synthetic polymers gen-
erally consist of individual molecules having different chain lengths and molecu-
lar weights. This complexity is an important factor in determining properties of
the polymer. Understanding of relations between polymer structure and proper-
ties has been aided enormously by the development of gel permeation chroma-
tography (which measures the dispersity of polymer chain length), of infrared
spectroscopy (which measures functional groups), and of thermal methods like
differential scanning calorimetry (which detects polymer crystallinity).There have likewise been early successes in addressing measurements ofbiopolymers, particularly their molecular weights, and to a more limited extentBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERtheir structure and folding. The most important techniques for structure determi-nation, in addition to x-ray crystallography, include high-field nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and mass spectrometry (MS). A host of com-
puter-reliant nuclear relaxation protocols and high-field magnet technology have
combined to cement an NMR foundation that has brought about a 30-fold ad-
vance in terms of chemical shift resolution from the first commercial introduction
of NMR in the 1960s. In mass spectrometry, there is an ongoing evolution of
ways to entice large, thermally fragile biomolecules into the gas phase; the meth-
ods of electrospray ionization (ESI) and matrix-induced laser desorption-ioniza-
tion (MALDI) are presently the most widely adopted.Small DimensionsThe measurement of a chemical on a surface or in a small volume has histori-cally been quite challenging. The amounts of sample are small, so the measure-
ment must be sensitive; the sample is spatially localized, so the measurement
must be spatially selective; and the sample may exhibit ordering that the mea-
surement must be able to detect. The advances in measurement capabilities in this
arena have been truly remarkable and are ongoing. Most of the measurements are
based on principles that were unknown 50 years ago. Surface analysis can now
call on x-ray and Auger photoelectron spectroscopy (AES) to measure emitted
photoelectrons, revealing the identity of atoms within several nanometers of a
solid surface. Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) measures the emitted-ion
consequences of crashing energetic or heavy ions onto the surface. Molecular
ordering and quantities on surfaces can be delineated using vibrational spectros-
copy, surface plasmon resonance spectroscopy, and Raman and surface enhanced
Raman spectroscopy (SERS), all of which have been enabled by the laser. These
advances in surface composition and structure analysis have been crucial in the
development of the microelectronics industry, which lives or dies by the proper-
ties and composition of surfaces.Imaging of the lateral composition and topography of surfaces has long beenan important area and includes topics like electron microscopyÑwhich has madephenomenal advances in recent yearsÑand scanning Auger electron spectros-copy. The measurement of ordering and arrangements of atoms and molecules in
a small volume or on a surface was given a quantum leap by the invention of
scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and its progeny of various atomic force
and surface force microscopies. The enabling tools in the new instruments were
(again) the laser, piezoelectric materials, and computer instrument-control. It is
presently possible to visualize the ordering of atoms on a surface, and even to
arrange individual atoms, such as Òquantum corrals,Ó2 with the contacting tip-
2S. L. Silva and F. M. Leibsle, Surface Science, 441, L904, 1999.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ISOLATING, IDENTIFYING, IMAGING, AND MEASURING67probe. Much further understanding of the structures of semiconductor surfaceshas been derived from STM measurements, with important technological divi-
dends. DNA chains lying on a surface can be imaged, and even individual mol-
ecules can be stretched in order to understand the energy of their folding. Imaging
of molecularly soft surfaces such as the surfaces of cells offers an enormous
potential for understanding organization of molecules in natural life systems. The
probe tips of surface probe microscopies can also be made chemically sensitive.
This is an exciting development by giving us a new dimension of molecule-scale
imaging of chemical properties, for instance by detecting interactions between a
molecule on a probe tip with a receptor site on a surface. Emerging research on
nanostructures will rely heavily on microscopy, including its STM and surface
forces forms.There have also been major advances in measuring transfers of electronswithin small sample dimensions. The science of attaching chemicals to electrodes
(chemically modified electrodes) has enabled measurements of electron transfer
kinetics associated with electrocatalysis and electroanalysis. Significant applica-
tions include attaching enzymes to the electrode coatings for use in, for example,
the monitoring of blood glucose for diabetics. Another small-dimension analysis
is enabled by using microscopically small electrodes, which are capable of de-
tecting, in real time, the single-vesicle release of neurotransmitters from neuronal
cells. These microelectrodes are having a substantial impact on the general sci-
ence of neurochemistry. Overall analysis in small dimensions seems to be in an
enormously promising infancy, and is far from having achieved its limits even
with existing ideas.Throughput of Analytical InformationThe worlds of science and technology continually demand more informationper unit time (and per unit cost); there is an ongoing revolution in response to this
demand. The Human Genome Project, for example, provoked advances in capil-
lary electrophoresis instrumentation that can now produce sequencing results on
the order of one base pair per second. Combinatorial synthesis has precipitated
orders-of-magnitude increases in the demand for the analysis of structural and
reactivity information. In both DNA sequencing and combinatorial chemistry,
the concept of ÒparallelÓ analysis has emerged, in which instrument design fo-
cuses on simultaneous analysis of many different samples. The scope of parallel
analysis can be expected to grow for years to come. A significant concept in this
emerging field is miniaturization of the entire measurement into a ÒStar TrekÓ-like microchip device that would allow instant analysis of a microsample with a
microinstrument. The true capabilities of miniaturized instruments remain to be
defined, but they are already impressive. Chip technologies hold the promise of
allowing many parallel measurements to be done simultaneously at little cost.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERProcess AnalysisMonitoring the course of chemical transformations during chemical process-ing and manufacturing is a crucial component of commercial activity. Desirably
the analysis is in real time and with the required selectivity and sensitivity to
adequately inform the process engineer.A possible future process analysis challenge is monitoring a chemical self-assembly process, where chemists and chemical engineers want to know about
the Òextent of reaction.Ó The chemical process may involve covalent chemical
transformations, or be simply the adoption of the desired physical structure. The
tools could be optical (UV-visible or IR absorption, for example) or measure-
ments of density or heat evolution. When the evolution of structure effectively
captures the Òextent of reaction,Ó structural characterization tools should be suffi-
cient. More difficult problems would be posed for process control in multicom-
ponent materials with complex structural features where the measurements should

be real-time (instantaneous) and provide information for feedback control of the
process. The analytical time constants required for real-time measurements would
be less than that inherent in the self-assembly, which may have widely varying
inherent characteristic times, and are influenced by extensive molecular transport
and organization. The close coupling of developments in new on-line measure-
ments with process control theory and practice will be crucial to the fullest pos-
sible development of chemical manufacturing. This is only one example of many
future challenges in process analysis.CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE FUTUREChemical measurements will continue to be challenged by the broad advancesof the chemical sciences. It is not possible to overstate the future need for mas-
sively parallel, high-throughput, miniaturized, and widely distributed instrumen-
tal analyses, preferably with Òsmart instrumentsÓ that are self-calibrating and
highly automated. Furthermore, a related need exists for massive automation in
data reduction, storage, retrieval, and graphic presentation. The necessary de-
vices will revolutionize the practice of medicine and the understanding of the life
sciences, and they will provide chemists and chemical engineers with the tools
for discovery and for process control.At the start of the 21st century, we are witnessing a discernible shift fromhypothesis-driven science and technology to information-driven science and tech-
nology. In the 21st century, the interaction of measurement science with theory,
modeling, and simulation will play a central role in the acquisition of information
and its conversion into useful knowledge. New fundamental knowledge is essen-
tial for advancement in the measurement sciences, particularly in nanoscale sci-
ence and technology, which are at the heart of future advances in automated stor-
age and retrieval of information. The measurement sciences correspond to aBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ISOLATING, IDENTIFYING, IMAGING, AND MEASURING69convergent need in both the Human Genome Project and the quest for new mate-rials. Increasingly, precise and quantitative measurements are equally essential to
advancing the acquisition of fundamental knowledge.The chemical world is often divided into ÒmeasurersÓ and ÒmakersÓ of mol-ecules. This division has deep historic roots, but it artificially impedes taking
advantage of both aspects of the chemical sciences. Of key importance to all
forms of chemistry are instruments and techniques that allow examination, in
space and in time, of the composition and characterization of a chemical system
under study. To achieve this end in a practical manner, these instruments will
need to multiplex several analytical methods. They will need to meet one or more
of the requirements for characterization of the products of combinatorial chemi-
cal synthesis, correlation of molecular structure with dynamic processes, high-
resolution definition of three-dimensional structures and the dynamics of their
formation, and remote detection and telemetry.The development of measurement tools of unprecedented specificity and sen-sitivity will be central to achieving a molecular-level understanding of complex
systems that will allow molecular interactions and their time evolution to be fully
understood. Moreover, the challenge of solving increasingly complex problems,
with the accompanying paradigm shift from hypothesis-driven to information-
driven science, places a premium on rapid, parallel, and inexpensive measure-
ments. These trends are especially evident in the Human Genome Project, in
combinatorial chemistry, and in the study of the chemical networks that control
cell function.Additional instrumentation demands spring from the reduction in size of sys-tems that must be studied to the microscale and nanoscale levels. This size reduc-
tion will require greatly increased instrumental sensitivity as well as new math-
ematical approaches to pattern recognition and graphics display. The need for
new fundamental knowledge of interfacial and transport phenomena will be ac-
centuated by the dramatic increase in the surface-to-volume ratio that will result
from the corresponding reduction in sample size. New technologies that permit
multiplexed measurement at higher spatial resolution and greater molecular speci-

ficity are emerging, and established technologies are being further developed to
enhance speed, resolution, and sensitivity.Urgent expansion is needed for activities in the measurement sciences toachieve a variety of goals:¥Develop new concepts and associated instrumentation in five broad cat-egories:1.High-performance instruments and measurements of unprecedented
precision, sensitivity, spatial resolution, or specificity;2.Low-cost, robust instruments and measurements for monitoring and
analyzing exceptionally small volumes, for real-time control of pro-Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERcesses, or for detection of chemicals and biotoxins without physicalcontact;3.High-throughput measurements, including informatics and mathemat-
ics for interpretation of large-volume data streams;4.Separation and analysis of chemical and biological mixtures of ex-
treme complexity and heterogeneity;5.Determining the structural arrangements of atoms within noncrystal-
line chemical substances, and resolving how they change as a func-
tion of time, on any time scale.¥Integrate measurement science into the fundamental intellectual core ofgraduate education and training for scientists and engineers.WHY THIS IS IMPORTANTThe most fundamental question that anyone can ask when looking at a newmaterial is, ÒWhat are the molecules (or ions, etc.) in it, and how much of each isthere?Ó For a chemical scientist, this means discovering the molecular composi-
tion of all the components in some substance, their quantitative amounts, and
their arrangement with respect to each other. The context of this discovery can be
our own bodies, the swamp next door, the air on the highway, the white powder in
an envelope, and, in the broadest context, the planet next door or a galaxy away.
When we want to know more about other planets in our solar system, we devise
instruments that can go to those planets and examine their chemical components.
The instruments need to be able to detect and measure the chemicals that are
present, and determine if they might indicate present or past life on those planets.
Such tools let chemists and chemical engineers isolate, detect, and measureÑsothey can explore the chemical universe. The instruments that allow them to deter-
mine chemical structures permit them to identify the novel components of that
universe, including those parts of it that humans themselves create.In practical terms, detecting and measuring are critical to all aspects of hu-man activityÑto manufacturing, to our environment, to health and medicine, toagriculture, and to national security. Thus it is essential that chemical scientists
continue to improve the tools and methods needed for this central scientific activ-
ity.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.716Chemical Theory and Computer Modeling:
From Computational Chemistry to ProcessSystems Engineering1Some Challenges for Chemists and Chemical Engineers¥Develop computer methods that will accurately predict the properties
of unknown compounds.¥Develop reliable computer methods to calculate the detailed pathways
by which reactions occur in both ground states and excited states,
taking full account of molecular dynamics as well as quantum and sta-
tistical mechanics.¥Develop reliable force fields for molecular mechanics calculations on
complex systems, including those with metallic elements.¥Invent computer methods to predict the three-dimensional folded struc-
ture of a proteinÑand the pathway by which folding occursÑfrom its
amino acid sequence, so information from the human genome can be

translated into the encoded protein structures.¥Devise experimental tests to establish the reliability of new theoretical
treatments.1As part of the overall project on Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st Century, aworkshop on Computing and Communications will lead to a separate report. The reader is urged toconsult that report for further information. Also see Mathematical Challenges from Theoretical/Com-putational Chemistry, National Research Council, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1995.
continuesBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERThe phenomenal increase in speed and computational power of computersÑas well as their dramatic reduction in costÑhas continued at an astonishing pace
over the last decade. In terms of CPU speed, MooreÕs law implies that computing
power should double every year or two,2 a pattern that is expected to continue for
at least 10 years into the future. At the same time, key advances in areas such as
ultraviolet lithography techniques, nonleaking complementary metal oxide semi-
conductor (CMOS) transistors, and multiple instruction, multiple data (MIMD)
computer architecture are already in place to support clock-speeds at the 10-GHz
plateau with power requirements at 1 V or lower. In addition, the technology and
software infrastructure now exist for researchers to routinely build large parallel
supercomputing clusters using off-the-shelf commodity computers and network-
ing components, thus increasing the impact of MooreÕs law by orders of magni-
tude. Finally, 10 years ago, few could envision how the dimension of communi-
cationsÑvia the InternetÑwould enhance computing in what may have been the
most revolutionary development in the late 20th century.Chemistry and chemical engineering, like many other disciplines, are beingprofoundly influenced by increased computing power. This has happened in part
by enhancing many existing computational procedures, providing a new impetus
to quantum mechanical and molecular simulations at the atomic level, and opti-
mizing processes and supply chain management at the macrosystem level. Fur-
thermore, these computational tools have helped test new conceptual approaches
to understanding matter and molecules. While we expect all these developments¥Invent new computer tools and logistics methods to reduce significantlythe time needed for commercializing new drugs.
¥Invent new algorithms to globally optimize at the worldwide level the
use of raw materials, energy, and environmental impact of chemical
processes.¥Develop new and powerful computational methods, applicable from
the atomic and molecular level to the chemical process and enterprise
level, that will enable multiscale optimization.2Moore originally stated that ÒThe complexity for minimum component costs has increased at a rateof roughly a factor of two per year,Ó Moore, G.E., Electronics, 38 (8), 1965. This has been restated as
ÒMooreÕs Law, the doubling of transistors every couple of years,Ó (http://www.intel.com/research/silicon/mooreslaw.htm). There are two related laws: (1) The cost of a fabrication plant to make eachgeneration of processors doubles in price from the previous one. (2) Since the discovery of the giantmagnetoresistance (GMR) effect, the density of disk storage increases by a factor of 2 every 12months. See also: Gelsinger, P., Gargini, P., Parker, G., Yu, A., IEEE Spectrum, October 1989.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHEMICAL THEORY AND COMPUTER MODELING73to continue, the important challenge is likely to arise in dramatic growth of newcomputing needs. These needs are driven by the increasing shift in the chemical
industry toward biotechnology products and pharmaceuticals, the emergence of
industrially relevant nanotechnologies, the requirement to optimize existing large-
scale commodity chemicals plants, and the increased size and complexity of many
new problems and systems. Instruments used by chemists and chemical engineers
are already substantially controlled by on-board computer systems, the complex-
ity of which will increase with that of the purpose and use of the instruments.Computational chemistry and process systems engineering play a major rolein providing new understanding and development of computational procedures
for the simulation, design, and operation of systems ranging from atoms and mol-
ecules to industrial-scale processes. The enormous span of scales of space and
time that range from computational chemistry to process systems engineering can
be visualized with the Òchemical supply chainÓ shown in Figure 6-1. The supply
chain starts with the set of chemicals that industry must synthesize and character-
ize at the molecular level. Subsequent steps aggregate these molecules into clus-
ters, particles, and filmsÑas single and multiphase systems that finally take theform of macroscopic mixtures. At the process engineering scale, the figure illus-
trates the design and analysis of production units that are integrated into a chemi-
cal process, which in turn is part of a site with multiple processes. Finally, this
site is part of the commercial enterprise that is driven by business considerations.
The multiple scales of this chain are a fact of life in chemical sciences and tech-
nology. To date, the field has neither sufficient tools nor enough trained people to
pursue computational chemistry and chemical engineering across all these scales.
The field will qualitatively changeÑin new insights, in what experiments aredone and how chemical products and processes are designedÑwhen this isachievable.Advances in computing have facilitated major progress in computational
chemistry and biochemistry, computational materials design, computational fluid
dynamics, process synthesis, planning and scheduling, model-based process con-
trol, fault diagnosis, and real-time process optimization. This progress has been
enabled by parallel advances in fundamental chemical physics theory, mathemat-
ics, operations research, and computer scienceÑincluding computational tech-niques for simulation and optimization of chemical systems. This chapter shows
how areas that span computational chemistry, from the atomic level to process
systems engineering at the macrosystem level, are full of exciting computational
challenges that await solutions from bright minds.3,43Impact of Advances in Computing and Communications Technologies on Chemical Science andTechnology, National Research Council, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1999.
4Mathematical Challenges from Theoretical/Computational Chemistry, National Research Council,National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1995.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74FIGURE 6-1The chemical supply chain. Courtesy of Professor Wolfgang Marquardt.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHEMICAL THEORY AND COMPUTER MODELING75GOALSScience proceeds by both experiment and theory. Simple experimental factswithout a theory to interpret them do not satisfy our need for understanding. In-
deed, many experimental measurements cannot be interpreted without theory,
and as experiments probe phenomena and structures at ever smaller spatial and
temporal scales, the role of theory in interpreting experiment increases. However,
theory without experiment can lead to unrealistic dreams.The birth of modern
science came when it was realized that truth is obtained from facts, not just from
speculation. Theory validated by experiment runs through all of chemistry, and
almost all its branches now use computers. Structures are determined by com-
puter treatments of x-ray data, potential new drugs are analyzed by computer
modeling, and even synthetic strategies to make a desired target molecule are
developed using computer programs created for the purpose.Quantum MechanicsThe chemical sciences are built on a set of fundamental mathematical theo-ries that have increasing utility as computational hardware and software become
more powerful. As the basis for calculating the electronic structure of molecules,
quantum mechanics permits calculations, often based on rational approximations,
of structure and properties of molecules, and of reactivity and reaction mecha-
nisms. The Schrıdinger wave equation can in principle predict the electronicstates of any chemical species, but in practice it can be applied only approxi-
mately to molecules of any significant size. A continuing, important goal is to
devise better and more accurate ways to obtain predictions of molecular struc-
tures, bond energies, molecular properties, transition state structures, and ener-
gies for systems of increasing size.Good approximate quantum calculations usually can be done reliably onlyfor isolated molecules. Another important objective in this field is to develop
methodologies for solvated molecules and molecules that are parts of membranes
or other organized biological systems. Engineers are attempting to use quantum
mechanical calculations to predict practical phenomenaÑfor example, makingand breaking of bonds in adhesion and fractureÑthat are based on electronicinteractions. Additional goals are to learn how to accurately include heavier ele-
ments and to calculate the properties of molecules as a function of time, when
they are interacting with other species.Quantum calculations are the starting point for another objective of theoreti-cal and computational chemical science, multiscale calculations. The overall ob-
jective is to understand and predict large-scale phenomena, such as deformation
in solids or transport in porous media, beginning with fundamental calculation of
electronic structure and interactions, then using the results of that calculation as
input to the next level of a more coarse-grained approximation.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERAn important goal is to improve or supplement quantum mechanical meth-ods in order to calculate reliably the energy and geometry of a transition state.
This is one piece of information that can lead to the larger objective of predicting
the rates of unmeasured reactions, but a second goal must also be met to achieve
this. The accurate prediction of reaction rates also depends on our knowledge of
dynamical properties of molecules and the dynamics of their sampling of acces-
sible electronic, rotational, and vibrational states. Another goal is to predict the
course of excited-state reactions, often initiated by adsorption of light. Such mol-
ecules do not traverse the lowest energy paths, and they usually form products
that are different from those produced in ground-state reactions. Molecules that
absorb light are transformed into various different excited states, depending on
the energy of the light that is absorbed. Each excited state can in principle un-
dergo a unique photochemical transformation. The development of successful
theoretical treatments for such complex phenomena presents a substantial chal-
lenge. This goal also extends to the calculation of magnetic, optical, electrical,
and mechanical properties of molecular and extended solids in both the ground
and excited states.Yet another related goal is to be able to predict the catalytic activity of agiven surface for a particular reaction. Using computational quantum chemistry,
it is becoming possible to predict with reasonable accuracy the energy barriers
and transition states of molecules reacting on catalytic surfaces, thus leading to
insights into reaction rates. This is enabling a new field of rational catalyst de-
sign, which offers the promise of designing and optimizing new catalysts compu-
tationally so that synthetic efforts can be focused on high-priority candidates.Molecular MechanicsOne tool for working toward this objective is molecular mechanics. In thisapproach, the bonds in a molecule are treated as classical objects, with continu-
ous interaction potentials (sometimes called force fields) that can be developed
empirically or calculated by quantum theory. This is a powerful method that al-
lows the application of predictive theory to much larger systems if sufficiently
accurate and robust force fields can be developed. Predicting the structures of
proteins and polymers is an important objective, but at present this often requires
prohibitively large calculations. Molecular mechanics with classical interaction
potentials has been the principal tool in the development of molecular models of
polymer dynamics. The ability to model isolated polymer molecules (in dilute
solution) is well developed, but fundamental molecular mechanics models of
dense systems of entangled polymers remains an important goal.A particular goal of chemical theory is to predict protein structure from theamino acid sequenceÑto calculate how polypeptides fold into the compact ge-ometries of proteins. One strategy is to develop methods (often based on bioinfor-
matics) for predicting structures approximately and then refining the structuresBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHEMICAL THEORY AND COMPUTER MODELING77using atomic-level molecular modeling methods. Molecular mechanics is also thetheoretical approach employed in calculating how a proposed drug might bind
into a protein.Modeling and SimulationModeling and simulation are extremely important tools in the chemical sci-ences. The understanding and engineering of complex chemical processes, such
as combustion or atmospheric chemistry and transport, generally rely heavily and
increasingly on modeling and computation. Recent advances in computing not
only have enabled more accurate and reliable calculations, but they have also
provided new tools for interpreting the output of the calculations. Modern com-
puter graphicsÑincluding molecular graphics, simulations, and animationsÑhave greatly enhanced the ability of scientists and engineers to understand and
utilize the results of their computations.Yet modeling can be no better than its assumptions. It often suffers from theproblem that we cannot follow any computed process for a long duration (many
time steps)Ñprimarily because the computer time needed per time step is signifi-cant, but also because of the cumulative propagation of round-off errors. The
typical time step is on the order of 1 femtosecond (i.e., 10Ð15 s) of real time for an
atomically detailed molecular simulation. Consequently, modeling phenomena
on the femtosecond time scale would require about 103 time steps, which is not
difficult, and modeling on the picosecond time scale (106 time steps) is fairly
routine. However, many phenomena of interest (e.g., the time to fold a protein)
are on the millisecond or larger time scale and would require 1015 time steps or
more. Another goal is to learn how to improve the calculations by overcoming
these problems. One approach is to use stochastic approaches based on cleverly
chosen Monte Carlo methods; another is to reduce the level of detail in the mod-
els for the molecules (so-called coarse grained models).Statistical Mechanics and Fluid MechanicsSometimes the theoretical or computational approach to description of mo-lecular structure, properties, and reactivity cannot be based on deterministic equa-
tions that can be solved by analytical or computational methods. The properties
of a molecule or assembly of molecules may be known or describable only in a
statistical sense. Molecules and assemblies of molecules exist in distributions of
configuration, composition, momentum, and energy. Sometimes, this statistical
character is best captured and studied by computer experiments: molecular dy-
namics, Brownian dynamics, Stokesian dynamics, and Monte Carlo methods. In-
teraction potentials based on quantum mechanics, classical particle mechanics,
continuum mechanics, or empiricism are specified and the evolution of the sys-
tem is then followed in time by simulation of motions resulting from these directBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERinterparticle, stochastic, or fluid mechanical forces. The larger the size of thecomputation, the better the statistical representation of the system.Statistical mechanics is the science that deals with average properties of themolecules, atoms, or elementary particles in random motion in a system of many
such particles and relates these properties to the thermodynamic and other macro-
scopic properties of the system.5 Use of statistical mechanics reflects the view
that broad features of a system may be captured best as a description of the statis-
tical distribution of the elements within a population rather than as a precise de-
scription of the elements themselves. One advantage of statistical mechanics is
that a good model often reveals some underlying generality governing the sys-
tem, thereby permitting analogies to be made between properties or behaviors
that superficially are quite different. Simulations and statistical mechanics are
key tools for physical chemists and engineers working on understanding rheo-
logical behavior, mass transport, modeling of microfluidic devices, flow of granu-

lar media, and behavior of dense particle suspensions.At the next higher level of coarse-graining, fluid mechanics and other con-tinuum mechanics methods are active arenas of theory and computation. For ex-
ample, electrorheology and magnetorheology have provided tremendous impetus
in the last decade. Efforts to determine the dependence of basic scaling on field
strength and particle volume fraction quickly require answers to questions about
material properties. The links between the thinking of chemical engineers study-
ing transport and chemists designing and producing materials are crucial for

progress. Granular media is another area where the clear interplay between sci-
ence and technology is facilitating progress in solving sophisticated scientific
questions that have immediate impact on technology and practice. From the view-

point of computation and simulation, engineers working in granular media are
addressing problems of flow and mixing (such as those arising in the processing
of powdered pharmaceuticals); discrete computational approaches encompass
particle dynamics, Monte Carlo, and cellular automata calculations.Spanning Length and Time ScalesMany of the problems cited above highlight the need for being able to bridgecalculations across several length and time scales. It is thus worthwhile to con-
sider this in some additional detail. For example, reactions involve changes in the
molecules, and hence are inherently quantum mechanical in nature. But a reac-
tion taking place in a solution at finite temperature implies that the reaction is
influenced by a dynamic environment more pragmatically described by classical
molecular simulation methods. Hence, a scale-bridging method is needed to al-
low the dynamics of the solvent around the reactants to influence the electronic5Random House WebsterÕs Unabridged Dictionary, V2.2 for 16-bit Windows systems, copyright
1999, Random House, Inc.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHEMICAL THEORY AND COMPUTER MODELING79structure of the reactants in various conformations, as well as the reactants influ-encing the motion of the solvent molecules around them. One solution is to per-
form molecular simulations with force fields calculated Òon the flyÓ by quantum
mechanical methods at each time step. Such Òfirst principlesÓ or 
ab initio molecu-
lar simulation methods are presently limited to fairly small numbers of atoms
(around 100 to 1000) for rather short simulations (10 ps is a typical value). Other
hybrid methods, which treat just the environment around reactants quantum me-
chanically, are less accurate in principle but allow much longer time scales and
much larger spatial scales to be accessed, since the vast majority of the molecules
are treated by classical molecular simulation.The problem of spanning scales goes well beyond spanning from the elec-tronic structure scale to the molecular (which might be thought of as the †ngstrım-or nanoscale). Chemical processes at the commercial scale ultimately involve
spatial scales on the order of meters, and time scales (corresponding to processing
times in reactors and separations equipment) ranging from seconds to hours and,
in the case of many bioengineering processes involving fermentations, days or
weeks. How do we connect phenomena at the electronic and molecular scale to
the commercial chemical process scale?In some cases, the connection is trivial: for low-molecular-weight molecularsystems, properties calculated at the electronic structure level (e.g., reaction rates,
and free energies of formation and reaction) or at the molecular simulation level
(e.g., the so-called critical constants, and transport properties such as viscosity)
can be used directly at the process scale as input data for process models. How-
ever, for complex molecules (such as polymers and proteins) the properties at the
molecular level are not decoupled from the process level. For example, flow at
process level can result in changes in the conformation of the molecules, which in
turn changes the properties of the molecules. In such cases, the problem of devel-
oping accurate molecular modeling methods that will span the scales from elec-
tronic to molecular to mesoscopic to macroscopic (the process scale) cannot be
avoided. Since such complex molecules and their processing are the focus of the
modern chemical, pharmaceutical, and materials industries, it is imperative that
the problem of developing effective multiscale modeling methods be solved. It is
currently one of the most active research focuses of the molecular modeling com-
munity. It is also a major focus of nanotechnology modeling efforts, since in such
systems the need to connect nanoscale structure to macroscale functionality is
even more apparent.Making the Òscale-upÓ connection between the electronic and molecular
structure of molecules and their macroscopic properties, and the design of pro-
cesses to manufacture them, is one half of the story. The other half is making the
connection Òscale-downÓÑfrom specification of a process-level manufacturingneed (e.g., a solvent with better properties) to the design of a molecule that meets
the need. Harnessing these yet-to-be-developed methods and combining them
with state-of-the-art process modeling and optimization tools will result in inte-Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERgrated process and product design: the ability to computationally design and op-timize products (e.g., chemicals, drugs, materials) as well as the manufacturing
processes to make them. The molecular modeling and process design communi-
ties recognize that, with the continued rapid pace of computer hardware, soft-
ware, and algorithmic advances, this goal is now accessible in the next decade or
two. Hence, conferences are beginning to spring up whose main goal is to bring
together members of these communities to learn from each other. Cross-fertiliza-
tion between the fields has led to computational chemistry methods (e.g., simu-
lated annealing) crossing over to the process design community, just as tech-
niques from the process design community (e.g., mathematical programming
methods) have crossed over to the protein folding community.6H.S. Chan, and K.A. Dill, Physics Today, 46 (2): 24-32 Feb. 1993.
The Problem of Time Scales in Molecular SimulationBrute-force classical molecular dynamics simulation will not span thetime scales present in complex molecular systems, even with fully effi-
cient implementation on the worldÕs fastest parallel supercomputers. Thistime scale problem was captured well by Ken Dill in 1993.
6 Although this
scheme did not fully take into account the impact of massively parallel
computers (by which the current generation of ~10 teraflops computerstheoretically increase the level of computing 1,000- to 10,000-fold overworkstations), the essential problem of simulating over long periods of

time relative to the shortest time scale motion is not fundamentallychanged even by recent advances in parallel supercomputing. Whileparallel supercomputing makes it possible to span larger spatial scales
rather easily, spanning larger time scales remains a fundamental diffi-culty. To be more concrete, there are about 30 million seconds in a year,and the maximum speed at which messages can be passed between

any two processors on a parallel supercomputer is roughly 10,000 persecond. Hence, even if the time to compute forces could be reduced by
sufficient parallelization to essentially zero, a molecular dynamics simu-
lation could not execute more than 3 x 1011 time steps per year; in prac-tice, it will be considerably less. When a calculation is limited by the timerequired to pass messages, it is referred to as communications-limited.
Thus, with a time step of 10Ð15 s, in a year of computing the most one
could hope to achieve is around 10Ð4 s of real time. This conclusion high-
lights the need to develop theoretically sound methods for spanning the
many time scales present in the molecular simulation of complex systems
(such as proteins and polymers).Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHEMICAL THEORY AND COMPUTER MODELING81How well has DillÕs prediction held up? In 2000, the first evermicrosecond-long molecular dynamics simulation of protein folding wasreported. It required 750,000 node hours (equal to the product of the
number of hours times the number of processors) of computer time on aCray T3 supercomputer. According to DillÕs prediction, this length ofsimulation was not to be expected until around 2010. However, as noted
above, DillÕs analysis does not take into account large-scaleparallelizationÑwhich, unless the computation is communications-limited, will effectively increase the speed of a computation in proportion
to the number of processors available.Time scales for various motions within biopolymers (upper) and nonbiological poly-mers (lower). The year scale at the bottom shows estimates of when each such
process might be accessible to brute force molecular simulation on super-computers, assuming that parallel processing capability on supercomputers in-creases by about a factor of 1,000 every 10 years (i.e., one order of magnitude
more than MooreÕs law) and neglecting new approaches or breakthroughs. Re-printed with permission from H.S. Chan and K. A. Dill. Physics Today, 46, 2, 24,
(1993).PROGRESS TO DATEImportant insights have been developed using approximate methods that werenot highly precise quantitatively, and excellent high-level methods for solving
the Schrıdinger equation have been developed, but the methods still have usedapproximations. A Nobel Prize in 1998 went to John Pople and Walter Kohn for
their different successful approaches to this problem. Earlier methods used manyBiopolymersNonbiological polymersBiopolymersNonbiologicalPolymersBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERdifferent parameters derived from experiment, but current so-called ab initiomethods as pioneered by Pople are essentially free of such experimentally de-
rived parameters. With the current methods, systems of 5 to 20 common atoms
are handled well. Density-functional theory (DFT) as developed by Kohn is also
moderately successful with larger systems, and with more unusual atoms.In molecular mechanics, force fields and sampling methods used in the cal-culations are being improved continually, but they are not yet good enough that
atomic-level refinement of protein structures is feasible on a robust and routine
basis. It is unclear what the relative contribution of force field and sampling er-
rors are to the problem. Similar comments apply to the prediction of protein-
ligand binding. The protein-folding problem is thus currently being approached
mainly by analogy, using data from existing protein structures to derive various
folding rules. The field of ab initio theoretical protein folding
Ñprediction of fullthree-dimensional protein structure using a combination of an optimization algo-
rithm to minimize energy with an explicit force-field representation of the func-
tional groups in the proteinÑis a computationally intensive approach that hasrecorded some successes in protein structure prediction.7 Ab initio protein-fold-ing approaches are the only methods capable of predicting fundamentally new
structures in proteins (i.e., substructures not previously found in any experimen-
tally measured protein structures). One forefront area of research at the interface
of polymers and biology is the synthesis (by genetic engineering) of synthetic
proteins/biopolymers containing building blocks other than the usual 20 amino
acids, including inorganic species such as silicon. Ab initio protein-folding ap-
proaches offer routes to predicting the properties of such biopolymers.Initially, most theoretical methods calculated the properties of molecules inthe gas phase as isolated species, but chemical reactions are most often carried
out in solution. Biochemical reactions normally take place in water. Consequently,
there is increasing interest in methods for including solvents in the calculations.
In the simplest approach, solvents are treated as a continuum, whose average
properties are included in the calculation. Explicit inclusion of solvent molecules
in the calculation greatly expands the size of the problem, but newer approaches
do this for at least those solvent molecules next to the dissolved species of inter-
est. The detailed structures and properties of these solvent molecules affect their
direct interaction with the dissolved species. Reactions at catalytic surfaces
present an additional challenge, as the theoretical techniques must be able to
handle the reactants and the atoms in the surface, as well as possible solvent
species. The first concrete examples of computationally based rational catalyst
design have begun to appear in publications and to have impact in industry.7The use of the term ab initio in the context of protein folding should not be confused with its useto describe ab initio quantum chemistry calculations. In both cases, ab initio is meant to convey theidea of Òfrom first principles,Ó but the starting point and theoretical framework are different for each.
Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHEMICAL THEORY AND COMPUTER MODELING83In the area of collective properties, simulation methods have been developedover the past decade and a half that make it possible to predict the phase equilib-
ria of systems directly from force fields, dramatically widening the applicability
of molecular simulation for process-engineering calculations. Phase equilibria of
various kinds (vapor-liquid, liquid-liquid, fluid-solid) lie at the center of most of
the separation techniques (e.g., distillation and crystallization) commonly used in
the chemical industry. The last decade has also seen dramatic improvements in
molecular simulation methodologiesÑlargely based on stochastic methodsÑforovercoming the long relaxation times inherent in the equilibration of polymers
and similar complex materials. A recent international comparative study of the
industrial application of molecular modeling in the chemical, pharmaceutical,
and materials industries in the United States, Europe, and Japan gathered infor-
mation from over 75 sites; the report documents some of the remarkably diverse
ways in which molecular modeling methods are successfully impacting industry
today.8 Given the limitations of today
Õs tools, the future for integrated molecular-based product design and process-level design and optimization is very bright
indeed.Goals in Process Systems Engineering, and Progress to DateProcess systems engineering is the study of the processes used in manufac-turing. It encompasses all aspects of the design, construction, control, and opera-
tion of the chemical processes used in chemical manufacturing. The goal of pro-
cess systems engineering remains the understanding and development of tools for
the advantaged synthesis, analysis, optimization, evaluation, design, control,
scheduling, and operation of chemical process systems consistent with new soci-
etal and economic objectives and constraints. This is true for all processesÑnomatter what the chemistry or biochemistry, whether isolated or in supply chain
networks, dedicated or general purpose, batch or continuous, and whether micro-
scale or macroscale. This goal requires the further creation and exploitation of a
science base that includes novel representations of the underlying chemical and
physical phenomena, computationally efficient formulation and solution meth-
ods, and the expansion of and incorporation of advanced engineering expertise
and judgment. As discussed below, two major objectives in process systems engi-
neering are the creation or invention of new processes (process synthesis), and
the systematization of decision-making with prediction of systems performance
(modeling and optimization).8The report is available on the Internet at http://itri.loyola.edu/molmodel.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERProcess SynthesisCreation of new processes for building new plants or retrofitting existingfacilities is a key area for addressing the goals of process systems engineering
cited above. The major reason is that process synthesis deals with the systematic
generation and search of alternatives that can potentially lead to major structural
discoveries and modifications. Significant progress has been made in the devel-
opment of systematic techniques for the synthesis of energy recovery networks,
distillation systems (including azeotropic separations), and reactor networks. For
synthesizing process flow sheets that integrate these subsystems, hierarchical de-
composition and superstructure optimization have emerged as two major ap-
proaches. In the design of multiproduct batch plants, progress has been made
with mathematical programming models that integrate scheduling as part of the
design decisions.In the future we will see the application of synthesis techniques to new pro-cesses that involve greater use of more abundant or renewable raw materials, and
greater reuse of materials such as carbon dioxide, salts, tars, and sludges, which
are currently generally disposed of. Exploiting some of these alternative raw ma-
terials and chemistries may involve greater energy input than required for raw
materials presently in use, and the source and impact of any such increased en-
ergy requirement must also be carefully considered. At the same time, pressures
to increase reaction selectivity will continue unabated.Process synthesis is the invention of chemistry-implementing processing con-
cepts. It is a creative open-ended activity characterized by a combinatorially large
number of feasible alternatives. Process synthesis defines the overall structure of
the manufacturing process and identifies and designs the processing equipment to
be employed and specifies how they are to be interconnected. The number of
potential feasible process designs is in general very large, and selecting the right
process structure generally determines most of the economic potential of a new or
retrofitted chemical process. In recent industrial experience, energy reductions of
50% and overall cost reductions of 35% using systematic process synthesis tech-
niques have been achieved. Nevertheless, a significant need remains for even
better approaches.Some success has been achieved in developing systematic process synthesismethods based on recursive hierarchical means-ends analysis architectures
adapted from artificial intelligence research. These have been greatly aided by
the recent development of new representations of the underlying physical science
and thermodynamic knowledge that define the forces generally engaged in chemi-

cal reaction and separation processes. Exploiting these representationsÑprob-lem-solving strategies that focus primarily on the processing tasks to be accom-
plished rather than the equipment to be employedÑhas proven to be particularlyeffective in creating novel superior designs.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHEMICAL THEORY AND COMPUTER MODELING85The chemical process synthesis problem might also be formulated as an op-timization over all feasible process structures. In principle, if we employed all
different possible approaches to implement some desired chemistryÑincludingall possible different reactor configurations, all possible different separation and
purification schemes, techniques, and equipment, and all interconnections among
these potential units in one gigantic tentative process flow sheetÑand if we thensubjected such a superstructure to economic optimization constrained by envi-
ronmental, safety, and other criteria (during which process inferior equipment
and interconnections were eliminated), the best manufacturing process in terms
of both structure and the design of each surviving piece of equipment would
emerge. This, of course, is a massive and extremely difficult optimization prob-
lem involving a mixture of continuous, integer, and logical variables and relation-
ships. However, new mathematical techniques such as generalized disjunctive
programming and global optimization, combined with the tremendous increases
in available computing power made possible through large clusters of fast inde-
pendent processors, give hope that this superstructure optimization approach to
chemical process synthesis may be practical in the near future.Modeling and OptimizationThe chemical industry can largely be viewed as being composed of two ma-jor segments. One is the Òvalue preservationÓ industry that is largely based on the
large-scale production of commodity chemicals. The other is the Òvalue growthÓindustry that is based on the small-scale production of specialty chemicals, bio-
technology products, and pharmaceuticals. For the chemical industry to remain
strong, it is essential that these two segments be competitive and economically
strong. The Òvalue preservationÓ industry must be able to reduce costs, operate
efficiently, and continuously improve product quality, thereby making process
simulation and process optimization its key technologies. The Òvalue growthÓindustry must be agile and quick to market new products, making supply chain
management one of its key technologies. In both cases, major challenges over the
next two decades will be to gain a better understanding of the structure and infor-
mation flows underlying the chemical supply chain of Figure 6-1, and to develop
novel mathematical models and methods for its simulation and optimization.In the past, most of the modeling and optimization activity has taken place inisolated parts of the chemical supply chain. In chemical engineering it has been
mostly at the level of process units and plants, but more recently it has been
moving in two opposing directionsÑthe molecular and the enterprise levels. Incomputational chemistry, the modeling research has been directed at the molecu-
lar level and is increasingly moving toward the atomic and quantum scale, as
discussed in the previous sections. Developments in planning and scheduling are
being increasingly directed to address the optimization of the supply chain at theBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERenterprise level. Major difficulties in developing mathematical models that inte-grate the various parts of the chemical supply chain result from the huge differ-
ences in length and time scales in the supply chain and the number of chemical
species considered at each level. Furthermore, at the longer scales, new situations
can arise that may not be reliably predicted from the basic models.Process Simulation: A RevolutionProcess simulation, which emerged in the 1960s, has become one ofthe great success stories in the use of computing in the chemical
industry. For instance, steady-state simulation has largely replacedexperimentation and pilot plant testing in process development for com-modity chemicals, except in the case of reactions having new mecha-

nisms or requiring new separation technologies. Tools for steady-state
process simulation are nowadays universally available to aid in thedecisions for design, operation, and debottlenecking; they are part of
every process engineerÕs toolkit. Their accuracy and predictive abilityfor decision-making is widely accepted to make routine plant trials andmost experimental scale-up obsolete in the commodity chemicals
industry.Dynamic simulation plays a dominant role in the design of trainingsimulators for operators. As with aircraft simulation, these programs

allow operators to deal with disturbances, start-ups, and upsets that go
beyond conventional regulatory control. For hazardous processes, theyare a requirement for operator certification on distributed control sys-
tems. Environmental, safety and hazard, and operability studies areoften handled through steady-state and dynamic simulation tools. Inshort, process simulation is the engine that drives decision-making in
process engineering. It is the accepted Òvirtual realityÓ of the process
industries.Some recent applications have benefited from advances in comput-
ing and computational techniques. Steady-state simulation is beingused off-line for process analysis, design, and retrofit; process simula-tors can model flow sheets with up to about a million equations by

employing nested procedures. Other applications have resulted in great
economic benefits; these include on-line real-time optimization modelsfor data reconciliation and parameter estimation followed by optimal
adjustment of operating conditions. Models of up to 500,000 variableshave been used on a refinery-wide basis.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHEMICAL THEORY AND COMPUTER MODELING87Off-line analysis, controller design, and optimization are now performed
in the area of dynamics. The largest dynamic simulation has been about100,000 differential algebraic equations (DAEs) for analysis of control
systems. Simulations formulated with process models having over 10,000DAEs are considered frequently. Also, detailed training simulators havemodels with over 10,000 DAEs. On-line model predictive control (MPC)
and nonlinear MPC using first-principle models are seeing a number ofindustrial applications, particularly in polymeric reactions and processes.At this point, systems with over 100 DAEs have been implemented for

on-line dynamic optimization and control.While the developments described above are currently implementedand available, significant remaining issues are being investigated to
further improve the capability of process simulators. One example is theuse of object-oriented approaches to integrating models from different
sources and vendors in a single simulation. Another challenge is combin-
ing partial differential equation models with DAE and algebraic processmodels, which will require parallel computations to solve models withmillions of variables. Finally, nonlinear optimization algorithms are
needed that can handle very large models as well as discrete variablesfor performing topology optimization in process flow sheets.
To tackle these problems successfully, new concepts will be required fordeveloping systematic modeling techniques that can describe parts of the chemi-
cal supply chain at different levels of abstraction. A specific example is the inte-
gration of molecular thermodynamics in process simulation computations. This
would fulfill the objective of predicting the properties of new chemical products
when designing a new manufacturing plant. However, such computations remain
unachievable at the present time and probably will remain so for the next decade.
The challenge is how to abstract the details and description of a complex system
into a reduced dimensional space.Another important aspect in the modeling and optimization of the chemicalsupply chain is the description of the dynamics of the information and material
flow through the chain. This will require a better understanding of the integration
of R&D, process design, process operation, and business logistics. The challenge
will be to develop quantitative models that can be used to better coordinate and
optimize the chemical enterprise. Progress will be facilitated by new advances in
information technology, particularly through advances in the Internet and by new
methods and mathematical concepts. Advances in computer technology will play
a central role. Fulfilling the goal of effectively integrating the various functionsBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIER(R&D, design, production, logistics) in the chemical supply chain will help tobetter meet customer demands, and effectively adapt in the new world of e-com-
merce. Concepts related to planning, scheduling, and control that have not been
widely adopted by chemical engineers should play a prominent role in the model-
ing part of this problem. Concepts and tools of computer science and operations
research will play an even greater role in terms of impacting the implementation
of solutions for this problem.Supply-Chain Management Increases Profitability of theChemical Industry Through Computer ToolsNew optimization tools, information management systems, and theInternet are revolutionizing supply-chain management in chemical com-panies. The objective of these tools is not only to help manage more
effectively the flow of materials from their production facilities to their
distribution centers, but also to incorporate the suppliers and the customers.Instead of running businesses from the inside out, forward thinking com-

panies are integrating their business processes to run the business theway their customers demand: from the outside in. The ultimate winners in
this new world will be the ones who manage their supply chains more

efficiently than their competitors, harness the customer loyalty factor, andfind ways to facilitate business transactions. Making the customer andthe other business partners more profitable is the new way to compete in

the chemical industry, where many products rapidly become commodi-ties. From simple ways to reduce the cost of each transaction, to working
together to reduce overall inventories, to true collaboration of business
processes such as product design, logistics management, manufactur-ing execution, product marketing, and overall management, the use ofadvanced computer and optimization tools and process models deployed
through the Internet will give those companies a significant competitiveadvantage.Supply-chain management can be applied at three major levels:strategic planning, tactical planning, and production scheduling. Further-more, its integration can lead to new business practices such as improvedÒcapability to promiseÓ in the sales of products. An example of strategic
planning is the integration of a single product through the entire supplychain, from raw materials delivery, through manufacturing, to delivery to
customers. Major decisions at this level include rationalizing the distribu-
tion network, building new plants, or evaluating new markets. This is in
contrast to tactical planning, which involves developing an operationalplan, meeting capacity constraints, and developing inventory and over-
time strategies to increase the efficiency in the supply chain. BASF per-Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHEMICAL THEORY AND COMPUTER MODELING89formed a corporate network optimization of packaged finished goods inNorth America. There were 17 operating divisions with multiple, hetero-geneous systems: 25,000 stockkeeping units (SKUs), 134 shipping
points, 15,000 ship-to locations, 956 million pounds shipped direct tocustomers, and 696 million pounds shipped to customers through distri-bution centers. By using optimization tools BASF reduced transportation
and facility costs by 10%, next-day volume delivery increased from 77%
to 96%, the number of distribution centers was reduced from 86 to 15,
generating $10 million per year savings in operating costs (personal com-
munication, Dr. Vladimir Mahlaec, Aspen Technology).An example of production scheduling involves scheduling a plant in
continuous time to optimize sequencing, while providing an executableproduction schedule. This problem is complicated by the fact that it must
take into account forecast and customer orders, inventories of raw mate-
rial, intermediates and finished goods, facility status, manufacturing in-formation, rates, facility preferences, and recipes. Pharmacia-Upjohn wasfaced with such a problem in the scheduling of a fermentation process.

Using modern software, schedules were generated for 6 days of produc-tion. The major benefit was an effective and flexible computer tool forrescheduling that can readily accommodate changes in customer orders.Finally, an interesting trend in supply-chain management is improvingbusiness practices by providing capabilities to improve service for cus-tomers. One such concept is Òcapability to promise.Ó The idea is not just
to ensure that the product is available, but that the supply chain is capableof delivering the product. This involves, for instance, capability to rapidlychange the schedule to accommodate the customer order and interact
with the active plant schedule. Such a system was developed at CelaneseFibers, which is integrated with a Customer Order System and enabled
via a Web browser.CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE FUTUREChemical Theory and ComputationFaster and cheaper computers will extend the range of high-level methods.Improvements in DFT functionals will improve the accuracy of DFT calcula-
tions. One specific challenge will be to derive density functional theory from
fundamental theory in a way that reveals how to incorporate successive approxi-
mations for the exchange and correlation terms. Some work on high-level meth-
ods with better scaling may allow more immediate extension of high-accuracy
calculations to larger systems. Combining quantum mechanical and molecularBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERmechanics methods will allow very large systems to be treated using quantummethods in the reactive core and force fields for the remainder of the systems, for
example in enzymatic chemistry. Many specific needs can be identified:¥methods to simulate quantum molecular dynamics in condensed systemswithout approximating the system as a quantum system coupled to a classical
bath. This is not now possible although there has been some progress toward this
end in the treatment of simple physical models. This is a development that will
benefit greatly from the development of practical quantum computers.¥development of methods to bypass the problem of multiple time scales inmolecular dynamics. This difficulty is particularly egregious in the protein-fold-
ing problem.¥methods for the efficient sampling of rough energy landscapes such asthose found in proteins. Because of high energy barriers in such systems, most of
the time is spent sampling energy basins near the starting configuration. The de-
velopment of efficient methods is required for the determination of structural and
thermodynamic properties as well as for efficient refinement of protein structure.¥accurate polarizable force fields for peptides, water, etc. Improved forcefields explicitly incorporating polarization are being developed. Until rapid abinitio molecular dynamics methods exist, such force fields are required for the
simulation of chemical systems with chemical accuracy.¥to understand the kinetics of protein folding from a mechanistic point ofview. Abstract schemes have been proposed, but there is much yet to do before
this goal is realized.¥to develop methods for understanding and predicting energy transfer, elec-tron transport, and the entirely new quantum effects involving coherence that
arise in nanoscale devices.¥to develop the statistical mechanics of fluids and fluid mixturesÑfor ex-ample, to obtain improved understanding of associating fluids, hydrophobicity,
and ionic systems.¥to develop computational tools for solid-state problems, including calcu-lation of magnetic, optical, electrical, and mechanical properties of molecular and
extended solids in both ground and excited states.¥to correlate theoretical predictions with experimental results, designingexperiments specifically to test various theoretical predictions. As this is done,
and is successful, the role of mathematical theory in chemistry will increase in
value.Process Systems EngineeringA number of major challenges exist in process systems engineering in whichcomputing will play a major role. These can be grouped by major areas of appli-
cation:Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHEMICAL THEORY AND COMPUTER MODELING91¥Process and Product Design. The traditional process design will be ex-
panded to include product design as an integral part of this area. Within the com-
modity chemicals industry major challenges that will be addressed include pro-
cess intensification for novel unit operations, and design of environmentally
benign processes. Areas that are likely to receive increased attention due to the
growth in new industries include molecular design, synthesis of microchips, smart
materials, bioprocess systems, bioinformatics, and design and analysis of meta-
bolic networks.¥Process Control. The traditional process control will be expanded toward
new applications such as nonlinear process control of biosystems. However, in
the commodity chemicals industry there will be increased need for synthesizing
plantwide control systems, as well as integrating dynamics, discrete events, and
safety functions, which will be achieved through new mathematical and com-
puter science developments in hybrid systems.¥R&D and Process Operations. The traditional area of process operations
will expand upstream and downstream in terms of integrating R&D as well as
logistics and distribution functions. Areas that are likely to receive increased atten-
tion 
include logistics for new product development, planning and supply chainmanagement, real-time scheduling, and synthesis of operating procedures (safety).
¥Integration. As is also described below, the integration of several parts of
the chemical supply chain will give rise to a number of challenges, such as
multiscale modeling for molecular dynamics, integration of planning, scheduling
and control (including Internet based), and integration of measurements, control,
and information systems.Progress in these areas will require a number of new supporting tools thatcan effectively handle and solve a variety of mathematical models involving thou-
sands and millions of variables. These supporting tools in turn will require that
chemical engineers become acquainted with new advances in numerical analysis,
mathematical programming, and local search techniques.¥There is a need for large-scale differential-algebraic methods for simulat-ing systems at multiple scales (e.g., fluid mechanics and molecular dynamics), a
capability that is still at a very early stage.¥There is a need for methods for simulating and optimizing models whoseparameters are described by probability distribution functions, a capability that is
in its infancy.¥There is a need for advanced discrete-continuous optimization tools thatcan handle mixed-integer, discrete-logic, and quantitative-qualitative equations
to model synthesis and planning and scheduling problems.¥There is a need for methods that can determine global optima for arbitrarynonlinear functions, and that can handle extremely large nonlinear models for
real-time optimization (on the order of millions of variables).Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIER¥There is a need for improved modeling tools to accommodate heuristicand qualitative reasoning.¥There is a need for hierarchical computations for conceptual design, whichwill require knowledge of new developments in computer science.¥There is a need for information-modeling tools, which will become in-creasingly important for supporting integration problems as well as teamwork.Finally, there are new potential applications from software and Internet-basedcomputing. While the former is likely to be most relevant for a few specialists,
the demand for software development may increase as chemistry and chemical
engineering move to new areas in which there are no standard software packages.
For Internet-based computing an exciting possibility will be to share more readily
new software developments directly from the developers, bypassing the commer-
cial software vendors. Another area of sharing leading to powerful new computa-
tional opportunities in the chemical sciences is the use of peer-to-peer computing
in the form of sharing unused cycles on small computers. We can do very large-
scale computations on networks of personal computers, as is being done in stud-
ies of protein folding9 and molecular docking.
10 The potential here is to tackle
computational problems of unprecedented size and complexity, with a relatively
low investment in the actual computational resources.Scientific ComputingAdvances in scientific computing will help to address some of the challengesin computational chemistry and process systems engineering, particularly com-
putational tasks that scale exponentially with size. While single-threaded execu-
tion speed is important and needed, coordination of multiple instruction multiple
data (MIMD) computer systems is rapidly becoming the major challenge in sci-
entific computing. The optimal parallel organization is application dependent:
synchronous systems execute multiple elementary tasks per clock cycle while
asynchronous models use clusters, vector units, or hypercubes. Although work in
automatic task parallelization has made significant progress, the major issues in
scientific high-performance computing are likely to be identification of suitable
hardware architectures, algorithms to reformulate problems into a sequence of
parallelizable subtasks with the Òweakest possibleÓ couplings, and nondetermin-
istic procedures with statistical properties. On the positive side, parallel comput-
ing is becoming almost routine as individual researchers, groups, universities,9http://www.stanford.edu/group/pandegroup/Cosm; V.S. Pande and D.S. Rokhsar, 
Proceedings ofthe National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A. 96, 9062-9067, 1999; V. S. Pande, A. Y. Grosberg, T.Tanaka, and D. S. Rokhsar, Current Opinions in Structural Biology, 8:68-79, 1997.10http://www.chem.ox.ac.uk/curecancer.html; Robinson, Daniel D.; Lyne, Paul D.; Richards, W.
Graham, J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci., 40(2), 503-512, 2000.
Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHEMICAL THEORY AND COMPUTER MODELING93and companies embrace low-cost cluster parallel computers made from commod-ity off-the-shelf processors and network interconnects. From a computational sci-
ence point of view, however, this multiplies the complexity of delivering higher
performance computational tools to practicing researchers. Even when the num-
ber of parallel supercomputer vendors peaked in the mid-1990s, the number of
manufacturers, processors, and network architectures was limited to a handful of
such systems; by contrast, the number of possible cluster configurations is enor-
mous.Beyond parallelization, the major thrust of high-performance computing to-day is computational grids, modeled after the electrical power grid, in which the
computational resources of a large number of sites are combined through wide
area networks into a computational metaresource. Significant scientific and tech-
nical obstacles associated with the grid computational environment must be over-
come, since grids embody all the complexity of parallel computers with addi-
tional difficulties such as distributed ownership of resources, multiple and
wide-ranging network latencies, and heterogeneous architectures, to name just
three. Resolution of these obstacles is one of the major thrusts of computational
science research today. Nevertheless, assuming these obstacles can be overcome,
grid computing offers the possibility of solving the largest scale problems con-
fronting the computational chemistry and process engineering communities in
the most cost-effective way. They can also facilitate collaboration between groups
with complementary expertise that can share their capabilities while maintaining
control over them. One can foresee the day when integrated process/product de-
sign/optimization (IPPDO) is performed on a wide area grid in which dedicated
servers perform needed parts of the overall calculation, with the most compute-
intensive computations being executed on the highest performance nodes of the
grid.As the sophistication of computation approaches increases, and the desire tointegrate product and process design and optimization becomes reality, we antici-
pate that large-scale computations will be required that may last for days or weeks
(even on the fastest computational resources) and that these computations will
require intervention and redirection (known as computational steering) by the
experts managing the computation. Computational steering is a relatively new
field that is being applied in such areas as global climate modeling. Enabling
computational steering requires the development of appropriate visualization tools
that communicate the relevant information to the users, and interfaces to the com-
putation that enable quantities and methods to be changed. Tools specific to the
integrated IPPDO application will need to be developed.Another new capability whose impact is still somewhat difficult to predict iswireless computing. One area that is likely to benefit is in the integration of mea-
surements, control, and information systems. Wireless computing may also play
an important role in computational steering of long computations described above,

since examining the state of a computation, consulting with colleagues, and steer-Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERing the computation can all be envisaged as taking place on an appropriatelyenabled handheld device. Many of these tools exist in a disconnected and primi-
tive form today: Much of the challenge lies in integrating the tools and adapting
them for the IPPDO application.WHY ALL THIS IS IMPORTANTIn the final analysis, basic understanding of chemistry will require successfultheoretical approaches. For example, in our picture of the exact pathways in-
volved in a chemical reaction there is no current hope that we can directly ob-
serve it in full molecular detail on the fast and microscopic scale on which it
occurs. As discussed in Chapter 4, our ability to make a detailed picture of every
aspect of a chemical reaction will come most readily from theories in which those
aspects can be calculated, but theories whose predictions have been validated by
particular incisive experiments.When we have the information from the sequencing of the human genome,and want to understand the properties of those proteins that are coded by some of
the genes but not yet known experimentally, we need to solve the protein-folding
problem. Then we can translate the gene sequenceÑwhich specifies the sequenceof amino acidsÑinto the three-dimensional structure of the unknown protein.For practical applications, good effective theories and computational toolsare invaluable. We want to calculate the properties of molecules that have not yet
been made, to select a likely medicine for synthesis. We want to be able to calcu-
late what catalyst would best speed a particular reaction with selectivity, so that
catalyst can be created and used in manufacturing. We want to calculate the prop-
erties of organized chemical systems, nanometer-sized particles, and aggregates
whose properties can be valuable in computers and in other electronic devices.
We need to develop new and powerful computational methods that span from the
atomic and molecular level to the chemical-process and chemical-enterprise level
in order to allow their effective integration for multiscale simulation and optimi-
zation. We want to synthesize energy-efficient and environmentally benign pro-
cesses that are cost effective. We want to manage networks of plants that elimi-
nate inventories and can be operated in a safe and responsive manner. With
increasingly powerful computers and better software, these goals seem within
reach in the future, and they will greatly enhance our capabilitiesÑboth in basicand applied chemistry and in chemical engineering.As discussed above, simulation and modeling are central components of pro-cess engineering. Improvements in these techniques will permit the design of
much more efficient processes and facilities. Integrating the current and future
capabilities of computational chemistry and process engineering will result in
improved materials, chemicals, and pharmaceuticals; yield more efficient envi-
ronmentally benign processes to manufacture them; and accomplish this while
providing greater financial return.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.957The Interface with Biology and Medicine1Some Challenges for Chemists and Chemical Engineers¥Understand fully the chemistry of life, including the chemistry of the
brain and memory.¥Invent and learn to manufacture effective antiviral agents and antibiot-
ics to fight all serious diseases, including those caused by drug-resis-tant pathogens.¥Invent medicines that go beyond treatment to provide cure or preven-
tion of life-limiting conditions and diseases such as cancer, AlzheimerÕsdisease, mental illness, and diabetes.¥Invent better ways to deliver drugs to their targets, including devices
that can function as artificial organs.¥Learn how genetic variation among individuals will affect their re-
sponses to particular medicines.¥Invent biocompatible materials for organ replacements and for artificial
bones and teeth.1As part of the overall project on Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st Century, aworkshop on Health and Medicine will lead to a separate report. The reader is urged to consult thatreport for further information.continuesBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERGOALSThe goal of fundamental science at the interface of chemical sciences andbiology is to understand life in chemical terms. Our ability to accomplish the
translation of biology into chemical terms is closely related to our fundamental
understanding of lifeÕs machinery. Decoding these mysteries and producing a
detailed molecular picture of how things work is a critical step. However, for
most people, the real impact comes when we can use that understanding to im-
prove our lives. Nowhere has the role of chemical sciences been better illustrated
than in the discovery, development, and production of new medicines and ways
in which we can more selectively deliver these medicines to the organ or tissue
where they are needed. This fundamental understanding of what chemical trans-
formations occur in living creatures, how these chemical transformations are regu-
lated, and how they respond to extracellular stimuli is also critical to developing
semisynthetic tissues and organs as replacements for damaged organs, to gene
therapy, and to solving a host of clinical problems. In addition, these chemical
tools will provide the basis for improvements in the productivity of agriculture in
both animal and plant production systems. Most directly, advances in the chemical
sciences will be essential for the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of disease.Underlying ScienceThe mechanisms of life are revealed when we understand their moleculardetails. Moreover, molecular understanding of biology plays the major role in¥Invent improved diagnostic methods so that diseases can be detected,identified, and treated at an early stage.¥Create food additives that protect and enhance our diets with unques-tioned safety.¥Learn how gene expression is controlled in living cells and how we can
affect that process with small-molecule medicines.¥Learn why enzymes are so effective, so we can design artificial bio-
mimetic catalysts that work as well as the best enzymes.¥Extend our chemical understanding of how life might arise spontane-
ously, on earth or elsewhere.¥Make organized chemical systems that imitate the functioning of bio-logical cells.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTERFACE WITH BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE97guiding drug discovery, and molecular-level understanding of biology is funda-mental in developing diagnostic methods.Nature is a highly innovative chemist, and we know only a small fraction ofthe universe of natural products. Currently, about half of the most widely pre-
scribed drugs in the United States are either small-molecule natural products,
such as penicillin, or synthetic molecules that are based on natural products but
have better properties. The other half are products of the creative imagination of
medicinal chemists. NatureÕs genetic and chemical diversity is a treasure thatshould not be squandered. One reason to maintain ecosystems such as rain forests
intact is that less than 10% of plant species have been systematically investigated
for their chemical products. Also, many microbes, insects, and other species have
not been explored for useful products.Discovering which natural product is useful has historically been a slow,laborious effort. Our improved understanding of the molecular basis of life and of
disease has allowed us to develop methods for rapid screening of libraries of
natural products for compounds that interact with specific molecular targets. Syn-
thetic chemists have used the techniques of combinatorial chemistry to generate
large numbers of chemical compounds that also can be screened in a similar
manner to identify promising drug candidates. Tremendous advances have been
made in our capabilities to rapidly make a wide variety of complex new chemi-
cals for such testing.Although we do not know the identity of all chemical species in a living cell,we do know many of the most essential components and have determined their
molecular structures. Molecular analysis of living cells has led to a flow plan of
information in molecular biology, known as the Central Dogma: The information
necessary for a cell is encoded in the double helix of DNA. DNA acts as a tem-
plate for its own replication, and segments of DNA that encode information for
the primary structure (i.e., amino acid sequence) in a protein are called genes. The
information for production of a protein is first transcribed from DNA through
synthesis of a messenger-RNA molecule by the process of transcription, and regu-
latory elements on the DNA help determine when and how often a particular gene
is transcribed. The information on the messenger RNA is converted to a protein
through the process known as translation; if the physiological conditions in the
cell are correct, the nascent protein folds into its proper three-dimensional shape.
Proteins act as catalysts (called enzymes), transporters, receptors of information,
regulators, and structural elements in the cell. Their three-dimensional shape is
critical to biological activity.The language of biology uses four letters (A, T, C, and G corresponding tofour different nucleotides) in DNA, and three-letter words. Each three-letter word
specifies a particular amino acid (or signals to start or stop translation). Other
combinations of DNA letters (of various lengths) combine with proteins in the
cell to block or encourage transcription of genes; these combinations of letters
constitute regulatory elements. The language of biology is universal; the sameBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERlanguage applies to humans, plants, and microbes. This universality makes ge-netic engineering and gene therapy feasible.Recent advances in technology, using modern chemical techniques for struc-ture determination, have allowed us to sequence or read the letters in the DNA, or
genome, of a cell. We have genomic sequence data for humans, an insect, a plant,
simple multicellular organisms, and many microbes; more are constantly being
produced. These sequences represent the total genetic and biochemical blueprint
for each of these organisms. This information is useless unless we learn to read it
intelligently; that is, to relate linear sequence information to cell and organismal
function. Functional genomics is a term used to describe that relationship, and it
will be a primary challenge for the next 50 years.The simple sequence of letters in the genome tells us only a little. The detailsof three-dimensional structure are important to understanding the chemical pro-
cesses of life. For example, the discovery that DNA forms a double helix made it
clear how genetic information is passed on and utilized. The biological activity of
the proteins encoded on the DNA is dependent on their specific three-dimen-
sional structure. Many chemists are concerned with how best to determine the
structure of such proteins. Ideally, that structure could be predicted from the se-
quence of amino acids that correspond to the code in the gene on the DNA. This
remains a challenging problem in computational chemistry (Chapter 6), but a
combination of experimental and theoretical techniques have advanced our un-
derstanding of structure and function in proteins. For example, x-ray methods can
be used when a protein can be crystallized (although this is often difficult).
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) techniques can be used to probe the structure
of proteins in solution. Many of the computational techniques are related to re-
cent advances in sequencing of DNA. Bioinformatics includes computational
chemistry with the goals of predicting function and three-dimensional shape di-
rectly from the amino acid sequenceÑby comparison with sequence, function,and structural information for other proteins (often from other organisms).Knowing protein structure can provide direct benefits to human health. Theprecise molecular structure of a protein gives it great selectivity in distinguishing
among substrates. Sometimes that activity can be blocked by molecules that are
similar to the substrate but do not cause a reaction or response when bound to the
protein.For example, with the crystal structure of the aspartyl protease from humanimmundeficiency virus (HIV-1) in 1989 came the opportunity to design mol-
ecules to block this important enzyme that acts as a molecular scissors. HIV is the
virus responsible for AIDS. Essential to viral replication, the HIV protease cuts
long strands composed of many proteins into the functional proteins found in
mature virus particles. This proteolysis occurs at the very end of the HIV replica-
tion cycle (Figure 7-1). The three-dimensional structural information derived from
the x-ray crystal structure, combined with computer modeling techniques, allowed
chemists to design potent, selective inhibitors of the protease enzyme (FigureBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTERFACE WITH BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE99FIGURE 7-1The HIV replication cycle. A virus particle (small sphere) attaches to a cellin the immune system such as a lymphocyte (large sphere, shown here in cross section) as
the first step. Two complementary approaches to AIDS therapy utilize (a) reverse tran-scriptase inhibitors (enlargement, lower left) to block incorporation of the viral genomeinto the host cell, and (b) HIV protease inhibitors (enlargement, lower right) to block
cleavage of proteins into key functional enzymes that are required for mature viral par-ticles. Copyright Merck & Co., Inc., Whitehouse Station, New Jersey, USA, All RightsReserved, used with permission.7-2). Design of complex molecules that ÒdockÓ into a target is only a first step
Ñthe molecules had to be synthesized from simple building blocks. The excellent
stereocontrol of reactions like the Jacobsen and Sharpless epoxidations and the
Evans aldol reaction was essential to the construction of molecules with as many
as five chiral centers (for which 25 or 32 possible stereoisomeric forms are pos-
sible). Target molecules had to be made in pure form and tested, and eventually
the single ÒactiveÓ isomer had to be produced with >99.8% purity at a level ex-
ceeding 100,000 kg/year. A decade ago, production of synthetic drugs with this
level of molecular complexity was inconceivable. Protease inhibitors have be-
come an important part of the treatment for AIDS patients.A major lesson learned from the first draft of the human genome sequence2 is
that there are fewer genes (perhaps only 30,000) than originally predicted (over2J.-M. Claverie, Science, 291, 1255, 2001; J. D. McPherson, et al., 
Nature, 409, 934, 2001; J. C.Venter, et al., Science, 291, 1304, 2001.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIER100,000). This was a surprise to biologists, who had speculated that the numberof genes in an organismÕs genome might scale according to that organismÕs levelof complexity. Instead, some simple worms such as nematodes have nearly as
many genes as human beings! Where are the complex functions encoded that are
characteristics of higher mammals? One answer seems to be in the post-transla-
tional modification of proteins. During or after their biosynthesis, proteins can be
modified with myriad added decorations, such as phosphate, sulfate, and acetyl
groups; the modified proteins can have vastly different properties compared with
those of their unmodified progenitors. Thus a single protein, derived from a single
gene, can be transformed into numerous distinct molecular species and thereby
amplify the information content of a very concise genome. Comparisons have
shown that post-translational modifications are more extensive in higher organ-
isms.The chemistry of polysaccharides is a major frontier. Their branched andcomplex nature makes them far more difficult to synthesize than the linear
biopolymers, proteins, and nucleic acids. For this reason, automated synthetic
methods for polysaccharides were just created in 2001, several decades after com-SNOHOHNOONH2OONNHOSt-BuNHOOHHHHONNNHNOOHOHNHOAmprenavirNelfinavir
IndinavirFIGURE 7-2Examples of HIV protease inhibitors.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTERFACE WITH BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE101parable methods were perfected for the linear biopolymers. There is still a needfor improved syntheses of the linkage that connects sugar residues within a
polysaccharide chain, the glycosidic bond. At the moment, each specific linkage
must be made with different optimal reagents, making a generalized automated
synthesis very difficult.Our increased understanding of the biology of polysaccharides has led tomajor breakthroughs in medicinal chemistry. The attachment of white blood cells
to cells that line the walls of blood vessels is a hallmark of inflammatory condi-
tions such as rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis, and transplant rejection. Disruption
of this cell-cell binding event would stop the inflammation and improve the
patientÕs health. It was discovered that the pathological binding of these two celltypes is mediated by noncovalent association of a receptor on the white blood
cell, termed L-selectin, with polysaccharide ligands on the blood vessel walls.Soluble versions of that polysaccharide that can bind to the receptors and thus
inhibit cell binding are now in clinical trials as anti-inflammatory drugs.In most cases, the precise functions of polysaccharides are not known; eventheir primary sequences are very hard to determine using current analytical tech-
niques. Thus, a major challenge is to crack the Òcarbohydrate codeÓ and deter-
mine the structures and functions of all the polysaccharides found on human cells.
Terms such as ÒglycomicsÓ have already been coined to describe such global
efforts.Biochemical EngineeringBiochemical engineering is both an established and an emerging field that isinherently multidisciplinary. It integrates chemical engineering with biology and
biochemistryÑto participate in biological discovery or to create processes, de-vices, or therapies.For example, bioprocess engineering is concerned with the development ofmanufacturing processes based on living cells or enzymes to make pharmaceuti-
cals, food ingredients, or chemicals. Much of biochemical engineering activity is
directed toward human health and forms an important branch of biomedical engi-
neering, particularly in activities such as drug delivery devices, artificial organs,
and tissue engineering (e.g., artificial skin for burn victims).Modern biochemical engineering has become so focused at the molecularand cellular level that the difference between molecular and cellular biology and
molecular and cellular engineering can be difficult to discern. Biologists and bio-
chemists want details of mechanisms and have successfully used a reductionist
approach in which they strip away all elements except those directly under study.
Biochemical engineers typically require a less detailed description of component
mechanisms, but they need to understand how the cellÕs components interact witheach other. Thus, biochemical engineers must view the cell or collection of cells
as a whole system. It is often this integrative approach that distinguishes bio-Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERchemical engineers from biologists and biochemists. The integrative or systemsperspective of the biochemical engineer complements the traditional reductionist
approach of the biologist.Another distinction between the biochemical engineer and the biologist isthat the creation of a process, therapeutic strategy, or device is the ultimate goal
of the engineer, while discovery is the primary goal of the biologist. However, the
engineerÕs approach often leads to new discovery, and many biologists partici-pate in creation. Since some properties of systems emerge only when component
parts are integrated together, the complete discovery and understanding of living
cells will require the integrative approach common in engineering, in addition to
reductionist approaches.Modern biochemical engineering began with the challenge of large-scale pro-duction of penicillin by fermentation during World War II. This challenge re-
quired the active cooperation of microbiologists, biochemists, and chemical engi-
neers. Today many small-molecule natural products are made from microbes in
large (>100,000 L) fermenters followed by a series of separation and purification
operations.Other major early contributions of biochemical engineering have been in thedevelopment of the artificial kidney and physiologically based pharmacokinetic
models. The artificial kidney has been literally a lifesaver. Pharmacokinetic mod-
els divide the body of an animal or human into various compartments that act as
bioreactors. These mathematical models have been used very successfully in de-
veloping therapeutic strategies for the optimal delivery of chemotherapeutic drugs

and in assessing risk from exposure to toxins.More recent accomplishments include development of bioprocesses for pro-duction of high-purity proteins, using genetically engineered cells. This challenge

was particularly difficult with respect to the development of large-scale systems
for production of therapeutic proteins using mammalian cells suspended (or dis-persed) in a liquid medium. Examples of some of these products are tissue plas-
minogen activator used to treat stroke and heart attack patients, erythropoietin to
treat anemia resulting from kidney damage or chemotherapy, and granulocyte
colony stimulating factor as an adjuvant to chemotherapy and cancer treatment.
Another accomplishment has been the development of effective devices for the
controlled release of pharmaceuticals and therapeutic proteins. Localized deliv-
ery of drugs (for example, in the brain) has been a key to effective treatment of
cancers and other ailments.Commercial production of paclitaxel (better known by the commercial nameTaxol), an important anticancer agent, has been accomplished using plant cell
tissue cultures, where cells or small aggregates of cells are suspended in a liquid
medium. This technological advance could lead to general methodology for the
production of plant-based medicinals from rare and difficult-to-grow plant spe-
cies. Tissue-engineered products such as artificial skin and cartilage have been
recently introduced into the market. The need to combine living cells and poly-Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTERFACE WITH BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE103mers under the strictest conditions of sterility challenged the ability of the engi-neers to mass produce and package these products..The preceding accomplishments are applied in nature, but required tremen-dous amounts of basic research on mass transfer, interactions of materials with
biological components, fluid dynamics, separation processes (especially chroma-
tography and membrane separations), and biochemical kinetics.Biochemical engineers also have made major contributions to a better under-standing of cells, tissues, and organisms. These contributions fall mainly under
such categories as metabolic engineering, cellular engineering, and hemodynam-
ics.Metabolic engineering refers to purposeful genetic manipulation of the bio-chemical pathways in a cell to produce a new product, to eliminate unwanted
reactions, or to increase the amount of a desired product already produced by a
cell. The optimal approach to effective metabolic engineering of a cell is essen-
tially quantitative in nature; biochemical engineers have played the major role in
the development and application of the appropriate mathematical models (e.g.,
metabolic control theory). In addition, chemists have developed a better under-
standing of the modular cellular machinery used to synthesize natural products
and have used the techniques of metabolic engineering to harness these modular
processes to create novel molecules. An excellent example is recent work to make
novel polyketide antibiotics. Biochemical engineers do much of the current ex-
perimental work on metabolic engineering in collaboration with other chemical
scientists.Cellular engineering, while closely linked to metabolic engineering, is con-cerned not so much with metabolic pathways but instead with processes such as
cell adhesion, cellular mechanics, signal transduction due to growth factors and
hormones, and viral infections. By combining mathematical models of these pro-
cesses with clever experiments we have far greater insight into these biological
mechanisms. Such insight can assist in the design of drug candidates. As an ex-
ample, both models and experiments show that the intuitive assumption that the
most effective inhibitor of a receptor-based process would have the highest bind-
ing affinity is wrong. Due to receptor recycling a nonmaximal binding affinity is
optimal.Large-Scale Production of Proteins from Recombinant DNAUsing Suspensions of Animal CellsWhen recombinant DNA technology was developed in the late 1970s
and early 1980s, many thought that all proteins could be produced ineasy-to-grow bacterial cultures. This optimism proved incorrect; bacteria
were incapable of making some proteins in a therapeutically useful form.continuesBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERFor these proteins, mammalian cells proved better hosts, as they couldprocess the protein with intracellular machinery similar to that in humans.However, large-scale production of proteins in cell culture was problem-
atic. Mammalian cells had to grow attached to a solid surface, such as
glass in Òroller bottleÓ culture. While the Federal Drug Administration
(FDA) had approved some processes for vaccine production that used

cell cultures, it required that these cells be Ònormal.Ó Normal mammaliancells can divide only a few times before they stop growing, making scale-
up to large volumes difficult.The first large-scale process to circumvent these limitations was onedeveloped by Genentech, Inc. (South San Francisco, CA) for production
of recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (tPA). This protein dissolvesblood clots and can be used to treat heart attacks and strokes. This pro-cess was developed in the mid-1980s, resulting in final product licensure
in 1987. The process required both regulatory and technical break-throughs.Genetic scientists chose to use a Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cellline as a recombinant for production of human therapeutics. This cell lineis Òtransformed,Ó which means it can replicate indefinitely. All cancers
arise from transformed cells, so Genentech had to convince the FDA that

their process, including recovery and purification, would eliminate thepossibility of injecting patients with a 
Òtransforming factorÓ that could
cause cancer in a patient. In addition, they had to adapt the CHO cells to
grow in suspension culture (i.e., cells dispersed in liquid medium and
unattached to any surface) and to grow in a medium without serum (whichis produced from blood by the removal of cells). Serum-free suspension

cultures of CHO cells greatly simplified processing problems and reducedcost. The absence of serum and the contaminating proteins it contained
simplified recovery and purification of tPA, and reduced degradation as
tPA was secreted from the CHO cells. By using suspensions, and thus
being freed from the constraints of surface-to-volume ratios inherent in
roller bottle or similar techniques, it was possible to design large (12,000
L) stirred bioreactors that could be readily scaled up and that would main-tain high levels of volumetric productivity (mg tPA/L-hr). The bioreactordesign issues were complex, as no one before had built a bioreactor that
could supply sufficient oxygen and nutrient to the cells in such a largesystem while stirring gently enough not to damage the cells with high
levels of fluid shear. This required novel designs of reactor shape and
impeller, based on an understanding of the cellular growth kinetics, masstransfer, and fluid dynamics. The process required development of a
novel large-scale, low-shear, tangential flow filtration technology for the

rapid, aseptic removal of spent medium from cells.
Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTERFACE WITH BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE105Other examples of important insight obtained by biochemical engineers arethe effects that physiological values of fluid stress have on cells. Cells that line
blood vessels are normally exposed to blood flow. This flow places a mechanical
stress on a cell that not only alters cell shape but also its function. The mechanical
stresses alter expression of genes. The mechanisms by which this occurs in cells
are incompletely understood and a matter of active research.PROGRESS TO DATEWhen one looks back at the last decade of the 20th century it is astonishing tosee what was achieved in the understanding of lifeÕs machinery. Decoding thesemysteries and producing a detailed molecular picture of how things work is a
critical step. However, nowhere has the role of chemistry been better illustrated
than in the creation and development of new medicines and therapies.The success of the project depended on the ability of biochemical en-gineers, chemists, and life scientists to work together. Success depended
on an integrated vision of the process and an understanding of how each

component interacted with the other components.While production processes based on serum-free suspension culturesof CHO cells are now common, the integrated approach to bioprocess
development remains essential to success. Chemists and biochemicalengineers need sufficient knowledge in the life sciences to interact fruit-
fully with biologists. The cell remains the ÒrealÓ bioreactor, but efficient
processes required the design of macroscopic bioreactors and operatingstrategies that effectively couple to our knowledge of the cellular reactors
housed in human-designed bioreactors.Selective Asthma TherapyIn the 1930s an unknown material was hypothesized that was pro-posed to cause a slow and sustained contraction of smooth muscle. It

was named the Òslow reacting substanceÓ (SRS). By 1940 a similar sub-stance was reported to be found in guinea pig lungs and was called theÒslow reacting substance of anaphylaxis
Ó (SRS-A). Over the next 40
years, while no one could isolate, characterize, or synthesize this mate-continuesBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERrial, the belief was that SRS-A played a key role in human asthma. In1979, Bengt Samuelsson proposed a structure for SRS-A that was de-rived from arachidonic acid and the amino acid cysteine. He called it

leukotriene C.CO2HCO2HOCO2HOHScys-glygluCO2HOHScys-glyCO2HOHScysLTA4Arachidonic acidCellular membranesPLA25-lipooxygenaseGlutamyl tr
ansferaseLTC4LTD4LTE4dipeptid
aseBroncho-constrictio
nReceptorLTC4 SynthetaseFormation of leukotrienes via the arachidonic acid cascade.Soon after, the complete structure of SRS-A was finally determined bytotal synthesis. SRS-A turned out to be a mixture of 3 substances nowknown as leukotriene C4 (LTC
4), leukotriene D4 (LTD
4) and leukotrieneE4 (LTE
4) in which LTD4 was predominant. The jump from a biological
observation in 1938 to a molecular structure of LTD4 opened the door toa novel and selective treatment for asthma. The theory was that if oneBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTERFACE WITH BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE107Underlying the discovery of a selective asthma therapy are numerous ad-vances in analytical and instrumental techniques as well as synthetic methods that
allow the construction of complex molecules. Practical catalytic, stereospecific,
and organometallic methods that permit a high level of stereochemical control
have enabled production at the multiton level of molecules previously inacces-
sible even at the gram scale.NSCOO-Na+ClOHSingulair (montelukast)could find a molecule that specifically blocked the action of LTD4 on the
lung, it would be possible to prevent the tightening of the airways found inasthma. Eighteen years after SamuelssonÕs proposal, after the synthesisand testing of thousands of man-made compounds, Singulair (montelukast)reached the worldÕs pharmacies. Leukotriene modifiers are recognized tobe the first important advance in asthma therapy in 25 years.This is just one example of how the chemical understanding of one of
lifeÕs processes at the molecular level resulted in the solution to a 60-year-old problem. The selective LTD4 receptor antagonist was specifi-
cally designed to take the place of LTD4 on smooth muscle. Such ap-
proachesÑwhere the drug molecule does only what itÕs intended to do,without indiscriminately binding to other receptors in the bodyÑare aimedat selective therapies that are free of side effects. It is that selectivity,designing molecules with precision based on structural information, thatcharacterizes the state of the art of chemistry as we enter the next
millennium.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERSelectivity and Anti-Inflammatory DrugsThe theme of selectivityÑbased on detailed understanding of molecu-lar structure and functionÑunderlies most recent therapeutic advances.Sometimes a biochemical ÒrevisitingÓ of an old discovery enables dramaticimprovements in the quality of life. Among the most widely used classesof medicines are the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such
as aspirin and ibuprofen. Used for years, these pain killers and arthritistreatments work by blocking the effects of arachidonic acid on an enzymecalled cyclooxygenase (COX). A major drawback to inhibiting COX is

that by doing so you inadvertently block its role in protecting the gastro-intestinal tract. The resulting ulcerative gastropathy is responsible for alarge number of hospitalizations and deaths. Recently it was discovered
that cyclooxygenase is not a single enzyme but rather a family containingat least two nearly identical members: COX-1 and COX-2. While COX-1is responsible for the good gastroprotective effects (and shouldnÕt beblocked) COX-2 is the enzyme involved with pain and inflammation (the
real target). The COX-2 hypothesis stated that if one could invent aspecific COX-2 inhibitor, it would be an effective anti-inflammatory and
analgesic medication with substantially reduced gastrointestinal (GI)toxicity compared with the classical NSAIDÕs aspirin and ibuprofen.010,00020,00030,00040,000
50,000Annual Mortality (United States)AsthmaNSAIDGastropathyHIV/AIDSMotor VehicleAccidentsDiabetesSignificant mortality is associated with NSAID gastropathy. G. Singh and G.Triadafilopoulos, Epidemiology of NSAID induced gastrointestinal complications,Journal of Rheumatology, 1999, 26, 56, 18-24, by permission of Oxford University
Press.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTERFACE WITH BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE109Again, detailed structural information at a molecular level was the key.Once these ÒpicturesÓ were available slight chemical differences between
the COX-1 and COX-2 isoenzymes could be seen: COX-2 had a side
pocket while COX-1 didnÕt. This meant that a molecule that could dockinto the COX-2 side pocket (binding site) but not into COX-1 would spe-cifically block COX-2 without touching COX-1. In 1999 this hope was

realized with the availability of COX-2 selective anti-inflammatories suchas Rofecoxib and Celecoxib that can be as much as 50-fold selective for
the target.Figure reprinted with permission from Elsevier Science (The Lancet, 1999, 353,
307-314).OOSOONNCF3SNH2OORofecoxibCelecoxib
continuesBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.110BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERCOX-2 selectivity of marketed compounds. Adapted with permission from T.D.Warner et al. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 96, 13, 7563
(1999). Copyright 1999 National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A.Log [Ratio of COX-2 to COX-1 Inhibition]-2.5-1.5-0.50.51.52.53.5> 50-fold COX-2 Selective5- to 50-fold CX-2 Selective< 5-fold COX-2 Selectiverofecoxibmeloxicam
celecoxibnimesulidediclofenac
piroxicamketorolacindomethaciinaspirinibuprofennaproxenSpecificity and Therapy for the Human BrainNowhere is the need for specificity so great as in trying to design thera-pies for the human brain. Here there are numerous receptors that affect
our moods, sleep, alertness, memory, and coordination. Even though theimportance of serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) had been known toneuroscientists for over 100 years, it wasnÕt until the discovery of drugsBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTERFACE WITH BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE111like Prozac (fluoxetine hydrochloride) and Paxil (paroxetine hydrochlo-ride) that selective antidepressive drugs became available. The antide-pressive effect results from inhibition of serotonin uptake by neurons in

the brain, thus ensuring that circulating levels are adequate. The selec-tivity results from selective binding compared with older drugs (tricyclics)
that were less discriminating in their binding to other brain receptors. The
net result is fewer side effects. As the molecular basis of memory andbehavior become clearer, we will see a leap in the effectiveness and
specificity of drugs for the central nervous system.The arrival of the year 2000 coincided with a milestone in modern sci-ence; many believe that deciphering the human genome will provide a
road map for therapeutic intervention. We are already seeing medicines
that act not directly on a target tissue but on receptors that regulate thetranscription of genes. The ability to ÒtuneÓ the molecular signaling that
continually occurs in our bodies will eventually allow for more exquisite
control of the cellular processes of life. If todayÕs chemistry lets us turnthings on or off by blocking or unblocking receptors and enzymes,
tomorrowÕs molecules will be able to balance complex metabolic pro-cesses like growth and aging by fine tuning the regulation of genes andtheir products.OHNF3CN
HOOOFProzacPaxil
CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE FUTUREThe opportunities for discovery and invention at the interface of chemistry,engineering, and biology are enormous, and many examples have been described
in the preceding sections. This interface represents a true research frontierÑonethat is critical to our ability to develop new chemistry for the prevention, diagno-
sis, and treatment of human disease. The continuing challenge is to discover the
chemical identity of all the molecules that make up living organisms and the way
they bind to each other and organize into biological structureÑmembranes andcell structures such as nuclei, ribosomes, etc.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERRibosomesThe nucleotide sequences of the genes encoded in DNA are tran-scribed into the same sequences of messenger RNA, again carrying the
genetic code, and these RNAs direct the synthesis of proteins with de-
fined sequences of amino acids. Protein synthesis occurs in a cellularmachine called a ribosome, which takes in messenger RNA and some

amino acids linked to transfer RNA and uses base pairing to direct their
assembly into a protein. The base pairing occurs because each kind ofamino acid is attached to a different transfer RNA, one that carries a

code for that particular amino acid. Thus messenger RNA plays the role
of template for protein synthesis, and transfer RNA guides the amino
acids to the correct spot. Assembling the protein still requires a catalyst
to link the amino acids together.Essentially all biological catalysts in the modern world are themselvesproteins, enzymes. However, in 1989 Sidney Altman and Thomas Cechreceived the Nobel prize in chemistry for showing that RNA itself couldact as a catalyst for some biological reactions. This led to the idea that in
an earlier time, as life was evolving, RNA may have been both the infor-mation molecule (a role usually played by the more stable DNA now) andthe catalyst (the role that protein enzymes now play.) Since this idea

indicates that in early times the synthesis of proteins was catalyzed byRNA, not by protein enzymes, the intriguing question is whether this is
still true today.Ribosomes are complex structures consisting of one small RNA mole-cule and two large ones together with some 50 to 60 different proteins.Their general shape had been determined by electron microscopy some
years ago, but a major breakthrough occurred in 2000. X-ray diffractionwas used to determine the detailed molecular structure of a ribosomalparticle that consists of almost all the molecules in a ribosome and

exhibits the full catalytic and regulatory functions of a ribosome.3 The
trick was to get this large particle, about 100 times as large as a simpleprotein enzyme, to crystallize so the x-ray technique could be applied.
The results are striking, but for the real details it is important to consultthe original articles). Such a detailed structure can help medicinalchemists to develop useful drugs that bind to the ribosome, but the more
important result has to do with the catalytic center.The catalytic center of the ribosome, where the protein is actuallymade, is now seen to consist of RNA, not of a protein enzyme! The many
3N. Ban, P. Nissen, J. Hansen, P. B. Moore, and T. A. Steitz, Science, 289, 905, 2000;P.Nissen, J. Hansen, N. Ban, P. B. Moore, and T. A. Steitz, 
Science, 289, 920, 2000.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTERFACE WITH BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE1134G. W. Muth, L. Ortoleva-Donnelly, and S. A. Strobel, Science, 289, 947, 2000.
proteins present help organize the structure, but they do not play a cata-lytic role. This is in line with the idea that the original process in early lifeforms used RNA alone. As proteins were created in processes guided
and catalyzed by RNA, some proteins were incorporated into the RNA
catalytic unit during evolution and improved the ribosomeÕs function. Afollow-up paper4 indicates a way in which the RNA could carry out the
catalyzed synthesis of proteins. A particular adenosine unit in the cata-
lytic RNA has the correct properties to be able to assist the formation ofpeptide bonds, which are the links in proteins.All this is basic chemical research that has wide importance, determin-ing the molecular structure of a component of living cells. Simply, it tellsus the details of how proteins are now made, but more generally it
strengthens the picture of how life may have started in a world where
RNA was both information molecule and catalyst. It is a major advance inscientific understanding.The large ribosomal subunit at 2.4 † resolution. (A) The particle rotated with re-
spect to the crown view so that its active site cleft can be seen. (B) The crown
view. (C) The back view of the particle, i.e., the crown view rotated 180 about itsvertical axis. Reprinted with permission from Ban et al., Science 289, 905 (2000).Copyright 2000 American Association for the Advancement of Science.One driver for new discovery will be the completion of the human genomeproject. As a result of this project, the locations and sequences associated with the
tens of thousands of genes of the human genome will have been determined. In
the post-genomic era, then, we will know the DNA sequences and genes of a
human being, but that is only the start. What are the functions associated with
these sequences? We will need to isolate the proteins that are the gene products,Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERdetermine their structures, characterize their reactions and their partners in reac-tivity. To perturb the actions of these proteins, we will need to develop diverse
arrays of small-molecule inhibitors and activators. While the human genome
project gives us access to the library of the cell, we will need to learn much to
exploit the information that we will have.For example, although we designate gene sequences by a one-dimensionalstring of letters, the protein gene products they encode have three-dimensional
architectures, and when properly folded they carry out biological function. A
critical challenge in this post-genomic era will be to make the connections be-
tween protein sequence and architecture, and between protein architecture and
function. We need to learn to predict how a protein folds and the relationships
between a folded structure of a protein and its function. Indeed, in reaching that
level of chemical understanding, we can then seek to design new functions for
proteins. Both combinatorial and rational design strategies may be applied in the
construction of novel biologically based catalysts.Genomics and gene arrays will become increasingly important in strategiesto prevent disease. Today, for example, we make use of simple assays such as the
PSA (prostate screening antigen) test in the early detection of prostate cancer.
Transcriptional profiling using gene chip technology will likely facilitate analo-
gous tests for all cancers by simultaneously measuring all relevant mRNA levels.
We will be able to determine what mRNAs or small natural products rise in con-
centration in association with cancers, and hence use detection methods for these
molecules in cancer prevention. A challenge resulting from the enormous amount
of information associated with such transcriptional profiling will be the determi-
nation of causal relationships, and of the partners and pathways associated with
cellular transformation. Indeed, a major intellectual challenge to the chemical
sciences is developing a systematic framework and computational tools to relate
microarray data, as well as data on protein levels, to a description of the dynamic
regulatory networks controlling cellular functions.Proteomics is a combination of experimental and analytical tools to deter-mine the total protein content of a cell or tissue. While genomics identifies the
potential proteins in an organism, proteomics provides information on which pro-
teins are actually present in a tissue under specific environmental conditions and
accounts for the physiologic history of the tissue. Proteomic information is diffi-
cult to obtain due to the large amount of chemical heterogeneity displayed by
proteins and our inability to amplify the amount of proteins in a sample. In con-
trast, polymers of nucleic acids are rather more chemically homogeneous and can
be amplified using the chemical technique of polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
Currently much proteomics work is accomplished using a technique called two-
dimensional gel electrophoresis. This technique is slow, requires highly skilled
technicians, and many proteins in a cell are too rare or too hydrophobic (water
hating) to be resolved by this technique. Nonetheless, 2-D gel electrophoresis has
been used successfully to monitor prion diseases (e.g., mad cow disease) andBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTERFACE WITH BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE115shows promise in the diagnosis of neurodegenerative disorders such as Alz-heimerÕs disease. A major opportunity in the chemical sciences is the develop-ment of microarray technologies that can provide more rapid and complete
proteomic information. The techniques of biotechnology applied on the nanoscale
may result in miniature devices that can be used in a massively parallel fashion to
do rapid separation and analysis of DNA, RNAs, or protein solutions.Progress in genomics and proteomics offers opportunities also in the diagno-sis and treatment of disease. We will soon be able to develop the chemistry neces-
sary to routinely detect genetic variations in individuals, and to do so for a full
range of genes. In fact, some pharmaceuticals that are largely effective and might
represent medical advances currently fail during clinical trials as a result of an
adverse reaction within a genetic subpopulation. With genetic screening, and a
better understanding of the underlying biochemistry, we will be able to tailor-
make therapies for patients based on their genetic dispositions.More generally, as described earlier, medicinal chemistry has greatly con-tributed to the fight against disease, but there are still major challenges ahead. For
example, we donÕt yet have generally effective drugs to treat viral diseases, suchas influenza or Ebola (although some trials of a new drug for the treatment of
influenza indicate that it decreases the length of the infection). This is critical.
Imagine the problem if the HIV virus that causes AIDS, or the Ebola virus that
kills quickly, were able to be transmitted by the bite of a mosquito, as some other
less lethal viruses can be. Until we have effective medicines to cure such viral
infections, humanity is at great risk.Another problem is bacterial resistance to antibiotics. As doctors have treatedpeople with the available antibiotics that medicinal chemistry devised in the past,
they have selected for strains of bacteria that are resistant to those antibiotics.
There is now a race against time by medicinal chemists to devise new antibiotics
that will work against the resistant organisms. If we do not succeed, many bacte-
rial infections that we thought had been cured will emerge again as major threats
to our health and life.We still need much better medicines to cure cancer, heart disease, stroke, andAlzheimerÕs disease. We need better drugs to deal with obesity, diabetes, arthri-tis, and schizophrenia. The treatments of diabetes, arthritis, and mental defects
such as schizophrenia or manic depression are not yet cures, just ways to keep the
symptoms under control. Cures are needed. Insights from genetics may help guide
us toward elegant and rational cures, but we will also make use of screens to
identify natural products and libraries of randomly generated synthetic com-

pounds (combinatorial chemistry). A semi-empirical approach may be the best
hope over the next two decades to yield drugs to alleviate these diseases.Many of the natural products may come from ÒunusualÓ organisms and maybe difficult to synthesize. In those cases, it will be necessary to develop appropri-
ate bioprocesses to produce, recover, and purify these compounds. Both chemists
and biochemical engineers will be involved in creating such processes.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERBut medicinal chemistry will also change in basic ways. Indeed, we are en-tering a completely new era of molecular medicine. We will develop technolo-gies to screen the effects of small molecules on large arrays of gene products,
from enzymes to receptors, and doing so will require advances in fields ranging
from biochemistry to material design. We will develop the tools to create ge-
nomic maps of protein-protein contacts and chemical tools to decipher the hierar-
chy of those contacts. Our ability to digest and exploit the enormous information
we obtain will also provide challenges in computation, in structure prediction,
and in our quantitative understanding of molecular recognition. As a result, fun-
damentally new strategies will be developed to attack disease on a molecular
level. For example, it is already clear that strategies to fight cancer are shifting,
from those centered on maximizing toxicity in cancerous cells to those where we
activate or harness different signaling pathways of the cell, depending on whether
the cell has undergone transformation from normal to cancerous.Among the fundamental new strategies, and certainly an important step to betaken by chemists in this new era of molecular medicine, will be developing a
general understanding of how small molecules can be utilized to regulate gene
expression and signal transduction. The goal is the design of small molecules not
simply as general poisons to the cell or to some cellular function, but instead as
reagents that turn off or turn on critical pathways. This challenge depends upon
advances also in our understanding of molecular recognition. When a protein orsmall molecule binds to a particular receptor, an ensemble of weak noncovalent
contacts are specifically arrayed in three-dimensional space to facilitate this rec-
ognition of one molecule by another. Chemists are now working on general strat-
egies to achieve highly specific molecular recognition, and doing so is a first step
in the rational design of new drugs as regulators of cellular processes.Associated with this question is how to target these small molecules to sitesof specific action in the cell or tissue. We have, for example, made substantial
progress in delineating how some small molecules and metal ions are trafficked
through the cell. Can we apply this knowledge to invent strategies for targeting
small molecules to specific organelles within the cell? Our current understanding
of what controls cell permeability and bioavailability is primitive, often not ap-
preciably more advanced than Òoil versus water.Ó As we develop a molecular
perspective concerning the trafficking of molecules into and through the cellÑaswell as the chemistry underlying what distinguishes the surfaces of different
cellsÑwe will establish a more rational approach to targeting molecules morepowerfully, and even with tissue specificity.Because cells and the body respond not only to genetic information but alsoto environmental cues, any analysis must take into account the time and environ-
ment-dependent nature of the biological system. Because of their training in analy-
sis of integrated systems, biochemical engineers should be able to contribute inte-
grated, quantitative models of these biological systems to guide the selection of
targets for intervention and the synthesis of a precise delivery system. In someBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTERFACE WITH BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE117cases these devices will need to be ÒsmartÓ devices to respond to a current physi-
ological state. An example of such a device, already in research and development,
is one to monitor blood glucose levels and to release insulin in response to changes

in blood glucose level. This device would effectively mimic the responses of the
natural pancreas. Other delivery systems may mimic viruses for DNA delivery to
specific target cells as a more controllable method for gene therapy. Indeed, the
controlled delivery of macromolecular therapeutics with temporal and spatial con-
trol of therapeutic distribution is an important goal for chemists and chemical
engineers.Controlled Delivery of TherapeuticsMany pharmaceuticals are designed to effect change in a single organ
or tissue. Traditional methods of drug delivery using pills or injectionsrequire the pharmaceutical to enter the blood stream and to be dispersed
throughout the body (systemic delivery). Often undesirable side effects
occur in nontarget organs before a therapeutically useful level of theagent is achieved at the target organ or tissue. Alternative methods ofdrug delivery are needed to deliver the drug to the right tissue, at the right
time, and at the right amount.As an example, consider treatment of a brain tumor. The brain protects
itself from the entry of potentially toxic substances through a blood-brainbarrier, which is a highly organized cellular barrier to the transport ofsuch compounds from the blood into the brain. To administer a chemo-

therapeutic agent to the brain through injection into the blood stream may
be impractical since a very high concentration of the drug may be neces-sary for the drug to cross the blood-brain barrier, and the side effects of
the drug on other organs in the body may be toxic. Robert Langer devel-oped a solution to this problem and related ones through the construction
of polymeric devices to release drugs at a predetermined rate for ex-
tended periods. In this particular disease, the brain tumor is removed andpolymeric disks filled with a chemotherapeutic drug are inserted. Thepolymers have been carefully synthesized to be biocompatible and to
break down at a known rate in bodily fluids. As the polymer matrix isdissolved, the drug is released slowly at high local concentrations formany weeks, killing residual cancer cells. Since the polymer disks are in
the brain, the drug does not have to diffuse across the blood-brain barrier.Thus, the target, the brain, receives a high dose of drug in the area nearthe tumor, and the rest of the body experiences only low levels of the

drug. This therapy is currently in use and can significantly extend thesymptom-free lives of patients.continuesBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERLanger received the Draper Prize from the National Academy of Engi-neering in 2002 in recognition of his work on development of modernbiomaterials. The polymer used for controlled release of chemotherapeu-
tic agents in the brain is only one example. Other examples include theuse of such biomaterials for controlled release of large molecules (pro-teins or DNA for gene therapy), as scaffolds for tissue engineering where
they release growth-promoting signals, and porous aerosol particles forinhalation drug delivery. The controlled-release drug delivery industry isestimated to have revenues of $20 billion a year with excellent prospects
for continued growth. This industry is based on combining a knowledgeof polymer synthesis, polymer interaction with biological molecules, thekinetics of the reaction of specific chemical bonds in the polymer with
water or biological fluids, and the rate of mass transfer of molecules in apolymer matrix and in tissue.We will also look to the chemical details of biology for lessons in how tocarry out complex and important reactions under mild conditions. Today, the
chemical industry produces ammonia from nitrogen through a high-temperature,
high-pressure reaction that consumes lots of energy, yet microorganisms are ca-
pable of carrying out the same reaction at normal pressures and temperatures
within the environment of the cell, using a metalloprotein catalyst called nitroge-
nase. Structural insights into this and other remarkable metalloprotein catalysts
have recently become available. But can we now harness that understanding to
develop new methods and new small molecular catalysts that incorporate the key
attributes of the natural enzymes? Many of these enzymes, nitrogenase in particu-
lar, are capable of activating small, abundant, basically inert molecules through
multielectron reactions. A tremendous challenge to the chemist lies in the design
and application of catalysts, whether small molecules or materials, that can carry
out such multielectron transfers to activate small molecules such as nitrogen,
oxygen, and methane. Imitating some aspects of life, biomimetic chemistry is
not the only way to invent new things, but it is one of the ways.We will look to chemical biology for guidance not only in designing newsmaller catalysts but also in devising methods to assemble large molecular ma-
chines. Replication, transcription, and translation, as well as other critical cellular
functions, appear to be carried out through the function of multiprotein/nucleic
acid particles. Advances in x-ray crystallography coupled with other imaging
methods such as NMR and electron microscopy are now providing our first snap-
shots of these macromolecular machines, such as the ribosome in which proteins
are synthesized in the cell. A spectacular recent advance is the determination ofBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTERFACE WITH BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE119the three-dimensional chemical structure of the multimolecular photosyntheticreaction center, for which Johann Deisenhofer, Robert Huber, and Hartmut Michel
received the Nobel prize in 1988. New advances in imaging will be needed to
delineate these and still larger macromolecular assemblies at atomic resolution.
These structural pictures provide a critical foundation for understanding how they
function. But how do these machines assemble? Are they remarkable examples
of spontaneous supramolecular assembly or are they guided in some way in com-
ing together? How do the parts of these assemblies function in concert? Are mac-
romolecular assemblies of such complexity required to carry out these functions?
Indeed, can we next begin to design novel macromolecular machines to carry out
new, still more complex functions? The construction and assembly of such ma-
chines would represent the first step in compartmentalizing chemical reactions.
As such, it would represent the very first steps in a tremendous challenge to the
chemist and chemical engineer, the design of a synthetic cell.Sequencing the Human GenomeThe year 2000 marked the completion of the Human GenomeProjectÕs primary goal. Through intensive efforts of both private andpublic agencies, the sequence for the three billion base pairs thatencodes the instructions for being human has now been determined.
5As a result of the Human Genome Project, we have determined the
complete chemical structure, nucleotide by nucleotide, of the DNA withineach of these chromosomes, the chemical structures that encode our
lives. It is an extraordinary accomplishment in chemistry.Completing this sequencing of the human genome could only be ac-complished by building upon discoveries in chemistry made over the
past 30 years. It was about 20 years ago that W. Gilbert and F. Sanger
showed that small segments of DNA could be sequenced directly usingchemical methods. About 10 years ago, instrumentation for automated
sequencing was engineered. And building upon all the advances in bio-technology of the last decades, from oligonucleotide synthesis to the
polymerase chain reaction and shot-gun sequencing, biochemists in the
last 2 years have been able to increase the pace of analysis, so that fullgenomic maps can be deciphered in months.In this post-genomic era, what can we expect? Mapping the human
genome brings not only a high-resolution picture of the DNA within our5J. D. McPherson, et al., Nature, 409, 934, 2001; J. C. Venter, et al., 
Science, 291, 1304,2001.continuesBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERcells but also the promise of molecular-based diagnosis and treatment ofdisease. Therapeutics could be tailor-made to take into account our indi-vidual genetic propensities. The cost of such pharmaceuticals will surely
decline as clinical trials take such genetic information into account. Andpreventive medicine will certainly flourish as we begin to catalogue and
diagnose our individual genetic predispositions to disease. But none of
this is likely to happen tomorrow or even next year. There are many more
conceptual advances in the chemistry of life that we need to achieve. At
the start of the 21st century, we may know the sequence of bases of the
human genome, but we canÕt yet read this sequence to know what reac-tions, what chemical functions, actually make us human.Post-Genomic TherapiesWe have already had a glimpse into the future with the recent approval
of a new approach for the treatment of adult onset, noninsulin dependent

diabetes (NIDD). In this disease, also known as Type 2 diabetes, the
body becomes increasingly resistant to insulin and loses its ability tocontrol sugar levels.The glitazone family of drugs acts to increase insulin sensitivity andthus increase glycemic control. They do this by acting upstream of a
gene! As selective activators (agonists) of a nuclear receptor called
PPAR-gamma (found in key tissues like fat and liver) they regulate tran-
scription of the insulin responsive genes involved in the control of glucose
production, transport, and utilization. Using the cellÕs signaling machinery,the drugs help the body compensate by getting the cells back to wherethey should be: sensitive to insulin.NNOSNHOOCH3OSNHOONRosiglitazonePioglitazone
Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTERFACE WITH BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE121WHY ALL THIS IS IMPORTANTWhat are the details of all the chemical transformations that occur in a livingcell? How are these details affected by the physical organization of the cell, with
various components such as membranes and ribosomes. How do these details
differ among cells of different types (liver versus brain, human versus bacterial)?
We can also begin to ask what chemical signals direct the development of a single
fertilized egg into the different organized tissues in a human being, and how such
signals work. What is the chemistry of aging? What special chemistry operates in
the brain to store memories? Underlying these functionsÑfunctions that makehumans what they areÑare chemical processes that remain to be discovered andharnessed.Other opportunities will drive both basic discovery and invention. New andimproved drugs will be needed to fight disease and improve quality of life. At the
same time, better methods will be needed for delivery of these drugs, and a vari-
ety of new medical devices will depend on the work of chemists and chemical
engineers. While the engineering of tissue constructs has had commercial suc-
cess, highly perfused or vascularized tissue remains problematic. Artificial or-
gans, such as an artificial liver, remain objects of intense research. Commercially
viable replacement organs are certainly more than a decade away. The primary
challenges are understanding the signals that tissues need to control proliferation
and differentiation and constructing bioreactors and scaffolds that will provide
signals in appropriate sequences.The explosive growth in our understanding of the chemical basis of lifeand its processes couldnÕt come at a better time. The demographic shiftof an aging generation of baby boomers will sorely challenge the nationÕsresources (both financial and human capital). The need for more effec-tive and cost-efficient therapies will become paramount. As our under-
standing of the chemistry of the brain grows, intervention will be based
on new insights at the molecular level. Selective therapies for problems
of memory and cognition, vision and hearing, pain, addiction, and sleepdisorders will be designed. The subtle control needed to balance meta-
bolic processesÑlike weight gain or loss and even agingÑis already onthe horizon. At the same time the revolution in microprocessors, telecom-
munications, and materials will enable the production of human ÒsparepartsÓ: joints and valves, eyes and ears linked to the brain. Even implant-able endocrine systemsÑminiature chemical factories that combine real-time analysis with the synthesis or release of therapeutic agentsÑarebecoming a reality.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERA closely related challenge is the design of materials that interact with cellsor living tissues to promote desired biological responses. Such responses might
be cell attachment, cellular differentiation and organization into functional tissue,
or promotion of in-growth of bone into an artificial prosthesis such as an artificial
hip.The coupling of the techniques of microfabrication on silicon with cells orbiological molecules also offers great promise. Devices at the natural length scales
of biological systems will facilitate the use of biosensors that can be implanted.
They will also aid the development of models having biological components that
can be used to gain predictive insight into in vivo systems. Such nanoscale de-
vices may mimic the biochemical interactions in the body by connecting ÒtissueÓcompartments in ways that mimic the bodyÕs circulatory system. A particularmodel that would be useful would be of the blood-brain barrier, to predict which
drugs or chemicals may enter the brain.While we have very functional processes for manufacture of therapeutics,there are significant challenges left to the process chemical sciences. The United
States faces a near-term crisis in the production of therapeutic proteins from mam-
malian cell culture due to the absence of sufficient facilities. Mammalian cell
culture is both expensive and has low yields; it is used to ensure that all of the
post-translational protein-processing steps (e.g., glycosylation or specific addi-
tion of certain sugar complexes to predetermined sites on the protein) are human-
like. Can we find ways to alter cellular machinery in other, more productive host
cells, to produce large amounts of proteins with humanlike post-translational pro-
cessing? Another challenge comes from the need to respond to bioterrorism
(Chapter 11). We need new methods to produce large amounts of protective anti-
bodies or vaccines in a matter of weeks rather than years. In addition, ways are
needed to integrate better genomic, proteomic, and advanced computational meth-
ods with metabolic engineering to inexpensively produce large amounts of non-
protein products.This listing of challenges for the future is not exhaustive, but it should pro-vide the reader with a sense of vast possibilities for the interface of the chemical
sciences and engineering with biology. These are complex scientific problems
requiring multidisciplinary research. Research at the interfaces of many disci-
plines requires greater understanding of neighboring fields. We are left with a
training paradoxÑwe need highly skilled specialists who are also generalists. Inaddition, we have a funding paradoxÑsuccess requires support of both funda-mental research and cross-disciplinary research. With collaborative efforts these
paradoxes will disappear, and we will realize the incredible potential that lies
before us. The early part of the 21st century will be known as the Golden Age of
the Chemistry of Life.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Some Challenges for Chemists and Chemical Engineers¥Invent improved structural materials that are stable at high tempera-
tures and easily machined.¥Invent materials with useful electrical and optical properties, including
high-temperature superconductivity.¥Invent materials that are lighter, stronger, and more easily recycled.
¥Invent materials for surface protection (paints and coatings) that are
truly long-lasting and rugged.¥Understand and utilize the properties of nanoscale materials and ma-
terials that are not homogeneous.¥Build materials with the kind of actuating response found in physiologi-
cal systems such as muscle.¥Develop and process materials in which complex structural assembly
occurs spontaneously or with minimal guidance and in useful time-
scales to produce durable systems with diverse utility.¥Create nanomaterials technology from nanoscale chemical science.
1238Materials by Design11As part of the overall project on Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st Century, aworkshop on Materials and Manufacturing will lead to a separate report. The reader is urged to con-sult that report for further information.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERGOALSA material is defined as Òthe substance or substances out of which a thing ismade or composed.Ó2 Understanding materials therefore necessitates a marriage
between understanding substances and knowing how to assemble them into use-
ful structures. Materials with specially tailored properties are at the core of nearlyall interesting assemblies that are not living, and many that are. Chemical scien-
tists synthesize, characterize, produce, and construct with materials. Moreover,
they do this at length scales from molecules at the nanometer level, to polymers
and electronic devices at the submicron scale, and to ceramics and cement in
large-scale structures. Revolutionary developments are being made in all aspects
of materials science. The materials sector of the chemical sciences is vital, both
fundamentally and pragmatically, for all areas of science and technologyÑas
well as for the societal needs in energy, transportation, national defense, and medi-
cine.The overall goal of materials research within the chemical sciences is toexplore, design, and controlÑthrough synthesis and processingÑthe relation-
ships among structure, properties, composition, and processing that determine
the useful behavior of all materials. The chemical sciences are especially power-
ful (as they are in all areas of synthesis and manufacturing) in molecular-level
construction of material structures. Though the domain of materials chemistry is
rapidly expanding, it remains underdeveloped.A frontier challenge in the chemical sciences is to investigate the chemistryand properties of single isolated molecules and compare that behavior with the
average molecular behavior in an assembly, solution, or condensed phase of mol-
ecules. Many parts of the chemical sciences are concerned with the collective
properties of materials in condensed phases, which have a variety of intriguing
and controllable properties. Today, we recognize fully that the most interesting
materials are functional systems, derived from our evolving knowledge of struc-
ture-function relationships. Catalysts are superb examples of chemically func-
tional materials, and the area of catalytic materials is an exemplary branch of
modern functional materials science. Responsive materials, often consisting of
softer materials, give rise to many kinds of functionality, such as sensing and
actuation.Composites are an important class of solid materials, whose history goesback to ancient times. For example, bricks made only of clay were not as strong
as those in which straw was mixed with the clay. Now we use clay as the filler in
new polymeric composites to enhance their mechanical properties. The ionic con-2Random House WebsterÕs Unabridged Dictionary, V2.2 for 16-bit Windows systems, copyright
1999, Random House, Inc.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MATERIALS BY DESIGN125ductivity of the polymer electrolytes used in energy storage systems also can beenhanced by addition of tiny clay particles. Another example is found in building
construction, where concrete is reinforced with steel rods to producing a compos-
ite in which the components mutually reinforce the overall strength. Other recent
examples are the graphitic materials used in tennis rackets and golf clubs, where
long strands of carbon fibers are combined with resins. The science of the bound-
aries or interfaces between phases, and aggregates of matter with sizes between
the molecular and the macroscopic, has become a vigorous part of the chemical
sciences. Constructing nano- and microstructures of any complexity requires joint
modules or elements through interfaces.The goals of molecular understanding, synthetic control, and novel fabrica-tion of various materials are inherently based in the chemical sciences and tech-
nology. The goal of applied chemistry and chemical engineering is to convert
available substances into useful materials, normally by changing their molecular
composition and arrangement, through controlled synthesis, processing, and
manufacturing methods.Chemical scientists seek to understand the properties of materials in whichthere is organization of the components. Chemistry is the original syntheticnanotechnology (as biology is the original natural nanotechnology); chemists
have been designing and executing constructions requiring placements of atoms
with subnanometer precision for most of the last century. Chemical engineers are
now aiming to do this on larger scales. As self-assembly and nanotechnology
move from laboratory demonstrations to more widespread means of fabrication
and manufacturing, the variety of materials available to technology and society
will grow enormously. New catalytic chemistry and processes, such as the revo-
lution in metallocene catalysts, is an area where chemists and chemical engineers
are creating new routes to macromolecular structural control at the nanometer
scale.Methodologies of synthetic chemistry (Chapter 3) must be adapted to achievethe full potential of chemical materials science and technology. This in turn will
allow chemists and chemical engineers to characterize the synthesis of supramo-
lecular entities and the three-dimensional character of materials. Our abilities to
achieve these goals in new materials synthesis are enhanced by intricate optical,
micromechanical, and spectroscopic probes, just as they are by the use of
noncovalent bonding, self-assembly, and assembly directed by forces such as
fluid mechanical or electric fields. The miniaturization and diversification of syn-
thesis through biological or combinatorial approaches provide unprecedented
opportunities. Chemical science should take better and broader advantage of natu-
rally abundant substances to produce building blocks for molecular (or larger)
assemblies. Surface science applied to materialsÑparticularly to organic materi-alsÑis of growing importance and will expand significantly with the develop-ment of new materials for biotechnology, medicine, information technology, and
nanotechnology.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.126BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERTo achieve these goals will require, among many other things, a dramaticincrease in the interactions among chemists, engineers, biologists, and physicists.PROGRESS TO DATESince early civilization humans have been interested in the properties of thevarious minerals found in the earth. The discovery that materials we now recog-
nize as iron oxides could be heated with charcoal to produce iron led to wonderful
new tools in the Iron Age, while similar transformation of other minerals led to
copper, tin, and other metals. Although we think of them as common, few metals
are naturally occurring; they are produced by chemical reactions of their naturally
occurring compounds. One of the earliest synthetic materials is glass, produced
over 5,000 years ago by heating various natural minerals together. Clearly, the
discovery, refinement, and creation of materials has arisen from the chemical
sciences and processing technology (and sometimes vice versa).Synthetic Polymers and Self-AssemblyThe story of polymers is one that shows enormous effects on human life.Though polymer science revolutionized 20th century life and is now a well-de-
veloped academic field, polymer synthesis is still progressing rapidly. Synthetic
polymers have often consisted of long chains of identical subunits. Sometimes
the synthetic polymer chains have cross-links between the chains (in proteins,
cross-links within a chain help determine a specific folded geometry). For many
years, copolymers have also been produced to gain the beneficial properties from
more than one monomer. Glassy polymers can be blended with rubbery ones to
generate desirable mechanical properties. Block copolymersÑproduced with longruns of one or the other monomerÑphase separate on a nanoscopic scale (typi-cally 10 to 50 nm) that is determined by the block molecular weight. These

microphase-separated polymers often have remarkably better properties than
blends of the two components, and are an early example of using self-assembly to
produce new materials.The architecture of macromolecules is another important synthetic variable.New materials with controlled branching sequences or stereoregularity provide
tremendous opportunity for development. New polymerization catalysts and ini-
tiators for controlled free-radical polymerization are driving many new materials
design, synthesis, and production capabilities. Combined with state-of-the-art
characterization by probe microscopy, radiation scattering, and spectroscopy, the
field of polymer science is poised for explosive development of novel and impor-
tant materials. New classes of nonlinear structured polymeric materials have been
invented, such as dendrimers. These structures have regularly spaced branch
points beginning from a central point
Ñlike branches from a tree trunk. New struc-
Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MATERIALS BY DESIGN127tures create new possibilities for applications, a direction that will continue todrive materials chemistry.High-molecular-weight polymers can be useful as solid materials and in so-lution, and lower molecular weight polymers can make liquids that are unusual in
character. Synthetic adhesives illustrate liquid-phase materials that cross-link or
polymerize when they set. Water-based paints are another example, liquids with
suspended solid polymer particles that form uniform solid films during drying.
So-called liquid crystals illustrate another exciting example of complex fluid
materials; these are liquid-phase materials made up of anisotropic, usually fairly
rigid, molecules of high aspect ratio that have strong electric dipole moments.
Such molecules are prone to adopt preferred orientations, especially under the
influence of surfaces, electric fields, and flow processes. Control over preferred
orientations gives high anisotropic strength of materials and switchable optical
properties, making them useful in displays such as those on digital watches and
laptop computers.Multicomponent systems having molecules of macromolecular size and het-erogeneous composition can be exquisitely sensitive to the delicate balance of
intermolecular forces. The fine interplay among a suite of noncovalent interac-
tions (e.g., steric, electrostatic, electrodynamic, and solvation forces) dictates
microstructure and dynamics. Molecular organization and interaction cause col-
lective and cooperative behavior to dictate macroscopic properties. Often the bal-
ance of forces is such that self-assembly occurs to generate aggregates, arrays, or
other supramolecular structures. Large molecular size enables amplification of a
small segmental effect into a large intermolecular effect. Self-assembly can am-
plify the small forces between small objects to produce large-scale structures
useful for macroscopic creations for patterning, sieving, sorting, detecting, or
growing materials, biological molecules, or chemicals. Learning to understand
and harness intermolecular interactions in multicomponent polymer and compos-
ite systems offers huge challenges, as well as opportunities to mimic nature, which
has learned to do this in many instances.Self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) are ordered, two-dimensional crystalsor quasi-crystals formed by adsorption and ordering of organic molecules or metal
complexes on planar substrates. Development of these monolayers is based on
early studies in which chemists learned to attach chemicals to surfacesÑfor pur-poses ranging from adhesion to chromatography to electrochemistryÑbut oftenwithout strong ordering in the monolayers. The ordered structures have made it
possible to develop a rational surface science of organic materials. They provide
the best current example of the power of self-assembly to make possible the de-
sign of the properties of materials. They have made routine the control of wetting,
adhesion, and corrosion in certain systems, andÑthrough soft lithographyÑtheyhave provided a new approach to microfabrication that is uniquely chemical in its
versatility. They have also greatly advanced the field of biomaterials by making it
possible to control the interface between cells and synthetic materials at the mo-
lecular level.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERSoft LithographyBuilding ever smaller devices has been a dominant trend in micro-electronics technology for 50 years. The technology used for this type of
fabrication is photolithography. This astonishingly sophisticated tech-nology is a kind of photography: The pattern that is to be a part of thecircuit is formed by shining ultraviolet light through a mask (a pattern of
chromium on silica), through a reducing lens, onto a thin film of photo-
sensitive polymer (a photoresist) covering the surface of a silicon wafer.After exposure, the exposed polymer differs in its solubility from unex-

posed material, and a suitable solvent allows the selective dissolution ofeither exposed or unexposed regions. The exposed regions are thentreated (by deposition of metal, etching, or implantation of ions) to make
a part of the final device.Photolithography is the basis of one of the technologies that has genu-inely changed the worldÑit has made possible the computing and infor-mation revolution. But it is not suited for making every possible type of
small structure. As the advantages of 
ÒsmallÓ have become obvious in
microelectronics, researchers have searched for ways to make smallchannels (for analysis of fluids or for synthesis), small machines (so-called microelectromechanical systems, or MEMS, for accelerometers

and display projectors), and small optical systems (for optical communi-cations). Such targets for fabrication all have different requirements inmaterials and costs, and photolithography is not a Òone size fits allÓtechnology.An alternative to photolithography has been developed that isÑformany applications in chemistry and biologyÑmore versatile and muchless expensive. This technology depends on a 
Òback to the futureÓ strategy
that produces micron- and nanometer-scale patterns by stamping, print-ing, and molding. The element in these methods is a stamp or mold that
is fabricated in a transparent, chemically inert elastomer, poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS). Because the stamp can deform, it is called soft; theorganic materials that are printed and molded are also called soft matter
by physicistsÑhence the name soft lithography. Patterns of small fea-tures are embossed in the surface of the element; when it is ÒinkedÓ witha suitable ink, it can print lines that are <100 nm in width (that is, the size

of a line of 200 gold atoms). As illustrated here, when the recessedregions are filled with a polymer, and the pattern is transferred to a sur-face, the resolution is <10 nm. If the stamp is sealed to another surface,
the patterns become microchannels for analysis of nucleic acids, proteins,or cells.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MATERIALS BY DESIGN129Soft Lithography. Figures a-c illustrate a soft-lithographic technique calledmicrocontact printing. A PDMS stamp with features in bas-relief is coated with anethanolic solution of octadecanethiol, and placed in contact with the surface of a
thin metallic film (30-50 nm) of gold, silver, or palladium. A self-assembled mono-layer (SAM) of octadecanethiolate forms on the surface of the metal in the regionswhere it contacts the PDMS stamp. The stamp is removed and the regions of the
metallic film without a SAM are dissolved by wet-chemical etching. Figure d is aschematic diagram of a long, serpentine, palladium wire (2 m) with contact padsthat are connected to the wire at every 0.25 m along the length of the wire; it is a
part of a sensor for hydrogen. Figure e is a SEM image of a section of the pattern.Drawings a-c courtesy of George M. Whitesides; d-e reprinted with permissionfrom D. B. Wolfe et al., Applied Physics Letters 80, 12, 2222 (2002).
Soft lithography is very simple, and it does not require expensiveinstrumentation or access to clean rooms. It does not give the lateralaccuracy of photolithography, but it is much less expensive. The size ofthe features it can make is not limited by optical diffraction, but rather by
van der Waals contacts and by deformations in the polymer used. It hasbecome a tool that is widely used in chemistry to make micro- and
nanostructures. It also has helped to open doors to chemists wishing to
play an active role in many areas of cell biology, bioanalytical chemistry,microfluidics, optics, and new forms of electronics such as 
Òall-organicÓelectronics: that is, electronics that does not rely on silicon, but instead
uses organic or organometallic compounds as conductors, semi-conductors, and insulators.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.130BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERMicelles, liposomes, shell-linked particles, and vesicles are all results of thespontaneous self-assembly of amphiphilic molecules to form enclosed or aggre-
gate structures that contain solvophobic regions surrounded by solvent-loving
moieties. In all of these structures, opportunities abound to exploit them for chemi-
cal separations, controlled release, directed transport, and synthesis. Fundamental
studies of these organized systems have increased in the recent decade. The pur-
suit is often biologically inspired, but in creating mimics we still fall short of the
natural systems. Combining this activity with concerted synthetic chemistry and
biochemistry provides great potential for the future.Electronic, Optoelectronic, Photonic, Magnetic,and Superconducting MaterialsThe properties of modern electronic, optoelectronic, photonic, and magneticdevices provide another story of great science that has affected most of human-
kind. Electronic devices require special materials: materials that emit light when
struck by a beam of electrons for use in television screens and computer moni-
tors, materials to make the semiconductors that are the heart of electronic and
microelectronic circuits, and materials that are used in magnetic memory storage
devices for computers.Classical electronic circuits and communication lines are made of metal toconduct electricity. Now we have the prospect of massively communicating by
optical signals. The great progress in the use of optical fibers to permit light to
travel in and between devices results from major achievements in materials pro-
cessing. Special surface coatings on the fibers reduce signal degradation; optical
switches allow connections with devices communicating through optical fibers.
The optical fiber revolution provides very high speed plus the ability to pack
much more information into a given transmission.There is considerable interest in developing new types of magnetic materials,with a particular hope that ferroelectric solids and polymers can be constructedÑmaterials having spontaneous electric polarization that can be reversed by an
electric field. Such materials could lead to new low-cost memory devices for
computers. The fine control of dispersed magnetic nanostructures will take the
storage and tunability of magnetic media to new levels, and novel tunneling mi-
croscopy approaches allow measurement of microscopic hysteresis effects in iron
nanowires.One of the most exciting properties of some materials is superconductivity.Some complex metal oxides have the ability to conduct electricity free of any
resistance, and thus free of power loss. Many materials are superconducting at
very low temperatures (close to absolute zero), but recent work has moved the so-
called transition temperature (where superconducting properties appear) to higher
and higher values. There are still no superconductors that can operate at room
temperature, but this goal is actively pursued. As more current is passed throughBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MATERIALS BY DESIGN131a superconductor the transition temperature moves lower; consequently, high elec-trical current tends to make the materials lose their superconducting ability. The
development of a full, predictive theory of high-temperature superconductivity
would be a major asset to the realization of practical materials in this area. The
materials studied to date are also difficult to processÑthey are easily corroded orbrittleÑthus motivating further study of novel processing or assembly techniques.
If practical superconductors can be made that will conduct appreciable currents at
reasonable temperaturesÑperhaps even from organic materialsÑit may becomepossible to transfer electric power over long distances with high efficiency, and to
exploit magnetic levitation for transportation systems.Quantum ComputationThe first demonstration of continuous electrical tunability of spin coher-ence (the state and degree of alignment of electronic spins) in semicon-ductor nanostructures has recently been made. This opens possibilitiesfor the field of quantum computation by permitting properties other than

electronic chargeÑand particularly the quantum property of spin
Ñto bemanipulated for computing purposes. Spin, often described by analogywith rotation of the earth, is a quantum property of electrons (and some

atomic nuclei) that must have one of two possible values analogous toclockwise or counter-clockwise rotation of a rotating body.While magnetic fields are conventionally used to manipulate spins infamiliar magnetic devices like hard-disk drives, this demonstration of elec-trical control of aligned spins represents a significant step toward making
new spin-based technologies. One future technology is quantum com-
puting, where many schemes make use of electron spin states as bits ofinformation analogous to the 0 and 1 of binary computing. Unlike ordi-
nary bits, quantum bits
 can be any combination of both 0 and 1 simulta-
neously, corresponding to a continuous range of possible directions.By classical mechanics, magnetic fields can modify the behavior of
spins by inducing precession, which is an additional rotation of the spinaxis with respect to the magnetic field. While the speed of electron spinprecession in a magnetic field is generally fixed by the particular materi-
als used, recent research has shown that both the speed and direction ofprecession can be continuously adjusted by applying electric fields inspecially engineered quantum structures.
3 It is more fitting to refer to
continues3G. Salis, Y. Kato, K. Ensslin, D. C. Driscoll, A. C. Gossard, D. D. Awschalom, Nature,414, 619, 2001Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132New magneto-optical spin control for spintronics. Courtesy of David Awschalom and Peter Allen.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MATERIALS BY DESIGN133these devices as gates rather than switches because they perform con-
tinuous tuning of electron spin. Instead of the ÒoffÓ and ÒonÓ options for aswitch, a gate operates across a continuum in the same way that lights

can be dimmed by a rheostat.Such spin gates are an example of the rapidly developing field ofspintronics, which studies electronic devices that are based on electronspin. Spintronics uses magnetic fields to manipulate the distribution of
spin coherence, whereas electronics uses electric fields to manipulate
charge distribution. This raises the question, What might spintronics dothat electronics cannot? In addition to the longer-term goal of quantum
computing, spintronics offers the near-term possibility of revolutionizing

the way we think about piecing together different technologies.
The creation of nanoscale sandwiches of compound semiconductorheterostructures, with gradients of chemical composition that are pre-
cisely sculpted, could produce quantum wells with appropriate properties.One can eventually think of a combined device that incorporates logic,storage, and communication for computingÑbased on a combination of
electronic, spintronic, photonic, and optical technologies. Precise pro-duction and integrated use of many different materials will be a hallmarkof future advanced device technology.The opportunities to develop new structures for computing, quantum
computation, and spintronicsÑtogether with other areas in molecularelectronicsÑraise important issues about the role of computation in thechemical sciences (Chapter 6). In order for chemical scientists to play amajor role in converting clever new ideas for computational devices into

full-fledged computers, they will have to become increasingly competentin the architectures, algorithms, and protocols that are necessary for
reliable computation.Ceramics, Carbon Structures, and Crystal EngineeringInorganic substances are the components of ceramics, such as those in dinnerplates. Ceramics have important industrial uses as well; a typical example is the
ceramic insulating materials that are used to suspend power lines. Ceramics are
typically poor conductors of heat and electricity, and they perform well at high
temperatures. Consequently, they find applications that take advantage of these
properties. Some use of ceramics in automobile engines is being developed to
achieve improved fuel efficiency at higher-temperature operation. The fragility
of current ceramics and the difficulty in machining them (relative to machiningBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.134BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERmetals) are still problems for such uses. One approach to ceramics with betterproperties is to overcome their fragility by incorporating them into composites.
As chemistry moves from pure materials to organized systems of different mate-
rials, composites are leading the way. A challenge for the future is to invent
improved structural materials, probably composites based on resins or on ceram-
ics, that are stable at high temperatures and easily machined.Carbon atoms in pure form can be obtained as materials having two classictypes of molecular structure: diamond and graphite. In diamond each carbon atom
is linked by equivalent single bonds to four neighboring carbons. The result is a
clear very hard material that is used for cutting, in saws with tiny diamonds im-
bedded in the blades, as tough coatings for metals, and in other industrial uses as
well as in jewelry. By contrast, each carbon atom in graphite is linked to only
three neighboring carbons, in a sheet, and some of the electrons are in delocalized
pi orbitals that permit them to move easily along the sheets. The extensive aroma-
ticity of carbon sheets leads to electronic transitions with energies in the visible
light region, so that graphite absorbs throughout the visible region and is a black
material. In addition, the mobility of the pi electrons in graphite makes it an
electrical conductor, in stark contrast to the insulating properties of diamond.A new type of structure has recently been discovered in which the sheets ofgraphite-like carbons are curved. The first example, called fullerene (after the
geodesic domes of Buckminster Fuller), has 60 carbons in a sphere. It resembles
a soccer ball with its five- and six-sided polygons (in contrast to graphite, which
resembles a floor tile pattern, with hexagons only). A Nobel prize was awarded in
1996 to Robert F. Curl, Jr., Harold W. Kroto, and Richard E. Smalley for their
discovery of fullerenes. Instead of curling into a sphere, the sheets of carbon with
hexagons can also curve into tubes with diameters on the order of 1 nm (often
called nanotubes), tiny whiskers that are sometimes quite long. Because of the
electrical conductivity of pi electrons, these tubes are also electrically conduct-
ing, somewhat like graphite. While they are already used in research instruments
to probe microscopic structures, one of the challenges is to use these new struc-
tures in miniature devices, or as building blocks for organized chemical struc-
tures.The importance of crystal form often is underappreciated. In many applica-tionsÑfrom drugs (in which bioavailability may be determined by crystal form)to explosives (where crystals may differ in stability) and optical devices (where
the nonlinear optical properties required for the device are based on a particular
crystalline architecture)Ñthe correct crystalline form is essential to obtaining thedesired chemical and physical properties of a material. Crystallization has long
been an art rather than a science; sometimes the same substances will exhibit
polymorphism and adopt different crystalline forms depending on the crystalliza-
tion conditions. Crystal engineeringÑthe prediction and control of molecularcrystal structures based on the constituent molecular structuresÑis on the vergeof becoming a science. The current generation of computers is finally powerfulBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MATERIALS BY DESIGN135enough to rationalize the crystal structures of simple, relatively rigid, organicmolecules. As computer capability increases, and as the sophistication of the pro-
grams used increases, it seems very probable that it will soon be possible to pre-
dict the structures of crystals. Learning to template or guide desired organization
of molecules will have great utility.Layered Materials and Surface ModificationThe scale of components in complex condensed matter often results in struc-tures having a high surface-area-to-volume ratio. In these systems, interfacial
effects can be very important. The interfaces between vapor and condensed phases
and between two condensed phases have been well studied over the past four
decades. These studies have contributed to technologies from electronic materials
and devices, to corrosion passivation, to heterogeneous catalysis. In recent years,
the focus has broadened to include the interfaces between vapors, liquids, or sol-
ids and self-assembled structures of organic, biological, and polymeric nature.In a simple material, its surface properties are dictated by the properties ofthe bulk, which are not necessarily desirable. For example, we may need a bulk
material for its strength but want to make a medical deviceÑsuch as an artificialheartÑwhere the surface must not cause a reaction leading to rejection or bloodclotting. This leads to the challenge of learning how to add biocompatible surface
layers to materials. This challenge is not yet fully met, but interesting approaches
to creating biomimetic functionality on surfaces are rapidly emerging. This field
is an example of the transition of chemistry from pure materials to organized
systems and materials, in this case the organization being the modification of the
surface with a different material for a biofunctional purpose.The ability to modify surfaces by attaching chemicals to them has for yearsencouraged scientists to attempt to design surface adhesive and wetting proper-
ties. The advent of self-assembled monolayers, including mixtures of molecules
in a monolayer, has led to more detailed control and understanding of surface
adhesion and wetting. This capability has been extended with the use of novel
monolayers to alter liquid-crystalline anchoring processes, surface friction, and
biocompatibility. Important applications of this approach have arisen in micro-
fluidics and liquid crystalline displays. Work pioneered by Nuzzo and Allara at
Bell Laboratories in the early 1980s with thiol self-assembled monolayers on
gold has led to a great deal of research, much of which has been revolutionary.Thus the study of surfaces has emerged as an important focus in the chemicalsciences, and the relationship between surfaces of small systems and their perfor-
mance has emerged as a major technological issue. Flow in microfluidic sys-
temsÑfor example, in micromechanical systems with potential problems ofstiction (sticking and adhesion) and for chemistry on gene chipsÑdepends on theproperties of system surfaces. Complex heterogeneous phases with high surface
areasÑsuspensions of colloids and liquid crystalsÑhave developed substantialBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERtechnological importance. In certain size ranges, we have seen new and scientifi-cally engaging phenomena, such as electron tunneling through nanometer-thick
insulators and diffraction of light in photonic band-gap crystals. New tools and
systemsÑfrom scanning tunneling microscope and atomic force microscope(STM and AFM) to self-assembled monolayers and carbon nanotubesÑhave fun-damentally changed our ability to characterize and prepare these complex sys-
tems. Finally, microelectronicsÑcomplex systems of small functional compo-nents fabricated in silicon and silicon dioxide, and other materialsÑhave becomeso important that we must develop the science and technology relevant to future
systems of small components, whether based on microelectronics or other tech-
nologies. The microelectronics industry is entirely based on chemical processing,
using such techniques as chemical vapor deposition (CVD), plasma processing,
etching, and electroless deposition.NanomaterialsAs the analytical, synthetic, and physical characterization techniques of thechemical sciences have advanced, the scale of material control moves to smaller
sizes. Nanoscience is the examination of objectsÑparticles, liquid droplets, crys-tals, fibersÑwith sizes that are larger than molecules but smaller than structurescommonly prepared by photolithographic microfabrication. The definition of
nanomaterials is neither sharp nor easy, nor need it be. Single molecules can be
considered components of nanosystems (and are considered as such in fields such
as molecular electronics and molecular motors). So can objects that have dimen-
sions of >100 nm, even though such objects can be fabricatedÑalbeit with sub-stantial technical difficultyÑby photolithography. We will define (somewhat ar-bitrarily) nanoscience as the study of the preparation, characterization, and use of
substances having dimensions in the range of 1 to 100 nm. Many types of chemi-
cal systems, such as self-assembled monolayers (with only one dimension small)
or carbon nanotubes (buckytubes) (with two dimensions small), are considerednanosystems.Whether there is currently a nanotechnology is a question of definition. If
one asks whether there are (or are soon likely to be) commercial electronic flu-
idic, photonic, or mechanical devices with critical lateral dimensions less than 20
nm, the answer is Òno,Ó although there may be in 10 to 20 years. There is, how-
ever, a range of important technologiesÑespecially involving colloids, emulsions,polymers, ceramic and semiconductor particles, and metallic alloysÑthat cur-rently exist. But there is no question that the field of nanoscience already exists.
The current, intense interest in ÒnanoÓ is based on the (correct) perception
that the study of nanoscience has exploded. As new tools have become available
for the preparation and characterization of systems with these dimensions, the
opportunities in the chemical sciences have grown enormously. The attentionBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MATERIALS BY DESIGN137also results from the as yet untested proposition that nanoscience will eventuallyrevolutionize existing areas of important technology, especially microelectronics.There is great interest in the electrical and optical properties of materialsconfined within small particles known as nanoparticles. These are materials made
up of clusters (of atoms or molecules) that are small enough to have material
properties very different from the bulk. Most of the atoms or molecules are near
the surface and have different environments from those in the interiorÑindeed,the properties vary with the nanoparticleÕs actual size. These are key players inwhat is hoped to be the nanoscience revolution. There is still very active work to
learn how to make nanoscale particles of defined size and composition, to mea-
sure their properties, and to understand how their special properties depend on
particle size. One vision of this revolution includes the possibility of making tiny
machines that can imitate many of the processes we see in single-cell organisms,
that possess much of the information content of biological systems, and that have
the ability to form tiny computer components and enable the design of much
faster computers. However, like truisms of the past, nanoparticles are such an
unknown area of chemical materials that predictions of their possible uses will
evolve and expand rapidly in the future.Several techniques are now available for the fabrication of nanostructures.These techniques arise from four approaches, and their simultaneous applicabil-
ity to a common set of targets is one of the reasons for the excitement in the field.
The first set includes the classical techniques developed from microfabrication:¥electron beam writing, which is the most important, although x-ray anddeep UV photolithographies may also contribute;¥use of scanning probe devices to move individual atoms or to write pat-terns;¥preparation of colloids, vesicles, emulsions, buckytubes, and self-as-sembled monolayers using chemical self-assembly methods (some with histories
that date back to the beginning of chemistry);¥soft lithography and nanoimprint lithography, which use printing, mold-ing, and embossing technologies developed on the macroscopic scale to replicate
structures at the nanoscale.The characterization of simple nanostructures is now possible with remark-able detail, but is highly dependent on access to the tools of measurement science
and to scanning probe microscopies.These methods have made available a set of nanostructured systems thathave begun to reveal the characteristics of nanoscale matter. The long list of
discoveries in the last decade includes:¥Òquantum boxÓ behavior in colloids of semiconductors precipitated from
solution;Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIER¥quantized capacitive charging of metal nanoparticles coated with low di-electric monolayers;¥a range of electrical properties in carbon nanotubes grown from vapor-phase precursors using metallic catalysts (with the highest observed conductivi-
ties comparable to those observed in graphite);¥high mechanical strength of buckytubes (combined with the above-men-tioned electrical properties) that makes them possible candidates for ÒnanowiresÓ;¥remarkably regular nanostructures in phase-separated block copolymers;¥functional transistors prepared in organic semiconductors with 100-na-nometer gate widths;¥membranes containing nanopores with controlled interior functionality;¥versatile methods of preparing nanostructures that are based on simpleideas taken from printing, writing, molding, and embossing, and that have made
it possible to prepare certain nanostructures without use of expensive apparatus.Two important conclusions have emerged in this field. First, the methodsemployed for microelectronicsÑphotolithography using UV wavelengthsÑareunlikely to provide inexpensive access to nanostructures. Second, the techniques
of chemistry and chemical engineeringÑalthough very early in their develop-mentÑwill be able to provide nanostructures with a wide range of compositionsand properties, and at costs that are very low compared to those prepared by e-
beam or other ÒconventionalÓ techniques for fabrication at small dimensions. In
particular, chemical affinities should make it possible for tiny structures and de-
vices to self-assemble spontaneously, an appealing idea for large-scale manufac-
turing.CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE FUTUREMany of the challenges of the formation and processing of new materialswill be met with advances in the chemical sciences. There are some revolutionary
things happening in materials: organic electronics and spintronics, attempting to
replace classical silicon electronics, the exploration of single-molecule electron-
ics to achieve the ultimate in size reduction, sophisticated biocompatible materi-
als for tissue engineering, implants, man-machine hybrids, ferromagnetic organic
materials, materials with negative index of refraction, nanoelectronics, and func-
tional colloids.Self-assembly and nanotechnology are advancing rapidly, but the challengestill remains to develop a means of fabrication and manufacturing. The rapid
developments in synthetic chemistry produce myriad new polymeric and com-
posite materials. These advances are enhanced by progress in optical, micro-
mechanical, and spectroscopic probes. The miniaturization and diversification of
synthesis through biological or combinatorial approaches provide unprecedentedBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MATERIALS BY DESIGN139opportunities. The approach to the future should be a holistic one, with syntheticadvances moving in concert with assembly and microstructural control. Summa-
rized below are a few of the leaps that can be viewed as important aspirations for
the chemical science community.TemplatingThe development of templated synthesesÑof metallic, ceramic or semicon-ductor particles, wires using novel synthetic and self-assembling structures such
as dendrimers, micelles, and nanotubesÑis in its infancy. This is a prime ex-ample where synthetic advances in the creation of new lipids, surfactants, and
amphiphilic polymers work together with probes of structure and function of in-
finitesimal wires or particles. New techniques such as scanning microscopy must
be developed to follow the electronic and magnetic processes occurring in the
small systems. Spectroscopists, microscopists, engineers, and chemists must work
together at the frontiers involving techniques developed by those from disparate
fields of electronics and biology.Higher Order StructuresThe ability to program synthetic polymers with the correct information toself-assemble, recognize analytes, or provide biological function seems fairly fu-
turistic. However, the close interplay between chemical composition and physi-
cal interactions makes this a possibility; new synthetic approaches involving con-
trolled living polymerizations and biological synthetic pathways allow control of
molecular composition. Additional research on the balance of physical forces
driving self-assembly, recognition, field responsive behavior, and biological com-
patibility should be closely tied to the synthetic efforts.New approaches in synthetic chemistry and biochemistry pave the way fortremendous advances in self-assembly. Highly controlled living polymerizations
will allow the creation of ever more complex macromolecules having prescribed
architectures (branching, stereoregularity) and chemical specificity. The future
will hold the opportunity for chemists to make molecules of size and complexity
approaching protein structuresÑand to fold and assemble them. Then, mimick-ing nature becomes a question of choosing important problems and technologies
needing improvement or intervention. By creating the appropriate molecules, pat-

terning them on the appropriate surfaces, and providing them with the appropri-
ate functions, we can think of mimicking the most chemical of senses: taste and
smell. These analytic advances, when taken in parallel with the computational
and electronics revolution, suggest the possible creation of the robots and gadgets
that were previously envisioned only in science fiction.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.140BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERSemiconductor ProcessingWe need novel materials to maintain the computer revolution, since we maybe reaching the limits of Òtop downÓ miniaturization. Instead of etching pieces of
silicon to produce electronic circuits that are smaller and smaller, there is the
hope that Òbottom upÓ design will work. In other words, self-assembly of mol-
ecules or nanoparticles offers the potential for construction of miniature elec-
tronic circuits that will be faster and will permit more computer power in a given
space. Promising physical approaches involve soft-lithography or crystal or

nanoparticle growth, but other processes doubtless will emerge as the field of
nanoparticle science evolves.Chemical scientists will seek new methods of generating nanostructures witha range of materials and processes that rely on ideas common in chemistryÑself-assembly, diffusion, phase-separation, catalysis, wettingÑto make these struc-tures accessible and inexpensive.In terms of technology, it is too early to predict what will emerge fromnanoscience, although it is clearÑfor a field as fundamental as this oneÑthattechnologies will surely emerge. Candidates for early success include systems of
photoluminescent colloids in which the same materials base provides any desired
color simply by tailoring the size (for displays); compact disks with <50-nanom-
eter pits (for very dense memory devices that will require near field recording
technology); and optical elements for manipulating extreme UV and x-ray light.
In the longer term, there will be, at minimum, demonstrations of information
processors having key components with nanometer dimensions (perhaps made of
organic or organometallic materials) and probes for exploring the interior of the
cell.As self-assembly and nanotechnology move from curiosities and demonstra-tions to more serious means of fabrication and manufacturing, the need for char-
acterization tools, especially those that can meet the time scales for real-time
processing, will grow enormously.Molecular Electronic MaterialsImproving the molecular control of addressable, switchable, or conductingmolecules that have extremely high purity, selectivity, or specificity is a goal
within reach in the coming decades. This will require the combination of syn-
thetic and processing strategies, such as recognition and controlled binding, to
tailor oligomeric materials with finely tuned properties. In this field, the chemical
sciences will have to interact creatively with computer science and engineering in
order to turn promising molecular switching ideas into practical computer archi-
tectures.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MATERIALS BY DESIGN141Composite and Hybrid MaterialsAs the ability to control materials moves to molecular dimensions, the ex-pectations for composite materials will grow. Rather than relying on incorpora-
tion of macroscopic particles or fibers as discussed above, one can hope to create
important marriages between disparate materials that will allow the development
of new material properties. Combining this synthetic expertise with physical pat-
terning, self-assembly, deposition, or quenching techniques will lead to the cre-
ation of new materials with optimal properties. Organized nanocomposite materi-
als can be important for photonic band gap materials as well as membranes and
catalysts with high selectivity.Surface Modification and Interfaces with Biology and ElectronicsThe connection between biological function and a useful electrical signal isthe capstone of sensor technology that will change medical, environmental, and
personal-protection strategies in the coming decades. The link between biology
and electronics is through the chemical sciences. The ability to mimic nature and
reliably anchor biologically active moieties to a surface is in its infancy. Here
another level of complexity and functional integration are possible. Coupling the
physical chemical means to manipulate interfaces with synthetic strategies in-
spired by nature provides powerful opportunities for gains in environmental and
medical devices. As an example, the recent understanding of virus phage packag-
ing, combined with the ability to inject DNA into a host or a host mimic, opens
the way for molecular scientists to develop new therapies and delivery strategies.
Another challenge is the construction of materials with the kind of actuating re-
sponse found in physiological systems such as muscleÑsoft materials in which alarge-amplitude mechanical response could be produced in response to a small-
amplitude stimulus.Capitalizing on self-assembly and nanoscience will enhance the ability toscreen drugs for individual sensitivities. Advances in drug discovery, combinato-
rial synthesis, and screening with sensors that have the ability to detect multi-
tudes of specific genetic matchesÑmarrying microelectronics and self-assem-blyÑare expected to be near-term breakthroughs. Then the creation of advancedforms of Òin the fieldÓ or 
Òin the officeÓ tests for chemical risks, pharmaceutical
compatibility, or environmental hazards will be possible.The processing of materials through self-assembly will also have to meetseveral kinds of challenges that arise from scaling up in physical size and speed,
and in complex shapes. Little has been done with complex shapes and nonplanar
surfaces. Can processes that work on glass slides or mica or 4-inch silicon wafers
be scaled up to very large surface areas, such as continuously moving webs of
paper, film, or tape, or surfaces of tubular biomaterials? Building large volumesBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.142BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERof nanostructured, self-assembled materials in three dimensions may be even morechallenging than scaling up to large surfaces.Processing speed presents different challenges. Since self-assembly is a pro-cess that moves down a free energy gradient, there is a predetermined end point;
but it is not known how to anticipate its speed. Study of the kinetics and dynamics
of self-assembly processes will be necessary to bring this field to a level compa-
rable to traditional methods of synthetic chemistry and chemical engineering.
Few studies of kinetics of assembly processes have been pursued, in part because
following the assembly process presents analytical difficulties. Practical process-
ing rates will certainly have to be much faster than those of typical current re-
search laboratory practice. The free energy landscapes along the paths toward
self-assembled products are not fully explored. Local minima and metastable
states lurk but are uncharted, and it is often not appreciated when they are occu-
pied or when they are trapping the process far from the desired equilibrium state.
The challenges of kinetics and of metastable states raise the question of catalysis
and whether routes to assist, accelerate, and guide self-assembly processes can be
developed.Self-assembly processes in nature are sometimes catalyzed by enzymes. Zeo-lites are, in many ways, the inorganic counterparts of enzymes, with their ability
to selectively bind other substances and perform catalysis. Can templates or cata-
lysts be effective in increasing rates and reducing defects in a wide range of
nanostructured materials?One of the most general forms of the surface modification of materials ispainting. We have become used to the idea that paints, while serving their impor-tant function of preventing corrosion and water damage, need to be renewed on a
regular basis, with a significant cost in labor and materials. One less glamorous
challenge that could make a significant contribution to modern life is the inven-
tion of long-lasting paint, perhaps 100-year paint. In addition, it would also be
desirable that this long-lasting paint be easily cleaned, perhaps simply by natural
rain, and that it have a mechanism to repair damage to itself. We are used to the
idea that our body can repair wounds; it is an important challenge to devise meth-
ods by which synthetic materials would also have this wound-healing ability. As
one approach, the wound might expose pools of monomer that could spontane-
ously fill the void and solidify.Green Materials and Eco-TechnologyOther challenges facing materials scientists have to do with the environment.We have traditionally made materials that are as stable as possible, so they will
last a long time and not need to be replaced. This longevity has the undesirable
consequences of creating waste that requires significant energy to process, or else
it clutters the landscape when discarded. As one approach, chemical scientists
and engineers need to focus on recycling and materials that can be easily re-Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MATERIALS BY DESIGN143cycled. Another approach is to produce materials that undergo rapid degradationinto invisible and harmless substances. Some progress has been made by incorpo-
rating ketone groups into polyethylene so that sunlight will break chemical bonds
and cause the polymer to disintegrate into tiny particles. However, these materi-
als are not yet economically attractive, and more efforts of this kind are needed.This is part of the general need, discussed in Chapter 9, to make materialssuch as insecticides or refrigerants that will degrade in the environment rather
than cause problems with bird life or with the ozone layer in the stratosphere. In
addition, as the world demand for synthetic materials grows, new renewable re-
sources for chemical feed stocks must be sought, and we must reconsider our
current infatuation with burning the petroleum reserves that are important feed-
stocks (as discussed also in Chapter 10). Zero-effluent processing plants also
need to be developed. There are innumerable opportunities for advanced chemi-
cal processing of materials to create micro- and nanodevices for environmental
and ecological monitoring.Another challenge is to develop methods to replace the volatile organic sol-vents that are used in many industrial procedures. One choice is water as a sol-
vent; it is easily repurified, and has a harmless vapor. Another choice is super-
critical carbon dioxide, a good solvent for many organic substances. It is not as
innocuous as is water, but carbon dioxide can be easily recovered and reused. It is
currently used to remove caffeine from coffee, and is being developed as a dry-
cleaning solvent to replace organic solvents (Chapter 9).Analysis and SimulationAdvances in computational capability have raised our ability to model andsimulate materials structure and properties to the level at which computer Òex-perimentsÓ can sometimes offer significant guidance to experimentation, or at
least provide significant insights into experimental design and interpretation. For
self-assembled macromolecular structures, these simulations can be approached
from the atomic-molecular scale through the use of molecular dynamics or finite
element analysis. Chapter 6 discusses opportunities in computational chemical
science and computational materials science.Molecular dynamics simulations are capable of addressing the self-assemblyprocess at a rudimentary, but often impressive, level. These calculations can be
used to study the secondary structure (and some tertiary structure) of large com-
plex molecules. Present computers and codes can handle massive calculations but
cannot eliminate concerns that boundary conditions may affect the result. Even-
tually, continued improvements in computer hardware will provide this added
capacity in serial computers; development of parallel computer codes is likely to
accomplish the goal more quickly. In addition, the development of realistic, time-
efficient potentials will accelerate the useful application of dynamic simulation to
the self-assembly process. In addition, principles are needed to guide the selec-Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.144BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERtion of initial configurations; the proper initial conditions accelerate convergenceand minimize problems associated with metastable configurations.Molecular calculations provide approaches to supramolecular structure andto the dynamics of self-assembly by extending atomic-molecular physics. Alter-
natively, the tools of finite element analysis can be used to approach the simula-
tion of self-assembled film properties. The voxel4 size in finite element analysis
needs be small compared to significant variation in structure-property relation-
ships; for self-assembled structures, this implies use of voxels of nanometer di-
mensions. However, the continuum constitutive relationships utilized for macro-
scopic-system calculations will be difficult to extend at this scale because
nanostructure properties are expected to differ from microstructural properties. In
addition, in structures with a high density of boundaries (such as thin multilayer
films), poorly understood boundary conditions may contribute to inaccuracies.Image analysis is an important aspect of many areas of science and engineer-ing, and imaging will play an important role in characterizing self-assembled
structures as well as in on-line process control. Development of effective noise
identification and suppression, contrast enhancements, visualization, pattern rec-
ognition, and correlation algorithms should be co-opted where possible and
adapted to the analysis of self-assembled structures.Models of the self-assembly process also will be important. Because self-assembled structures can be diverse, those models are likely to be highly com-
plex. Sensitivity analysis can be an important approach to the identification and
control of critical parameters.Adaptive and Responsive MaterialsAn area of great promise for the future is that of materials for which proper-ties change in response to external influences. The most prominent is giant
magnetoresistive (GMR) materialsÑmaterials for which the electrical conduc-tivity can change by a few percent under the application of an external magnetic
field. GMR materials moved from a laboratory curiosity to the dominant technol-
ogy in computer memories within a decadeÑa startling example of how a newmaterial can completely change a major industry. The invention of new materials
has been an area in which the United States has played a central role; the current
emphasis on focused, shorter-term projects has, however, made it very difficult to
support a lively activity in new materials, which by definition are far from a final
product.Among the adaptive materials currently on the forefront are liquid crystals,electro- and magneto-rheological (ER/MR) fluids, thermo- and physioreponsive
gels, and shape memory alloys. In all but the last case, these systems involve4A voxel is a volume-pixel. While a pixel is a two-dimensional point that has the attributes of height
and width, a voxel is a three-dimensional point with the attributes of height, width, and depth.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MATERIALS BY DESIGN145fluid-solid interfaces, complex or dispersed suspensions, and external fields. Thus,all of the directions outlined above for self-assembly and interfaces come into
play when pursuing these Òsmart fluids.Ó Improvements in synthesis and spatial
resolution of the external fields through soft-lithography (self-assembled mono-
layers, etc.) will provide new capabilities of control and tuning of these complex
fluids.Tools, Resources, and InfrastructuresThe area of complex condensed matter depends crucially on the availabilityof appropriate tools for both fabrication and characterization. These tools are of
ÒintermediateÓ size: they are neither a test tube nor a synchrotron. Typical tools
Ñscanning probe microscopes, x-ray photoelectron spectrometers, electron micro-
scopes, clean roomsÑcost from $0.1 million to $5 million. They are shared-usefacilities, but they must be local to the user groupÑtravel to distance facilities forroutine measurements is not practical.Simulations in this area also require access to high-level computational capa-bilities. By definition, simulations involve both large numbers of atoms and dy-
namic behavior; both consume large numbers of CPU cycles. Because the field is
so demanding on computer time, analytical theory is very important, even if it
yields only approximate solutions.Many of the tools required for the nanoscience revolution in materials in-volve sophisticated experiments requiring leadership, training, and infrastructure.
User facilities such as high-resolution electron microscopes, synchrotrons and
NMR facilities need to be easily accessible and provide adequate support for
efficient experimentation.The nanometer- to micrometer-scale dimensions of supramolecular assem-blies present many challenges to rigorous compositional and structural character-
ization. Development of adequate structure-property relationships for these com-
plex hierarchical systems will require improved measurement methods and
techniques. The following areas constitute critical thrusts in instrument develop-
ment.¥Many techniques ideally suited for nanostructure characterization unfor-tunately depend also on the substrate properties. For example, the reflectivity and
conductivity of a substrate play an important role in the successful execution of
the instrumental method. Hence, substrate-independent techniques are needed so
that structure and/or behavior of the material can be investigated in a confined
geometry, decoupled from the potentially invasive effect of the substrate-mate-
rial interface.¥Feedback provided by on-line monitoring of self-assembling processeswill play an increasingly important role in controlling the microscopic and mac-
roscopic architecture of molecular assemblies. Successful adaptation of char-Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.146BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERacterization methods for noninvasive in situ monitoring will require miniatur-ization of many of the analytical devices commonly used for interrogating self-
assembled structures. The revolution in microscopic identification and control
provides new opportunities for chemists and chemical engineers. Promising routes
to achieve this goal include the use of optical fibers in spectroscopic methods and
the development of MEMS-based analytical instrumentation.¥Order and polydispersity are key parameters that characterize many self-assembled systems. However, accurate measurement of particle sizes in con-
centrated solution-phase systems, and determination of crystallinity for thin-film
systems, remain problematic. While inverse methods such as scattering and dif-
fraction provide measures of these properties, often the physical information de-
rived from such data is ambiguous and model dependent. Hence development of
improved theory and data analysis methods for extracting real-space information
from inverse methods is a priority.¥Use of diverse techniques provides significant structural information indispersed and thin-film systems. If significant advances in source intensities (e.g.,
higher neutron and x-ray fluxes, higher power diode lasers) and photon detector
technology (e.g., high quantum efficiency, large bandwidth charge-coupled de-
vices, CCDs) are achieved in the near term, these methods could be extended
readily to studies of nanoscale features. Since the experimental and theoretical
frameworks for these techniques are well established, extension to smaller length
scales should be straightforward.¥The already critical need for molecular-scale compositional mapping willincrease as more complex structures are assembled. Currently, electron micros-
copy, scanning probe microscopy (SPM) and fluorescence resonance energy
transfer (FRET) are the only methods that routinely provide nanometer resolu-
tion.In contrast to the mature instrumental techniques discussed above, a hithertononexistent class of techniques will require substantial development effort. The
new instruments will be capable of measuring the thermal (e.g., glass transition
temperatures for amorphous or semicrystalline polymers and melting tempera-
tures for materials in the crystalline phase), chemical, and mechanical (e.g., vis-
coelastic) properties of nanoscale films in confined geometries, and their creation
will require rethinking of conventional methods that are used for bulk measure-
ments.WHY ALL THIS IS IMPORTANTMaterials science and engineering is inseparable from chemistry and chemi-cal engineering. The importance of materials is illustrated by the effects they
have on the quality of human lifeÑunderscored by the way our society uses newBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MATERIALS BY DESIGN147materials and the technology they spawn to define epochs in history. The list ofthe 20 greatest engineering achievements of the 20th century, compiled in 2000
by the National Academy of Engineering,5 contains many entries (for example,
high-performance materials, automobiles, airplanes, electronics, computers, tele-
phones, and fiber optics) that depend essentially on advances in materials science
and engineering. From synthesis to processing to commodity manufacturing of
materials, the tools of chemical science and engineering will be essential to defin-
ing the next century in these terms. New materials with predictable properties
will provide worthy and formidable targets for design and synthesis, while pro-
cessing and manufacturing these new materials will present significant challeng-
ing new objectives for chemical process-systems engineering.The science of materials reflects the way that chemistry has changedÑfroma field concerned only with atoms and molecules and their properties in isolation,
to a field increasingly concerned with organized interactive systems. This change
opens opportunities and challenges in fundamental science that will let us ask not
just: What are the chemical components of that stuff? We will be asking as well:
How do those components interact to produce the properties of that stuff? The
answers to such questions will greatly add to our understanding of the chemical
universe.5http://www.greatachievements.org/Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Some Challenges for Chemists and Chemical Engineers¥Elucidate the entire complex interactive chemistry of our biosphereÑ
the atmosphere, the earth, and its lakes, rivers, and oceansÑand pro-vide the scientific basis for policies that preserve our environment.¥Ensure that chemical manufacturing and chemical products are envi-
ronmentally and biologically benign, never harmful.¥Learn how to make products that are stable over their necessary life
but then undergo degradation so they do not persist in the environ-ment or in living creatures.¥Invent agricultural chemicals that do not harm unintended targets in
any way and are not overly persistent.¥Develop selective catalysts that enable the manufacture of useful prod-
ucts without producing unwanted waste products and without usingexcessive energy.¥Invent processes for the generation and distribution of energy that do
not release greenhouse gases or toxic contaminants into the atmo-sphere.¥Help humans control their population growth by inventing birth control
methods that are safe and effective, inexpensive, and widely available
and accepted.1489Atmospheric and Environmental Chemistry11As part of the overall project on Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st Century, aworkshop on The Environment will lead to a separate report. The reader is urged to consult that reportfor further information.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ATMOSPHERIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMISTRY149GOALSChemists and chemical engineers want to understand the chemical composi-tion and behavior of the earth, its rivers, lakes, and oceans, and its atmosphere.
What are the complex interactions among these systems that occur naturally, how
are they influenced by human activity, and what will be the chemical and physi-
cal consequences that affect our environment? To what extent can the knowledge
and capabilities of chemists and chemical engineers be used to understand and
prevent or correct problems, either by direct chemical intervention or by guiding
changes in human behavior? As a society, we want to be assured that the products
we use are safe for us and our environmentÑand to be sure that the methods of
their production do not harm us, our children, or our environment. The safety of
our environment is not a local issue. Concerns about global climate change make
it clear that chemists and chemical engineers will want to helpÑand will need to
helpÑin addressing these important scientific issues on a worldwide basis.Systems in placeÑranging from laws and policies of government regulatorybodies to voluntary programs of the industryÑare intended to anticipate, detect,
and prevent unacceptable risks to the public, both now and in the future. The
ability of chemists and chemical engineers to meet these challenges, as contribu-
tors to and beneficiaries of the chemical enterprise, requires that they utilize the
best science available today and aggressively advance that science in the future.
This ability will also be enhanced by educational effortsÑnot only efforts by the
scientific community to increase public understanding of science and technology,
but also changes in the ways that engineers and scientists are educated. Greater
understanding of the societal implications of their work by scientists and engi-
neers will enhance our stewardship of this planet.PROGRESS TO DATEGeochemists have made major progress in learning about the chemistry ofthe earth and its components, including rivers, lakes, and oceans. Much of this
involves such fundamental theories as thermodynamics, but on a scale much

larger than the molecular level that has been the past focus of the chemical sci-
ences. In the last decade, the chemistry of the atmosphere has also been eluci-
dated in much more detail. A field called earth systems engineering is emerging,
and it will require further development, with the chemical sciences and engineer-
ing as a crucial component. This field will address matters such as global warm-
ing, carbon sequestration, and environmentally benign manufacturing. It will also
address new analytical, computational, and assessment techniques through which
global-scale interactions in complex systems can be better understood and opti-
mized. Earth systems engineering is made even more intricate and involved by its
international character. The factual, quantitative, and analytical input that can be
supplied by chemical scientists will be of great value in this endeavor.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.150BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERChemists and chemical engineers have identified the processes that convertordinary oxygen molecules (O2) into ozone (O3) in the high altitude ozone layerof the stratosphere, under the influence of ultraviolet light from the sun. Further-
more, chemists and chemical engineers have elucidated, through both experimen-
tation and computational modeling, the processes by which extremely stable an-
thropogenic (human-generated) gases such as chlorofluorocarbon refrigerants

cause degradation and depletion of the ozone layer. The ozone layer plays an
important protective role for life on earth by blocking very-high-energy ultravio-
let light; consequently, this fundamental atmospheric chemistry has important
practical consequences. Similar understanding of the interaction of anthropogenic
materials with water and with the minerals of the earth is also being developed by
geochemists.The chlorofluorocarbon effect on the ozone layer illustrates another chemi-cal concernÑthe special problem that can arise when materials released into theenvironment are able to act as catalysts. If every chlorine atom generated in the
upper atmosphere simply destroyed one ozone molecule, the effect would be mini-
mal. But chemists have elucidated the catalytic cycle by which each chlorine
atom destroys thousands of ozone molecules. It is particularly important for chem-
ists to study and understand which substances can have such catalytic effectsÑand to learn how to prevent the release of such substances into the environment.The interaction of gases such as carbon dioxide (CO2) with earth and waterhas also been investigated. Carbon dioxide is in most respects a harmless mol-
eculeÑthe product of human, animal, and plant respiration and the starting mate-rial for the growth of plants by photosynthesis. It is also produced by burning
carbonaceous fuels for energy, and in converting limestone to lime for cement
production. It is now becoming clear that too much carbon dioxide in the atmo-
sphere can contribute to what is called the greenhouse effect. The temperature of
the earthÕs surface is governed by what happens to the energy in incident sun-lightÑhow much of it is reflected back into space versus how much is retained byconversion into thermal energy, and how much of that is reemitted back into
space as infrared radiation. There is a delicate balance among these processes,
and a change in that balance can affect the overall temperature of the earth. Green-
house gases absorb some of this infrared radiation and prevent its transmission
back into space. Other gases, particularly water vapor, also contribute to the green-
house effect, but carbon dioxide is of particular importance because CO2 levels
correlate with human activity. For this reason there has been extensive debate
about the extent to which global climate change is anthropogenic.Recent estimates indicate that the level of carbon dioxide in the atmospherehas increased by a third since the beginning of the industrial age, and that it
contributes significantly to global warming. Other major contributors include
methane, tropospheric ozone, and nitrous oxide. Methane is the principal compo-
nent of natural gas, but it is also produced by other sources such as rice paddies
and farm animals. Tropospheric ozone is generated naturally and by the sunlight-Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ATMOSPHERIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMISTRY151induced reactions of combustion by-products, and nitrous oxide is formed in mi-crobial reactions, in part from nitrogen-containing fertilizers, and as a by-product
of some chemical processes. Carbon dioxide and methaneÑgenerated by humanactivityÑappear to be making the greatest contributions to global climate change.Both gases are more abundant in the atmosphere than at any time during the
preceding 400,000 years.2 Solution of this inherently chemical problem will re-
quire major contributions by chemists and chemical engineers.At one point it was assumed that the earth, its oceans and rivers, and itsatmosphere were so vast or self-cleansing that we could discharge anything into
them without damage to our planet. We now know this is not true. Currently, we
must deal with toxic waste dumps, with smog, with acid rain that kills forests, and
with pollution of rivers and the ocean by chemical discharges. How did this hap-
pen?Part of the problem is simply the slow accumulation of materials releasedinto the environment. Any single activity may seem small and harmless, but all
such activities add up. The combustion of fossil fuels has long been recognized as
a major source of air pollution. For example, burning petroleum components in
gasoline and diesel engines of vehicles can lead to air pollution by emission of
unburned hydrocarbons and sulfur and nitrogen oxides produced during the com-
bustion process. When this was realized, fuels were refined differently to reduce
sulfur content and vehicles were fitted with catalytic converters, designed by
chemists and chemical engineers, to remove the hydrocarbons and nitrogen ox-
ides from vehicle exhaust. The catalytic converter was introduced in the U.S.
automotive industry and is now used worldwide, an excellent example of the
beneficial global effects of chemical science and technology. Fuel efficiency was
also increased, so less fossil fuel had to be burned per mile traveled. This has
provided major improvements, but the real solution may come from a change to
other forms of energy production for transportation, as described in Chapter 10.The chemical process industries make a huge contribution to civilization, butthey have the potential for environmental pollution. During the early growth of
the industry, many chemical companies built their plants in river valleys. The
plants used the river water and subsequently returned it to the river with water-
soluble by-products, while they discharged gaseous by-products into the air.

Water and air pollution were serious problems near these plants. In recent de-
cades, chemical manufacturing has undergone a revolution. Almost all chemical
manufacturers in the United States, and increasingly worldwide, subscribe to a
program called Responsible Care.3 In brief, it involves a pledge by the manufac-turers to make only products that are harmless to the environment and to its living
occupants, and by processes that are also environmentally and biologically benign.
2Climate Change Science: An Analysis of Some Key Questions, National Research Council, National
Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 2001.3http://www.americanchemistry.com/Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.152BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERAnother important initiative is called green chemistry,4 developed as part ofefforts to reduce pollution at the source; it is defined as Òthe design of chemicalproducts and processes that reduce or eliminate the use and generation of hazard-
ous substances.Ó5 Originated in the United States (where prestigious awards for
accomplishments in this area are given annually), it is increasingly becoming a
worldwide program.Benign processes help make chemical plants into good neighbors, and theiroperators into good citizens, but the products themselves are now being exam-
ined with a new perspective. For example, DDT (invented by Paul Mller, whoreceived a Nobel Prize in 1948 for this invention) was an effective insecticide
that greatly reduced the occurrence of insect-borne diseases such as malaria. How-
ever, its widespread use caused problems, because it is too stable. DDT persists in
the environment and enters the food chain, a phenomenon that led to the nearly
complete elimination of DDT use after it was shown to interfere with bird repro-
duction. At one point it was believed that persistence was a good thing, since the
insecticide would keep on working, but it is now recognized that persistent chemi-
cals can accumulate in the environment and lead to new or unexpected problems.A similar situation is found with the herbicides that help make agriculturemore productive by controlling weeds. Advantages are now recognized for herbi-
cides having limited persistence, lasting long enough to do the job and then harm-
lessly disappearing.Persistence was also the unforeseen problem with the role of chlorofluoro-carbons (CFCs) in degrading the earthÕs ozone layer. CFCs were invented toreplace toxic and dangerous gases (such as sulfur dioxide) that had been used as
the working fluid for compressors in early refrigerators and air conditioners. In-
deed, CFCs are so unreactive under normal conditions that they are quite harm-
less to humans and other living things. However, they are so stable that they
diffuse throughout the atmosphere. When they reach the stratosphereÑwhere theozone layer is foundÑthe greater intensity of high-energy radiation from the sunfinally causes slow decomposition of the CFCs. This decomposition process pro-
duces chlorine atoms that catalyze the destruction of ozone in a chemical se-
quence that is now well understood. For elucidating these chemical processes in
the stratosphere, Paul Crutzen, Mario Molina, and F. Sherwood Rowland received
a Nobel Prize in 1995.While the high stability and persistence of CFCs provided a major advantagefor such applications as refrigeration and air conditioning, escape of the gases
into the air has resulted in unacceptable changes in the upper atmosphere. The
solution to the problem is to invent new relatives of CFCs that are adequate cool-
ants but are less environmentally persistent. Chemists have indeed created such
new substances, which are now replacing CFCs.4http://www.epa.gov/greenchemistry/index.htm5http://www.epa.gov/greenchemistry/whatis.htmBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ATMOSPHERIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMISTRY153Green ChemistryA common definition of green chemistry, which clearly encompassesconsiderable chemical engineering as well, is Òthe design, developmentand implementation of chemical processes and products to reduce oreliminate substances hazardous to human health and the environment,Ó(P. T. Anastas and J. Warner, Green Chemistry Theory and Practice,Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1998). A more recent article expandsthis definition to twelve principles (M. Poliakoff, J. M. Fitzpatrick, T.R.
Farren and P.T. Anastas, Science, 297, 807-810 (2002).1.It is better to prevent waste than to treat or clean up waste after it is
formed.2.Synthetic methods should be designed to maximize the incorpora-
tion of all materials in the process into the final product.3.Wherever practicable, synthetic methodologies should be designed
to use and generate substances that possess little or no toxicity tohuman health or the environment.4.Chemical products should be designed to preserve efficacy of func-
tion while reducing toxicity.5.The use of auxiliary substances (e.g., solvents, separation agents,
and so forth) should be made unnecessary wherever possible, and
innocuous when used.6.Energy requirements should be recognized for their environmental
and economic impacts and should be minimized. Synthetic methods
should be conducted at ambient temperature and pressure.7.A raw material or feedstock should be renewable, rather than deplet-
ing, whenever technically and economically practicable.8.Unnecessary derivatization (blocking group, protection/deprotection,
temporary modification of physical/chemical processes) should beavoided whenever possible.9.Catalytic reagents (as selective as possible) are superior to stoichio-
metric reagents.10.Chemical products should be designed so that at the end of their
function, they do not persist in the environment, and they break downinto innocuous degradation products.11.Analytical methodologies need to be developed further to allow for
real-time in-process monitoring and control before the formation ofhazardous substances.12.Substances, and the form of a substance used in a chemical pro-
cess, should be chosen so as to minimize the potential for chemicalaccidents, including releases, explosions, and fires.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.154BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERMany of the problems that affect our environment are the result of unex-pected effects that accompany an entirely reasonable intention. The effect of CFCs
on the ozone layer is such a case. Chlorofluorocarbons seemed to be perfectÑthey were chemically stable and noncorrosive, and they were not at all toxicÑasreplacements for the earlier toxic refrigerants. But then the ozone effect was dis-
covered. Similarly, DDT seemed to be a perfect insecticideÑcontrolling mosqui-toes and other insects that transmit diseaseÑuntil its effect on birds was discov-ered. A more recent example is methyl tertiary-butyl ether (MTBE), a fuel additive
that improves the performance of gasoline in automotive engines. Unfortunately,
spillage and leakage from underground gasoline tanks has allowed MTBE to en-
ter the ground water. This has led to concern about the biological effects of MTBE
and a probable end to its use.To prevent or at least minimize such problems, we must better understandthe environment at all levels, including the fundamental chemical processes that
affect it. We have learned the lesson that when assessing the fate of new products
in the environment, we should not underestimate the potential of these to appear
in unexpected places. The recognition, avoidance, or solution of complex envi-
ronmental problems requires the expertise of a variety of science and engineering
disciplines. Only then will it be possible to produce realistic evaluations of how
new compounds will be distributed and will act in the ecosystem. In addition to
chemistry and biochemistry, fields such as solution thermodynamics and trans-
port phenomena in which many chemical engineers work, as well as earth sci-
ences and environmental engineering, have crucial contributions to make.Another environmental problem is the contamination of soil by heavy metalsor organics. These soil-based contaminants can produce health hazards by release
of volatile substances, contamination of groundwater, or accumulation of heavy
metals by plants growing in the soil. Incineration has been used to treat soils
heavily contaminated by organic materials, but this approach is expensive and
may result in other environmental problems. The potential toxicity of contami-
nated soils is governed by a variety of factors; the factors that affect bioavailability
of soil-bound contaminants or the movement of contaminants in subsurface flu-
ids are not well understood. Close cooperation of chemists and chemical engi-
neers will be needed to gain the necessary understanding.One promising form of treatment is bioremediation. Microbes in the soil arecapable of converting organic chemicals to other compounds, and in the ideal
case to CO2 and H
2O, and some microbes have been found to convert heavymetals to complexes with reduced toxicity. Microbes can be harnessed through
addition of nutrients, other chemicals, or specific microbes to enhance beneficial
microbially mediated chemical reactions. However, the complex chemistry and
biology of subsurface soil systems makes it difficult to achieve predictable re-
sponses. A much deeper knowledge of the interaction of the chemistry of the soil,
fluid movement, and microbial physiology is an important challenge to makingBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ATMOSPHERIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMISTRY155bioremediation a fully practical technology. (see Chapter 7 for discussion ofrelated matters).A half-century ago, people were only beginning to understand the extent towhich human activity could affect the environment, often in very negative ways.
Many of the early problems of pollution were the result of chemical processes,
and ÒchemistryÓ received the blame. But 
ÒchemistryÓ has also provided solu-
tions, and dramatic improvements have occurred. No longer do industrial plants
belch foul smoke into the atmosphere, and no longer do chemical plants dis-
charge brown or orange sludge into nearby streams and rivers. These improve-
ments have been implemented by chemists and chemical engineers, and they have
been implemented in ways that often have provided economic benefits to the
United States.This chapter has focused on the chemistry of the earth and its immediateatmosphere, but the concept of ÒenvironmentÓ need not stop with the earth
Õs at-mosphere. Molecular chemistry also goes on in space, and it is an area of interest-
ing chemical science. Large, although extremely diffuse, clouds of molecules
exist between the stars, and such clouds are believed to be the origins of stars. So
far, the chemistry in the clouds has been investigated not by direct sampling, but
instead by observing the light that is emitted from them. Observations of such
light in the microwave range have led to the identification of many remarkable
substancesÑand of the likely transformations that they undergo. Chemists havesynthesized some of these unusual substances here on earth so their microwave
radiation can be compared with that from space, for identification of the space
molecules. In addition, computational chemistry has reached the stage at which it
is possible to predict the microwave radiation that some molecules would emit,
again enabling earth-bound scientists to obtain evidence for the structures of ma-
terials that exist only in outer space.CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE FUTUREConsiderable progress has been made in understanding the environment andthe chemical processes that affect the environment. However, the preceding dis-
cussion clearly shows that many challenges remain. Chemical scientists must
learn how to make useful substances that have limited persistenceÑand will gen-erate only completely harmless products when they degrade.A full understanding will be needed of the complex chemistry by which theatmosphere and the earth interact, including the dependence of global climate on
carbon dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere. Is there a way to deal with the
carbon dioxide produced by burning coal and other hydrocarbon fuels so that it
causes no problem? Chemical scientists will need to investigate effective ways to
trap CO2 that would otherwise build up in the atmosphere. Alternatively, it will
be necessary to find ways to reduce the generation of carbon dioxide. As humanBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.156BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERactivity continues to destroy forests, will this affect the carbon dioxide cycle andlevels, and what can be done about that?Supercritical ProcessingToday we are witnessing a 
ÒgreenÓ revolution as it pertains to manu-
facturing industriesÕ implementation of carbon dioxide as a replacement
for their dependency on water and organic solvent usage. A major impetus
for this conversion is driven by a concern for our environmentÑto reducea companyÕs footprint on our planet by reducing their usage of solventsand water. In addition, because of the low heat of vaporization of
supercritical CO2 (sCO
2) relative to water and organic solvents, corpo-rate motivations also include the reduction of energy usage associatedwith using CO2-based processes relative to conventional solvents andwater. However, beyond pollution prevention and energy efficiencyissues, sCO2 is finding increasing appeal because of increased perfor-
mance attributes associated with its inertness to many chemistries, to its
exceedingly low surface tension and viscosity, and to its adjustable sol-
vent quality due to its compressibility, especially in the supercritical state.Its critical temperature is conveniently located at 31C, and it is both
nontoxic and inexpensive. Recently, sCO2 has been or is in the process
of being commercialized in:¥Extraction processes for natural products including the decaffeinationof coffee and tea and the isolation of nutraceuticals, flavors, andfragrances¥The production of melt processable plastics based on fluoroolefins¥The replacement of toxic solvents used in professional garment ÒdryÓcleaning and critical/precision cleaning of manufactured goods¥Coating/encapsulation technologies for pharmaceuticals, textileapparel, and manufactured parts such as in the automotive industry¥Particle formation for use in drug delivery and xerographyThese processes are enabled by breakthroughs in many areas. A fun-damental understanding is emerging of the rational design of surfactantsfor sCO2Ñmolecules that reversibly self-assemble as the density of com-pressible sCO2 is adjusted. Such surfactants enable the stabilization of
polymer colloids in sCO2 for heterogeneous polymerizations and for the
emulsification of numerous sCO2-insoluble substances including proteins,water, and catalysts to name a few. Creative engineering unit operationshave been designed that allow for continuous reactions, automatedreaction/separation schemes, and novel membrane-based separations.
And finally, creative combinations of chemistry (novel compounds suchas sCO2-soluble functional polymers) with sCO2-based applications haveenabled entirely new processes.
Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ATMOSPHERIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMISTRY157Future commercial use of CO2 will surely include such diverse applica-
tions as thin-film deposition for microelectronics using recently developedpressurized spin-coating and free meniscus coating instruments; in sepa-
rations of value-added products from fermentation broths in biotechnol-
ogy fields taking advantage of the immiscibility of CO2 with water; and as
the solvent in a broad range of synthesis including transition metal and
enzymatic catalysis. All of these applications will lead to sustainablemanufacturing methods that are not only ecologically preferable, but inthemselves are enabled by working with a unique solvent that has the
density of common liquids but the transport properties of a gas.Humans affect the environment through simple living activitiesÑthey gen-erate waste. Ordinary waste sites, in which people place trash and garbage, gener-
ate methane by microbiological action, and methane is one of the most potent
greenhouse gases. Is this a significant problem, and if so, what can be done to
prevent or solve it? Will it be possible to recycle waste that we currently bury,
perhaps ameliorating the problem of waste sites? And if so, could we recover
some of the chemicals and energy that were used to manufacture the discarded
materials? Chemists and chemical engineers will need to devise the ways in which
materials that are harvested from the earth can be recycled, not just discarded or
burned. One of the approaches is bioremediation, in which microorganisms, per-
haps genetically modified, are used to deal with the waste. This approach has
already been used to some extent in dealing with oil spills. The ultimate goal is
sustainability: using and recycling materials so that we do not simply exhaust the
substances we have inherited, thus leaving less for our descendants.The future production of chemicals will require continued awareness of pos-sible unforeseen consequences, particularly with substances that persist in the
environment. This will require investigation of how these substances interact with
the environment, and it will necessitate the invention of new substances. As noted
above, new and safe refrigerants will be needed that lack the persistence of CFCs.
The worldÕs food supply will depend on the discovery of new insecticides that donot harm unintended targets in any way and other agricultural chemicals such as
herbicides and fertilizers that are neither harmful nor overly persistent. Other
sectors of the chemical industry will rely on the invention of new and selective
catalysts that enable the manufacture of useful products, including polymers, with-
out producing unwanted waste products and without using excessive energy.The existence of waste from past activities has created problems that willdemand the attention of chemists and chemical engineers. Environmental cleanup
Ñof toxic wastes, of contaminated groundwater, of radioactive wasteÑis a daunt-Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.158BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERing challenge. Only by developing effective ways to clean up contaminated sitesÑand by developing processes by which such contamination can be prevented in
the futureÑwill it be possible to take full advantage of the technological opportu-nities that science has provided over the last century.There are serious questions about the effect of continued growth of the hu-man population. We often focus on the matter of adequate food production, but
large populations also affect the environment and our need for energy. Chemists
can furnish the tools to help deal with the political and social questions. Some
population growth occurs not because it is intentional, but because adequate meth-
ods for birth control are unavailable to people in poor countries. Thus one chal-
lenge for chemists is to develop better methods that would be safe, effective, and
inexpensive and would enable all people to pursue their own decisions regarding
population growth.Small amounts of some contaminants can be serious. When we burn coal, notonly do we produce carbon dioxide, the major product, but we can liberate small
amounts of mercury and larger amounts of sulfur dioxide. The mercury can form
toxins that harm fish as well as humans, while sulfur dioxide can produce acid
rain that destroys forests and water supplies. How can these contaminants be
most effectively removed or dealt with? And how can we generate the energy that
we need without releasing such by-products?Environmentally responsible methods to manufacture useful products and togenerate energy still need the largest contributions from chemists and chemical
engineers. As we reexamine all human activities with a fresh eye, to see their
environmental impact, the continuing challenge will be to invent new ways to
achieve what society needs. Understanding the environmental effects of what we
do is the first step, a job for basic chemical science. Inventing ways to improve
what we do while still meeting human needs is a job for applied chemistry and
chemical engineering. The opportunities for our science to improve the human
condition will continue to pose exciting and important challenges.Important educational challenges also confront the chemical sciences. Con-tinuing emphasis on science education by government, foundations, industry, and
educational institutions at all levels is essential. It is also essential to engage the
professional practitioners in the chemical sciencesÑchemists and chemical engi-neers engaged in the broad spectrum of activities that characterize these fieldsÑin education. Public outreach programs of professional societies like ACS and
AIChE are important components, but more effort is needed both at the grass-
roots community level and in the improvement of the visibility of the chemical
sciences through mass media. Greater emphasis in science and engineering edu-
cation on the human aspects of the scientific endeavor is needed. Chemists and
chemical engineers must also continue their own educations. This will improve
their ability to contribute to a broader public understanding of science and tech-
nology, and it will enhance the contributions they can make to society.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ATMOSPHERIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMISTRY159We have come a long way. But there is still a long way to go. If we are toprovide a favorable legacy for future generations, chemists and chemical engi-
neers will need to develop effective ways to clean up existing waste and find
ways to prevent the generation of waste in the future. And most importantly, they
will need to develop a system that is fully sustainableÑthat will safely providethe energy, chemicals, materials, and manufactured products needed by society
while neither irreversibly depleting the earthÕs scarce raw materials nor contami-nating the earth with unhealthy by-products.WHY ALL THIS IS IMPORTANTHuman activity, including manufacturing, can damage our environment ifwe are not thoughtful and careful. We do not want to live on a planet where the air
and water are dangerous to health, or where life is not possible for various plants
and animals. In the past society did not worry enough about such questions, but
now we have learned to take them seriously. Fortunately, it has turned out that
environmentally benign chemical manufacturing, using the principles of Respon-
sible Care, is both environmentally useful and economically acceptable. In fact,
many companies have discovered that good environmental practices are actually
cost effective. In any case, the challenge is to learn how to continue to develop a
modern civilization without causing environmental damage.The consequences of human action on the environment are not always com-pletely foreseeable, so there is also the challenge to recognize the likelihood and
magnitude of those consequences that we can foresee, and to recognize patterns
of particular vulnerability. To meet this challenge it is essential that we continue
to cultivate a strong base of fundamental knowledge in the chemical and biologi-
cal sciencesÑfor we will need those tools not only to create new technologies,but also to anticipate their consequences. We must approach the creation of sci-
ence and technology for human advancement with intelligence, knowledge, and
reason. That is, after all, what makes the human animal special.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16010Energy: Providing for the Future
1Some Challenges for Chemists and Chemical Engineers¥Develop more stable and less expensive materials and methods for
the capture of solar energy and its conversion to energy or to usefulproducts.¥Design inexpensive, high-energy-density, and quickly rechargeable
storage batteries that make electric vehicles truly practical.¥Develop practical, less expensive, more stable fuel cells with improved
membranes, catalysts, electrodes, and electrolytes.¥Develop materials, processes, and infrastructure for hydrogen genera-
tion, distribution, storage, and delivery of energy for vehicles.¥Develop photocatalytic systems with efficiencies great enough to use
for chemical processing on a significant scale.¥Learn how to concentrate and securely deal with the radioactive waste
products from nuclear energy plants.
¥Develop practical superconducting materials for energy distribution
over long distances.continues1As part of the overall project on Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st Century, aworkshop on Energy and Transportation will lead to a separate report. The reader is urged to consultthat report for further information.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENERGY: PROVIDING FOR THE FUTURE161Chemistry and chemical engineering are intimately concerned with the gen-eration and use of energy. We need energy for manufacturing, for transportation,
for heating and cooling our homes, for lighting, and for cooking. Currently about
85% of the worldÕs energy is obtained by burning fossil fuelsÑpetroleum, natu-
ral gas, and coalÑbut this must change soon. Affordable supplies will become
scarcer, and burning fossil fuels produces carbon dioxide that contributes to the
greenhouse effect by which solar energy is trapped within the atmosphere and
warms the planet. Burning fossil fuels, at least with current technology, also pro-
duces oxides of nitrogen and sulfur and other pollutants that affect plants and
animals.The problem of having enough clean energy is related to population, stan-dard of living, and the efficiency with which energy is used to provide a unit of
economic output. Humans will always need energy, and chemists and chemical
engineers will continue to play a central role in learning how to produce and
useit.
GOALSChemists and chemical engineers will need to join with experts in other dis-ciplines to invent new ways to generate and transport energy for human use and
provide for the needs and aspirations of a growing population in a sustainable
manner. New ways will also be needed to minimize the energy used for human
activities, including manufacturing.¥Develop technologies and catalysts for the cleaner use of coal as afuel and for the conversion of coal to other fuels.¥Develop methods to use biomass as a renewable fuel source.¥Develop technologies for the improved extraction of conventional fossilfuels, including unconventional sources such as oil shale, tar sands,and deep-sea methane hydrates.¥Develop practical and environmentally responsible methods of carbondioxide capture and sequestration.¥Develop lower cost, lighter weight, more durable, more resilient, andrecyclable materials for the construction of safer lighter-weight vehicles.¥Develop improved materials, processes, and practices that will allowreduced energy use per unit of gross domestic product.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.162BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERPROGRESS TO DATEGenerating EnergyOnce petroleum is removed from the earth it is refined. It is separated into itsvarious components by distillation, producing not only gasoline but also higher
boiling materials such as diesel oil, kerosene, lubricating oil, and asphalt. Then
part of it is cracked, converting some of the larger less volatile molecules tosmaller ones more useful in gasoline, and it is reformed, transforming some of themolecules into others with smoother burning properties. Some of the products are
also used as chemical raw materials, in addition to fuels.Both cracking and reforming use special catalysts and processes. The overallprocess is highly efficient, so that essentially none of the components of petro-
leum are wasted. However, most agree that the supply of inexpensive petroleum
will run out sometime, although there is disagreement as to exactly when. At
current rates of consumption, we may still be using petroleum as a major source
of energy 50 years from now. Natural gas may last 100 years, while coal reserves
could last for perhaps four centuries. If population growth and standard of living
improvement lead to increased energy consumption rates despite conservation
efforts, the currently economically recoverable reserves will be depleted in a
shorter period of time. In any event, development of more expensive fossil fuel
sourcesÑsuch as oil shale, tar sands, methane hydrates that are found at the high
pressure of the deep sea, and coal, oil, and gas that current extraction technology
leaves behindÑwill also be required.Chemists and chemical engineers have developed processes for the gasifica-tion of coal, converting it by chemical transformation into syngas, a cleaner, moreconvenient energy source. They have also devised ways to convert coal into a
liquid that can be used in place of gasoline in combustion engines. However,
whether coal is used as a solid or converted to a liquid or gas, when it is burned
the result is still carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas.Some chemical processes use energy directly to drive the transformation. Forexample, the conversion of iron ore, iron oxide, to iron metal requires chemical
energy to remove the oxygen atoms. In early times the iron ore was heated with
charcoal; in more recent times it is heated with refined coal (coke), but in both
cases the result is conversion of coal or wood into carbon monoxide, which is
toxic but can be burned to carbon dioxide to generate needed heat. There is now
interest in devising processes that do not use carbon in this way, but use electrical
energy to avoid the production of carbon oxides.There is also interest in finding feasible and harmless ways to capture andpermanently sequester carbon dioxide underground or in the oceans, thereby pre-
venting its accumulation in the atmosphere.2 Carbon dioxide concentration in the
2Carbon Management: Implications for R&D in the Chemical Sciences, National Research Coun-
cil, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 2001.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENERGY: PROVIDING FOR THE FUTURE163atmosphere has increased by about one-third since the beginning of the industrialrevolution. Unless combustion of fossil fuels is halted, or unless carbon dioxide
from fossil fuel burning is completely and permanently sequestered, carbon diox-
ide concentrations in the atmosphere will inevitably continue to rise with poten-
tially significant consequences for global warming.Alternatives to Fossil FuelsSolar EnergyAlmost all of our energy has come from the sun. This is obvious when weburn wood, in which solar energy has been in a sense stored in a tree by photosyn-
thesis. When whale oil was a significant fuel it was only a little more indirectÑ
the whales ate plant material that was also produced by sunlight, and then con-
verted that food energy into the energy in their oil. Petroleum, natural gas, and
coal are also just stored forms of solar energy, from plants and animals that lived
and were buried long ago, while hydroelectric and wind power are derived from
more contemporary solar-driven oceanic evaporation and atmospheric pressure
gradients.In photosynthesis, plants convert carbon dioxide into oxygen of the air andcarbonaceous materials of the plant; burning the plants simply sends the carbon
back to carbon dioxide again. Thus the cycleÑcarbon dioxide plus light to form
plant material and oxygen, then burning the plant material to consume the oxygen
and regenerate carbon dioxide and liberate energyÑis one way to capture the
energy of the sun. The critical need is to avoid overloading the cycle, producing
carbon dioxide faster than it can be recycled into plant materialÑa significant
concern for current levels of fossil fuel combustion.Although energy systems are currently dominated by fossil fuels, alterna-tives need to be developed. There is no obvious single solution, but a variety of
approaches could make useful contributions. One plan would be to grow special
grasses or other plants that are particularly efficient at converting sunlight into
biomass (plant matter), then convert the biomass to electricity either by burning
or by some version of a fuel cell. Genetic engineering may permit us to design
new green plants that are particularly efficient at converting sunlight into useful
fuels. Water and arable land would be needed for this scheme, but it is argued that
we do not yet need all the arable land for the production of food and fiber. An-
other alternative would be to encourage the growth of phytoplankton in the ocean
by intentional fertilization with limiting micronutrients such as iron. The process
would serve as a mechanism for sequestering some carbon dioxide from the at-
mosphere; the resulting organic material would not be harvested as fuel but some
instead would sink into the ocean depths before completing the cycle back into
carbon dioxide. As with other proposals for carbon sequestration, there is no
scientific consensus on its efficacy and safety.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.164BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERScientists, including chemists and chemical engineers, have also been pursu-ing the direct capture of solar energy, either for heating or for directly generating
electricity.3 One plan would cover significant amounts of arid desert and other
surfaces such as rooftops with photovoltaic cells that directly convert solar en-
ergy into electricity. At the present time, photovoltaics can convert as much as
30% of the incident sunlight to electricity. The technical challenge, however, is to
devise materials and manufacturing processes for photocells that are cheap, long
lasting, and efficient in the conversion of light to electricity; ways are also needed
to collect, store, and distribute the energy when and where it is needed. These
problems have not yet been completely solved. A related advance is the invention
of electrically conductive polymers, which are not metals. Alan J. Heeger, Alan
G. MacDiarmid, and Hideki Shirakawa received a Nobel Prize in 2000 for open-
ing up this important new area of science.In an alternative way to take advantage of the sunÕs energy, photocells areunder development using sunlight to drive chemical transformations, perhaps even
producing chemicals that in turn could be used to generate electricity. For ex-
ample, the photochemical generation of hydrogen, by splitting water, could be
combined with a hydrogen fuel cell in this way. This area strongly depends on
basic research in photochemistry.Nuclear EnergyAn alternative to solar energy is provided by nuclear energyÑcurrently thesource of 7% of the worldÕs total energy and 20% of U.S. electrical energy. Chem-
ists and chemical engineers have devised the processes for producing the nuclear
fuels from crude uranium ores. In many countries nuclear power plants are major
sources of electricity (as much as 75% in France), but one of the problems is
nuclear waste. A typical nuclear energy plant produces 20 metric tons of radioac-
tive waste each year. Chemists and chemical engineers are working to devise
methods to separate the radioactive material from the inert material in which it is
produced. If this is successful the volume of radioactive substances to be handled
will be much less, and some of the purified radioactive materials may be avail-
able for other uses (including medical diagnostics and treatment). As another
approach, converting the waste products to tough ceramics could make them
stable for very long periods of time. The development of safe methods for dealing
with radioactive wasteÑtogether with public acceptance of themÑpose a chal-
lenge to which chemists and chemical engineers can respond.43For further discussion of this topic, see ref. 1 and ref. 2.4See for example: Electrometallurgical Techniques for DOE Spent Fuel Treatment: Final Report,National Research Council, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 2000; Alternatives for High-Level Waste Salt Processing at the Savannah River Site, National Research Council, National Acad-emy Press, Washington, D.C., 2000.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENERGY: PROVIDING FOR THE FUTURE165Nuclear energy offers many advantages if the waste problem can be solved.The fuel is inexpensive, the energy can be generated near where it is to be used,
and there are no greenhouse or acid rain effects. Of course, a special problem
with nuclear energy is the hazard if the plant is run carelessly, and it is possible
that the operation of a nuclear power plant could be diverted to develop material
for nuclear weapons or the radioactive by-products could be used in terrorist
attacks. However, it is important to solve these problems so that the currently
negative public perception of nuclear energy undergoes a change, and permits
nuclear energy to make its full possible contribution to the world, particularly
after we have stopped burning fossil fuels.Whether nuclear power generation increases as a contributor to our energysupply or merely continues on its present course, the aging population of nuclear
chemists and engineers poses a significant concern. There has been a steady re-
duction in the number of university programs in nuclear chemistry, radiochemis-
try, and nuclear engineeringÑand in the number of graduates they produce.5Unless a new pool of expertise is developed, it will become increasingly difficult
to safely operate existing reactors, manage the radioactive waste that will be pro-
duced (along with that which already exists), and clean up radioactive contamina-
tion from earlier activities.Water and WindApproximately 10% of U.S. electrical energy is produced by hydroelectricdams.6 Although there are few economic and environmentally acceptable dam
sites remaining, in some places it is possible to use wind power, or perhaps even
the ocean tides, to generate electricity. Here the opportunity for chemists and
chemical engineers is the invention and production of modern materials that can
make such approaches possible.Energy Efficiency, Conversion, Storage, and DistributionIn recent years, much attention has been devoted to improving the efficiencywith which energy is produced and used by society in general and also in chemi-
cal manufacturing. Higher fuel efficiency in automobiles, better insulation mate-
rials and construction practices for homes, and energy efficient lighting and ap-5Nuclear Education and Training: Cause for Concern? The Nuclear Energy Agency, Organisationfor Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Paris, 2000 [http://www.nea.fr/html/ndd/re-ports/2000/nea2428-education.pdf]; Training Requirements for Chemists in Nuclear Medicine,Nuclear Industry, and Related Areas, Report of a Workshop, National Research Council, National
Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1988.6Renewable Power Pathways: A Review of The U.S. Department of EnergyÕs Renewable EnergyPrograms, National Research Council, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 2000, p. 116.
Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.166BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERpliances are familiar examples. Internal combustion-electric hybrid vehicles areanother area in which multidisciplinary science and engineering research is striv-
ing to produce extremely efficient, if perhaps not yet economically practical,
transportation systems. For electrical power generation, complex systems such as
coal-gasification combined-cycle and natural gas combined-cycle are being in-
stalled to reduce the amount of carbon dioxide produced per unit of electricity
generated. A combined-cycle generator increases efficiency by capturing heat
from the gas-turbine exhaust stream and produces additional power with a steam
turbine. As a consequence of electricity deregulation, various heat and power
cogeneration and distributed power generation schemes with micro turbines or
fuel cells are also being explored. Again, contributions by chemists and chemical
engineers will be critical, especially in the development of high-temperature and
other advanced materials.Electrochemical CellsInstead of burning fuels such as petroleum or coal or natural gas to producesteam for electrical turbines, electrochemistry can be used to generate electricity
directly from chemical reactionsÑthus avoiding the waste of energy and the pol-
lution that comes from combustion. This approach is particularly attractive for
use in portable energy sources and vehicles. A common example of such an elec-
trochemical cell is an old-style flashlight battery that cannot be recharged. In such
a battery, a metal such as zinc gives up electrons as it is oxidized to a zinc ion,
while another material such as manganese dioxide is reduced by those electrons
to form manganese ions. The battery is constructed with separators or membranes
in such a way that the electrons from the zinc must travel outside the battery
through an external circuit before returning to the battery to reduce the manga-
nese dioxide. In this way electricity is used directly. The zinc metal and the man-
ganese dioxide were both originally made in a factory by oxidation-reduction
reactions of zinc salts and from manganese salts, so the battery represents a con-
venient way to store and deliver electricity.Batteries have been developed from many pairs of chemicals capable of be-ing oxidized and reduced. Some systems are rechargeable; after the chemicals in
the battery have been exhausted, the reactions can be reversed by the application
of an external source of electricity. The lead-acid automobile battery is a familiar
example. In many applications, such as cell phones and laptop computers, the
weight of a portable electricity supply is critical. This has led to the development
of batteries based on lightweight lithium chemistry, for which challenges still
remain.Electrochemists have also learned how to make electrochemical cells inwhich one of the reactants is continuously supplied from outside the cell rather
than contained within. One example is the zinc-air cell in which particles of zincBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENERGY: PROVIDING FOR THE FUTURE167metal contained in the cell react with the oxygen of the air brought in from out-side the cell to make zinc oxide, again with the generation of electricity. One can
imagine a scenario in which such a cell could replace the petroleum-fueled en-
gine of an automobile. The vehicle would be driven by an electric motor with the
electricity supplied from a zinc-air cell. When all the zinc had been oxidized, a
Òservice stationÓ would remove the part of the cell with the zinc oxide and replace
it with a fresh supply of zinc metal. The station would return the zinc oxide to a
factory where electricity would be used to convert it back to zinc metal.Fuel CellsElectrochemical cells in which both reactants are continuously supplied from
outside the cell, particularly those in which the reactants are oxygen and an other-
wise combustible fuel, are generally referred to as fuel cells. Chemists and chemi-
cal engineers have devised a large number of fuel cells that differ in the reactants
used, as well as in the separators, electrolytes, catalysts, operating temperatures,
and other construction details. One example uses hydrogen and air. The cell reac-
tion converts hydrogen fuel and the oxygen from the air to water, just as if the
hydrogen were being burned. But this process generates electricity directly with a
greater energy efficiency than that obtained from a process such as burning the
hydrogen in a combustion turbine generator. A hydrogen fuel cell also operates in
a cycle. The reaction of hydrogen and oxygen in the fuel cell to produce water is
one part of the cycle. Elsewhere, a source of electricity could be used to electro-
lyze water and generate hydrogen and oxygen. The net result is to move energy
from an electrical generating plant to a remote fuel cell.A fuel cell avoids the production of nitrogen oxide pollutants that are gener-ally formed in combustion processes. Nitrogen oxides formed during generation
of the energy needed for production of hydrogen (or other fuel) can be removed
by scrubbing the exhaust gases in the generating plant. Hydrogen fuel cells were
first used in the space program (with pure oxygen rather than air), but they are
being developed for a variety of terrestrial applications that range from portable
electronics, to vehicles, to back-up emergency power systems.There are still many unsolved problems for hydrogen fuel cells. One is therate of reaction of the oxygen at the electrodes, which is not yet as rapid as de-
sired. Related to this is the high cost of current membrane and catalyst systems.
Another unsolved problem is how to transport and store hydrogen safely for use
with the fuel cell. For space applications, hydrogen has been stored as a cryogenic
liquid. For terrestrial applications, one approach is to store the hydrogen as a very
high-pressure gas in very strong lightweight cylinders made of advanced com-
posite materials. Chemists and engineers are working on other approaches, such
as adsorbing the hydrogen on carbon or spongy nickel, or as metal hydrides that
can be stored safely at low pressure. But this and related problems have not yetBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.168BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERbeen solved. When they are, we could have what has been called the Òhydrogeneconomy.ÓIn another version of a fuel cell, a carbon compound such as methanol (fromnatural gas or from the reaction of coal with water) reacts directly in an electro-
chemical cell with the oxygen in air to form water and carbon dioxide. This ap-
proach has fewer problems with storage of the fuel, and it has higher efficiency
than power production from combustion of the same fuelÑbut it still produces
carbon dioxide with its contribution to global warming. The performance of cur-
rent fuel-cell catalysts may be degraded by carbon monoxide, an intermediate in
the reaction with carbon-based fuels. In yet another variant, a hydrocarbon is
caused to react with water in a separate device called a reformer to produce hy-
drogen along with a mixture of carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide; after sepa-
ration, the hydrogen can be fed to a conventional hydrogen fuel cell. This ap-
proach avoids carbon monoxide degradation of the fuel cell performance, but it
still produces carbon dioxide.Although there is still much to do to make fuel cells widely practical, experi-mental automobiles have recently been exhibited that are powered by fuel cells.
Thus there is every reason to expect fuel cells to play a major role in electricity
production in the future.Storage BatteriesIn the above scenarios the energy to produce the reactants for a battery orfuel cell was supplied in a factory, but another possibility is a storage battery that
can be easily and quickly recharged either at a service station or at home. The
familiar lead/acid car battery is an example, but it is not good enough to replace
combustion of gasoline as the main power source in typical transportation ve-
hicles. The batteries are too heavy and take too long to recharge.What is needed is a high-capacity storage battery that is lightweight, inex-pensive, long lasting, and rechargeable. The batteries now used in golf carts and
in some recent electric automobiles do not meet all these criteria, but there is
active research by chemists and chemical engineers to develop such batteries.
When they exist, drivers will be able to stop at a service station and recharge their
batteries in 10 to 15 minutes, then drive on for another 300 miles before a re-
charge is needed. In another scenario, the drivers might simply trade in their
depleted batteries for others that have been recharged by a service station. When
the problems are solved, we will be able to reduce our dependence on petroleum-
fueled automotive engines.We also use small rechargeable batteries to power cell phones and portablecomputers. They are reasonably light and have the capacity to go for some hours
before requiring recharging, but improvements are still needed. As chemists and
chemical engineers develop better battery technology we can expect to be freedBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENERGY: PROVIDING FOR THE FUTURE169from the need to recharge the batteries in our computers or cell phones quite sooften.Energy DistributionPortable energy is important for vehicles and small electronic objects such ascell phones, but we also need to distribute energy from the generating plant to the
place where it is to be used. Whether it is generated using photocells in the desert,
by growing biomass in agricultural areas, or by operating nuclear power plants, it
must go from there to the manufacturing plants and homes where it is needed.
Currently this is done with power lines made of ordinary conducting materials
such as copper or aluminum, but the electrical resistance of those metals results in
considerable loss of energy. Thus there is great interest among chemical scien-
tists in developing practical superconducting materials for power distribution.Superconductors pass electricity with no resistive loss, but so far they oper-ate only at extremely low temperatures, and are impractical for power distribu-
tion. However, as the basic science of materials progresses it is hoped that even-
tually superconductors will become practical for operation closer to normal
temperatures while carrying a large current flow. This is a particularly difficult
challenge, but if it can be met, the rewards will be enormous. There is already
progressÑsuperconducting power cables that can operate when cooled by liquid
nitrogen are being made for short-distance power distribution in some urban ar-
eas.The approach described above involves the idea that there is a central powerplant from which electricity is distributed, but there is another choice. It might be
possible to distribute the power generation itself, having small generators locally
sited where the power is used. Already many large buildings have their own power
generators (as do some private homes), although these are primarily for emer-
gency use. This distributed approach offers the advantage that power is generated
locally and only when needed, so energy losses from transmission would not
cause problems. For this approach, fuel cells may have an important role if they
become practical and can operate using locally available fuels.CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE FUTUREA variety of opportunities and challenges have been described in the preced-ing section along with an indication of where current progress is inadequate. We
must eventually learn how to operate in a world that is not energized by burning
fossil fuels, and the opportunities and challenges are clear. In the meantime, while

we are still burning coal and hydrocarbons, we need to learn how to deal with the
carbon dioxide that is produced. This must be done to address the problem of
global climate change and to eliminate the environmentally harmful side prod-
ucts of combustion. We need to devise better ways to use solar energy, for ex-Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.170BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERample by creating practical cells for conversion of sunlight to electricity. Weneed to replace combustion by fuel cell technology, and we need to solve the
problem of how to transport and store hydrogen. We need to invent rechargeable
batteries that are practical for vehicles that have electric motors instead of gaso-
line engines. Advances in both basic and applied chemistry and chemical engi-
neering are needed to achieve these goals.WHY ALL THIS IS IMPORTANTThe challenges and opportunities in the field of energy are critical for a worldin which inexpensive, readily available fossil fuels will eventually be exhausted.
Unless we learn how to generate and store energy, not just burn up the fuels
formed in earlier times, we will be unable to continue to advance the human
condition or even maintain it at its current level. The problems are of central
importance, but they can be solvedÑand the chemical sciences are a necessary
part of the solution.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Some Challenges for Chemists and Chemical Engineers¥Invent strong, lightweight, and multipurpose materials for military use
in vehicles, armaments, and protective clothing.¥Devise ways to detect mines, both on land and in the sea.
¥Develop robust and reliable sensors for detection of chemical agents,
biological agents, radioactive materials, and explosives.¥Develop portable miniaturized analytical devices for personal protec-
tion or remote deployment.¥Develop effective ways for mitigation of chemical, radiological, and
biological terrorist attacks, and devise ways to decontaminate the sitesof such attacks.¥Invent effective antivirals and antibiotics for response to attacks with
biological agents.¥Invent ways to detect dangerous materials in our food or water, and to
detoxify them.17111National and Personal Security11As part of the overall project on Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st Century, aworkshop on National Security and Homeland Defense has led to a separate report: Challenges for theChemical Sciences in the 21st Century: National Security & Homeland Defense, National ResearchCouncil, National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2002. The reader is urged to consult thatreport for further information.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.172BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERScience and technology have always played a major role in national security,particularly to arm and protect our military forces. The September 11, 2001, attack
on our country has directed tremendous attention to science and technology and
ways that it might be mobilized for national security and homeland defense. The
very real threat of future acts of catastrophic terrorism has become a significant
force for shaping research directions in chemistry and chemical engineering. The
most critical needs for national security are inherently chemical capabilities, such
as the means to analyze and detect threats by providing intelligence and warning,
and the ability to respond to an attack by mitigating damage and decontaminating
a site. Achieving these goals will require concerted basic and applied research in
chemistry and chemical engineering.The personal security of our citizens also benefits directly from science andtechnology. Our police forces are equipped with light, strong bulletproof vests
made of modern synthetic materials, and fire rescue personnel wear protective
clothing made from temperature-resistant polymers. The smoke detectors and

carbon monoxide detectors in our homes are based on chemical processes that
detect dangerous substances. Personal security is enhanced in the broadest sense
by water purification and by the chemical testing procedures that assure us of
clean water and food.GOALSChemical science and technology must contribute to the enhancement of na-tional and personal security by providing fundamental understanding and new
developmentsÑto defend against military, terrorist, or criminal attack and to give
warning of accidental or natural disasters. Chemists and chemical engineers will
need to make new discoveries in basic science and apply them to the creation of
useful materials and devices. These activities will need to address the threats to
both military personnel and the civilian population. The range of threats in turn
will include military or terrorist attacks on a massive scale, other assaults against
just a few individuals, natural disasters, industrial accidents, transportation-re-
lated mishaps, and accidents in the home. The goals, to which chemical scientists
can contribute, begin with early detection and prevention of an attack or eventÑ
but if prevention is not possible, they extend to mitigation of the effects and
subsequent remediation of damage.PROGRESS TO DATEMilitaryEver since World War II spurred the development of technological advancessuch as radar, synthetic antimalarials, and synthetic rubber, our nationÕs strengthsBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NATIONAL AND PERSONAL SECURITY173in science and technology have enabled us to prevail in the battlefield and mar-ketplace. The United States currently has a military equipped with materials, com-
munication devices, and supplies that result from fundamental research in materi-
als synthesis and processing, electronics development, and biomedical advances.Nuclear weapons, frightening and dangerous as they may be, are neverthe-less a significant component of our overall national defense. A major national
effort at this point is to make sure that they are not used in a war, or allowed to
spread into less responsible hands. Chemistry played a large role in the develop-
ment of nuclear weapons, enabling the chemical and isotopic separations proce-
dures by which weapons-grade fissile materials could be isolated from highly
complex mixtures. It was a remarkable achievement, solving a very difficult prob-
lem. Now analytical chemistry is heavily involved in detecting evidence for
nuclear test explosions, to try to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons.The production of weapons-grade uranium or plutonium is both technicallychallenging and expensive. Consequently, the source of this threat has been lim-
ited primarily to industrialized countries. In contrast, both industrialized and less
developed countries might turn to the production of chemical weapons or biologi-
cal weapons using dangerous viruses or bacteria. These are forbidden by interna-
tional agreement,2 but agreements do not necessarily provide a strong defense.
Consequently, the U.S. military has put considerable effort into developing pro-
tective clothing and procedures to protect troops against chemical and biological
weapons. The protective materials, and detoxifying procedures and substances,
are the products of modern chemistry and chemical engineering.A major contribution from chemistry and chemical engineering has been thedevelopment of materials with important military applications. Chemists and
chemical engineers, working with experts from areas such as electronics, materi-
als science, and physics, have contributed to such developments as new explo-
sives and propellants, reactive armor (a complex material with an explosive layer
that can reduce the penetration of an incoming projectile), and stealth materials
that reduce the detectability of aircraft by radar.Personal SecurityOur personal civilian security is greatly enhanced by many contributionsfrom chemistry and chemical engineering, often through integrated R&D efforts
with teams of scientists from many disciplines. Law enforcement employs foren-
sic tools that rely heavily on chemical analysis, and emergency response teams
use a variety of protective clothing and equipment that rely on modern materials
chemistry and engineering. As mentioned above, individual security extends to
chemical detection methods in the home.2The Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention, http://projects.sipri.se/cbw/docs/bw-btwc-
mainpage.html; the Chemical Weapons Convention, http://www.opcw.nl/.
Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.174BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERCHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE FUTUREMilitaryNew research is needed to equip our military for new types of combat indiverse environments, and against well-equipped opponents. Increasingly, com-
bat may occur in difficult areas, such as jungles or cities. These new situations
require that soldiers be independent agents who are able to carry their weapons,
communications, and supplies. Chemical scientists need to develop lightweight
strong materials that could replace the heavy metal armor in fighting vehicles;
new ultratough composites are a likely choice. Other lightweight materials will
be needed for surveillance vehicles and to equip rapid response forces. Military
vehicles will need better batteries and fuel cells to provide portable energy sources
(Chapter 10).The materials for uniforms and equipment will need to provide protectionfrom chemical and biological agents (and perhaps detect them as well), be light-
weight, and provide climate control to maintain performance in extreme environ-
ments. New medicinesÑantivirals, antibiotics, and antifungalsÑwill be neededto maintain the health of troops deployed in such locations. In urban areas, ad-
vanced materials are needed for robots that can enter buildings before soldiers.Combat medicine poses special problems. Chemical science and technologycan aid in the rapid detection and treatment of injuries from chemical and biologi-
cal weapons and other new weapons such as lasers. We need to develop blood
substitutes with a long shelf life, and improved biocompatible materials for deal-
ing with wounds. For the Navy, there are special needs such as analytical systems
that can sample the seawater to detect and identify other vessels. We need good
ways to detect mines, both at sea and on land. Land mines present a continued
threat to civilians after hostilities have ended, and chemical techniques are needed
to detect these explosive devices.Of course our national security also depends on deterring problems beforethey arise. We need to develop new analytical chemistry techniques that are ca-
pable of detecting the production of materials in violation of the chemical and
biological weapons treaties. Related detection technologies are needed to detect
chemical agents and warn personnel accordingly. The new instrumentation will
need to be versatile, robust, and portableÑwith miniaturization using approachessuch as microfluidics as a likely goal.BiologicalBiological warfare agents present a greatly increased threat because the origi-nal viruses or bacteria can multiply and infect additional people. Considerable
concern has been expressed over the possibility that a terrorist group might obtain
a sample of the smallpox virus. Until recently, it was believed that smallpox hadBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NATIONAL AND PERSONAL SECURITY175been eradicated, with the exception of samples at two specialized facilities (in theUnited States and Russia). Other biological agents also create concern. For ex-
ample, bacillus anthracis (anthrax) has long been viewed as a potential weapon
because it can be converted to hardy spores for delivery as a dry powder. The
events of 2001 showed anthrax to be a dangerous organism, but it is not transmit-
ted from one human to another. Consequently, the death toll from anthrax-con-
taining letters was relatively low, although the societal and psychological impact
was huge.How can chemists and chemical engineers respond? To guard against bio-logical attacks, it will be necessary to develop rapid and reliable methods of de-
tection. As the events of 2001 demonstrated, it is not acceptable to culture a
sample and wait days to learn if a particular biological agent is present; it must be
identified prior to the onset of symptoms. And if the agent is found, we will need
new therapies (antivirals, antibiotics) and reliable methods for decontaminating
the site of attack. Protection of personnel will also require new vaccines and new
approaches for delivering drugs and vaccines. The development of new drugs and
vaccines will need to be carried out in full recognition that genetically modified
pathogens could be used in an enemy attack. All of this will require concerted
research by chemists and chemical engineers in collaboration with other scien-
tists; these studies necessarily will be interdisciplinary.ChemicalChemical warfare agents are extremely toxic and very fast acting. Chemicalscientists must develop better understanding of their mechanisms of action, and
use this information to devise possible remedies. At present, the logical response
to the chemical threat is prevention of exposure. Consequently, sensors and other
fast analytical techniques must be developed. Rapid and reliable methods of de-
contamination are needed in the event that a chemical agent is detected. One
concept, the Òlab on a chip,Ó involves producing complete analytical systems in a
compact electronic form; such small devices could then be deployed by airdrop
and allow remote inspection. Such miniaturized analytical systems also could be
carried by individual soldiersÑproviding them with individualized real-time de-tection capability for chemical and biological agents.The chemical industry is an important part of the U.S. economy. The manu-facturing sites, and the chemicals they make, store, and transport, represent tar-
gets for terrorist attackÑeither by causing a release of toxic chemicals or bydiversion of chemicals for other purposes. The industry needs to be sure that it
has broad up-to-date information from analyses and risk assessments of chemical
plant safety, of site security, and of chemical transport security. These analyses
need to be coupled with detection capabilities for response, verification and track-
ing. Even with good plans in place, appropriate procedures are also essential for
dealing with any attacks. Chemists and chemical engineers will be challenged toBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.176BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERdevelop new products and processes that make the chemical industry inherentlymore secure. Once again, mitigation and decontamination procedures require the
attention of chemists and engineers.Nuclear and RadiologicalCountries and groups that lack access to nuclear weapons may still haveopportunities to obtain radioactive materials such as spent nuclear fuel. A bomb
in which a conventional explosive charge causes dispersal of radioactive material
is known as a Òdirty bomb.Ó Such a device could result in psychological effects
exceeding the physical damage it caused. Once again, new techniques are needed
for detection (of both the explosive and radioactive material), and decontamina-
tion procedures would be essential if such a device were used.Research by chemists and chemical engineers will be needed for the devel-opment of new analytical techniques to detect nuclear proliferation threats and
treaty violations. This will require establishing the characteristic signatures of
both production and testing of weapons. Detection of these signatures will de-
pend on chemical spectroscopy techniques, and advances in remote sensing.Within the context of the U.S. weapons programs, the ban on testing nuclearweapons requires that other methods be developed to ensure the safety and reli-
ability of existing weapons. As part of the stockpile stewardship program, it will
be necessary to understandÑthrough laboratory experiments and via computersimulation and modelingÑthe long-term changes that could affect the perfor-mance of the weapons in the stockpile. These include chemical effects such as
corrosion as well as the results of self-irradiation on both nuclear and nonnuclear
components of the weapons. What are the aging processes and their consequences
on various componentsÑincluding high explosives, electronics, and mechani-calÑand how will this affect performance? Successful modeling will require fun-damental understanding of materials over all length scales and of their chemical
behavior under extremes of temperature and pressure.ExplosivesBombings have long been a central threat from terrorism, and several majorbombing attacks have been carried out in the United States over the last decade.
Two earlier reports from the National Research Council outlined a number of
opportunities for technical contributions by chemical scientists.3 The recommen-
3Containing the Threat of Illegal Bombings: An Integrated National Strategy for Marking, Tag-ging, Rendering Inert, and Licensing Explosives and Their Precursors, National Research Council,
National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1998; Black and Smokeless Powders: Technologies forFinding Bombs and the Bomb Makers, National Research Council, National Academy Press, Wash-ington, D.C., 1998.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NATIONAL AND PERSONAL SECURITY177dations in those reports emphasized further research to develop new and improveddetection techniques, but new voluntary and regulatory approaches to controlling
explosives and their precursor chemicals were suggested if the level of threat
increases.Root CausesOne of many underlying problems leading to conflict is the difference instandard of living between industrialized and developing countries.4 Much of this
difference could be mitigated by technology to improve energy, information in-
frastructure, medicine and public health infrastructure, food, water, shelter, cloth-
ing, and other absolute necessities for poorer nations. A task for chemistry and
chemical engineering is to improve the means to feed and shelter the world, to
extend to less-wealthy nations some fraction of the benefits we enjoy.Personal SecurityIn most respects, the terrorist threats to civilian populations are parallel to themilitary threats from chemical and biological agents, radiological materials, and
explosives. DetectionÑwith all its challenges to the chemical sciencesÑremainsthe key. But the response must be quite different if an attack takes place on a
civilian target. In such a case, we would not be looking at a specific concentration
of troops under management of senior military officersÑwhose goal must be asufficient survival level that will enable the battle to be continued and won. In a
civilian situation, reduction of casualties must take first priority.Important opportunities in the area of response are found in the early stagesof emergency response. Emergency personnel need improved materialsÑinclud-ing clothing, gas masks, and glovesÑfor personal protection. These will need tobe lightweight and long-lasting, with significant improvements over the current
generation of protection suits that are too heavy, too hot, and too cumbersome.The time scale for chemical and biological attacks is quite different. Explo-sives and chemical warfare agents such as nerve gases kill in seconds or minutes,
but even the existence of a biological attack might not be recognized for days or
weeks. The first responders in a chemical or explosive attack will be alerted by
damage and casualties, and they will need to enter the disaster zone. They will
need the appropriate protective gear along with the detection equipment to tell
them what threat or agent(s) they are facing. Moreover, they will need equipment
and chemicals that will allow them to decontaminate the site by destroying or
removing whatever harmful agents may be present. Finally, their analytical equip-4Discouraging Terrorism: Some Implications of 9/11, National Research Council, National Acad-
emy Press, Washington, D.C., 2002, p. 29.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.178BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERment will need the sensitivity and accuracy to tell them when decontaminationhas progressed adequately so that the disaster zone can again be declared safe. All
of the new equipment and instrumentation will require the work of chemists and
chemical engineers.Biological attacks will likely be recognized not from a summons to the siteof attack but by the steady accumulation of unusual data collected by medical
personnel at hospital emergency rooms. Only when the collated data are properly
interpreted will the biological attack be recognized as such. But then it will be
necessary to engage our medical and public health systems quickly. To be ready
for such an event, chemists and chemical engineers will need to carry out exten-
sive work in collaboration with others in the biomedical field. It will be necessary
to develop new and better vaccines, antivirals, and antibiotics. Better, faster ways
of making and delivering these materials will have to be developed so that they
are available in time to save lives. If a biological attack should take place, im-
proved detection methods for biological agents will be needed immediately. A
rapid, accurate, and reliable method is needed for detecting and identifying in-
fected individuals before clinical symptoms appear. Many biological warfare
agents produce conditions that are curable only if treated prior to the appearance
of clinical symptoms. Waiting for the symptoms of a lethal disease to appear will
not be an acceptable alternative. Chemists and chemical engineers will need to
develop sensors, instruments, and analytical procedures to identify pathogens rap-
idly and reliablyÑthereby enabling medical personnel to respond accordingly.Protection of our food and water supplies against terrorist attack presents amajor challenge, because the supply chain is so extensive and open. But it is a
challenge that chemists and chemical engineers should accept. Moreover, the

threats to food and water are not limited to terrorismÑa variety of natural disas-ters could wreak havoc as well.WHY ALL THIS IS IMPORTANTA compelling sense of urgency was felt throughout the United States afterthe terrorist attacks of September 2001. For chemists and chemical engineers, this
has emerged as motivation to align their research directions in ways that can help
deter terrorism and protect our country from attack. Chemistry and chemical en-
gineering have major roles to play in furthering our defensive capabilities against
both military opponents and terrorists.All of the areas of research discussed in this chapter will require interdisci-plinary collaborations among chemists, engineers, biologists, physicists, and ma-
terials scientists. This critical area of national need should be the catalyst for
breaking down disciplinary barriers and promoting interaction among scientific
and engineering communities.Among the many areas of research that can contribute to our national secu-rity, several stand out from the rest as central to the chemical sciencesÑmateri-Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NATIONAL AND PERSONAL SECURITY179als, medicines, and sensors. Advanced materials will play a crucial role in mili-tary and civilian protection, and advanced research in structured and functional
materials on a nanoscopic scale will be an important focus for chemists and chemi-
cal engineers. The very real threat of virulent biological agents will drive chem-
ists, biochemists, and chemical engineers to seek new prophylactic treatments,
therapies, and protective vaccines. The need to protect millions of civilians in our
own communities against acts of catastrophic terrorism must be a central priority
for those working with analytical sensors and detectors, and for those working
with genomics and analysis of pathogenesis. There cannot be many more impor-
tant goals.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18012How to Achieve These Goals
U.S. prosperity depends on high technology, and much of that depends onchemical expertise. For most of the past decade, the chemical industry has been
one of the few U.S. manufacturing industries to have a positive balance of trade.
Indeed, the chemical process industries, which perform chemical transformations
in the course of manufacturing their products, are as much as one-third of the
entire U.S. manufacturing sector in terms of value added. The scope of the chemi-
cal sciences endeavor is vast, contributing far beyond the traditional aspects of
chemistry and chemical engineering. As a consequence, opportunities for funda-
mental and creative scienceÑand major contributions to technology and soci-
etyÑwill remain in the hands of chemical scientists for a long time. New funda-
mental chemical insights will increase our scientific understanding, and the
practical importance of future discoveries will have enormous potential. These
new discoveriesÑmedicines to cure and prevent diseases, solutions to meet our
energy needs, paradigm shifts in electronic materials, increased industrial sustain-
ability, and protection from terrorist attacksÑall require the efforts of chemists
and chemical engineers. The health and well-being of the chemical enterprise
will directly affect the health and well-being of our nation and its economy.1If these achievements are to occur, however, it will not be by the work ofchemists and chemical engineers acting alone. Many parts of society and experts
in other areas of science and technology will be partners with chemists and chemi-1Chemical & Engineering News, 78 (41), 60-61, 2000; 
Chemical & Engineering News, 79 (46), 38-
39, 2001; Chemistry Today and Tomorrow: The Central, Useful, and Creative Science, Ronald
Breslow, American Chemical Society, Washington, D.C., 1997.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HOW TO ACHIEVE THESE GOALS181cal engineers if the chemical sciences are to achieve solutions to all these chal-lenges. The following section suggests opportunities for the path forward.CHEMISTS AND CHEMICAL ENGINEERSThe Practice of Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringFuture research for chemical scientists will increasingly involve working inmultidisciplinary teams. This means not just analytical chemists with inorganic
chemists or chemists with chemical engineers, but chemical scientists working
with physicists and electrical engineers to develop electronic materials and de-
vices, chemical scientists working with biologists and physicians in the develop-
ment of medicines and the understanding of life processes, chemical engineers
working with physicians to develop artificial materials and organs for the body,
and chemical scientists working with business leaders and resource managers to
develop sustainable and profitable processes for our world.The need for multidisciplinary teams to understand the fundamental scienceof the future as well as to address the technical challenges ahead will require a
shift in the way we train graduate students, award tenure, and fund research. It is
desirable that graduate students be involved in projects that include other disci-
plines, and their classwork should involve a broader array of subjects than just
their primary specialty. Tenure has traditionally been built upon individual re-
search. Perhaps a demonstrated ability to collaborate with those in other disci-
plines should be considered a strong asset for tenure. To truly foster collaborative
research, funding agencies need to provide awards that are larger than the present
awards that are expected to fund only one principal investigator.Besides doing multidisciplinary research, chemical scientists in the comingyears will need to team with those from other sectors. Government and academe
need to work together in order to most effectively solve the problems facing the
nation in homeland defense and security. Industry and academia need to work
together to enhance the transfer of technology to the marketplace and to keep
academe in touch with the needs of industry. Government and industry need to
team to better address the problems they face together.2The Training of Chemists and Chemical EngineersAs in any reexamination of the field, chemists and chemical engineers shouldask serious questions about current practices. Does the divisional structure in
academic chemistry departments discourage multi-investigator research, or en-
courage artificial distinctions? Are the traditional divisions still the best structure2Research Teams and Partnerships: Trends in the Chemical Sciences, National Research Council,National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1999.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.182BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERfor educating students or do these divisions encourage narrowness? Is it reason-able that the traditional education of chemists involves no contact with the field
of chemical engineering? Since most chemical engineers are no longer doing
research in areas related to the undergraduate classes that they teach, what does
that imply about the need for changing the chemical engineering curriculum?
These are all areas that will be debated and acted on in the near future.3Regarding undergraduate education, most students are exposed to chemistrycourses because they are considering careers in the health sciences. These intro-
ductory courses are an opportunity and responsibility to convey the excitement of
the chemical sciences. There are three basic types of students who might take
chemistry in an undergraduate setting: One is the chemistry major, one is a sci-
ence major, and one is a nonscience student. Only about 10 percent or fewer
students in the first-year chemistry class will go on to become professional chem-
ists or chemical engineers.4 Clearly introductory courses must include certain
material to build the foundation for advanced work, but this does not mean that
the wonder and excitement of chemistry cannot be emphasized. Basic science
curricula needs to be developed for non-science undergraduate students. Chem-
ists and chemical engineers should take the lead in collaborating with their scien-
tific colleagues to develop a comprehensive science and technology course to
enhance the understanding by non-scientists of the scientific method and the

wonder and value of science. It is necessary for scientists and engineers to define
the minimum amount of science an educated person with a bachelorÕs degree inany field should have.In both chemistry and chemical engineering, greater opportunity and encour-agement needs to be given for undergraduates to have a research experience. This
needs to be offered through the universities, through programs such as Research
Experiences for Undergraduates, through cooperative education programs and
summer opportunities at government laboratories.Chemical scientists must communicate more effectively with other sectors ofsociety, technical and nontechnical alike, beyond the chemical science commu-
nity. They must put their discoveries and their goals into words that make sense
to nonchemists. It cannot be assumed that everyone will recognize that Òaro-maticÓ might not refer to odor or that a 
ÒreactionÓ might be something other than
the response to a surprise. Chemists and chemical engineers must describe to the
media what is important in chemistry. We should recognize the journalistÕs needfor news that the public can understand and the opportunity that this represents to
transmit important contributions of the chemical sciences. Perhaps most impor-
tant, chemical scientists must communicate more effectively with their elected
representatives and other government officials. The unified field of chemistry3Graduate Education in the Chemical Sciences: Issues for the 21st Century, National ResearchCouncil, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 2000.4Chemical & Engineering News, 79 (31), 5, 2001Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HOW TO ACHIEVE THESE GOALS183and chemical engineering has an exciting story to tell, with intellectual excite-ment and practical applications that are critical to modern civilization. The story
must be told to those whose decisions affect the resources needed to solve the
challenges that are outlined in this report. These goals in the realm of communi-
cation constitute a serious challenge to chemical scientists and engineersÑto ac-cept an enhanced commitment to professional responsibility and involvement that
would provide enormous benefit to their field.Chemists and chemical engineers can broaden their perceptions and interac-tions; one goal of this joint report is to facilitate movement in this direction.
Name changes in both chemistry and chemical engineering departments have
reflected this progression in recent years. Chemical scientists can work to mutual
benefit with experts from many other areasÑelectrical engineers, pharmacolo-gists, materials scientists, and solid-state physicists to name just a few.The pool of chemists and engineers must be expanded by attracting morewomen and minorities5 to the fields that chemical scientists find so rewarding and
exciting, as we discuss further in the next section. We must examine our current
practices and beliefs to see how to fully tap the talents of all members of our
society. U.S. chemistry and chemical engineering benefit from the immigration
of individuals with the needed skills who have been trained both here and in other
countries. However, the challenges are so great, and the demand for talent so
large, that it is important to attract more of the brightest American students into
these fields. Despite the needs of our technological society for chemists and
chemical engineers (see below), graduate school enrollments in the United States
have declined a bit over the last decade (Table 12-1).Chemists and chemical engineers will need to be active ambassadors fortheir fields by recruiting new students and describing the satisfaction and rewards
of a life on the frontierÑin this case the molecular frontier. This will requirevisits to schools to talk about the careers and opportunities. It is critical that such5For background information on these chemical workforce issues see: Women in the ChemicalWorkforce, National Research Council, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 2000; 
Minori-ties in the Chemical Workforce: Diversity Models that Work, National Research Council, The Na-
tional Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2003.TABLE 12-1Full-time Graduate Students in Chemistry and Chemical
Engineering.aField19932000
Chemistry17,20415,707
Chemical Engineering6,0795,865
aData from Federal Investment in R&D, E. Eiseman, K. Koizumi, and D. Fossum, RAND Scienceand Technology Policy Institute, Arlington, VA, 2002 (Table 17), p. 99.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.184BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERvisits include students in the entire range from kindergarten through high school.Students need to learn early that there are exciting things to do in creative sci-
ence, including in particular the chemical sciences, and that they could play a role
in inventing solutions to the challenges that humanity faces. Many students have
never met a chemist or chemical engineer, and it may be essential to see that they
do.Finally, chemists and chemical engineers must accept the important chal-lenges that they alone can meet. Some of the challenges are described in this
report, but the chemical sciences community must continuously expand the listÑand always stand ready to accept new ideas and meet new goals. Some of the
most exciting advances in science have come from basic scientific exploration, so
we must continue to encourage those who simply want to expand the frontiers of
fundamental understanding.EDUCATORSAs mentioned above, it is important to convey the excitement of the chemi-cal sciences to students. Science is about discovery, but chemistry and chemical
engineering also extend to invention. Showing students how data can be used to
make a scientific deduction gives more of a flavor of the science than does simply
learning a set of facts about the science. For example, students can gain real
contact with primary scientific data and its interpretation if they are asked to look
at an NMR spectrum of a compound and deduce its structure. Asking them to
invent an experiment that will answer a chemical question can also be stimulat-
ing. Asking them how they could synthesize a given compound makes them use
their knowledge in a creative way. Some of this can be done in standard lecture
and laboratory courses, but it is also important to encourage creativity by promot-
ing science fairs in which high school students can compete by entering their own
research projects.Educators should take advantage of the availability of professional chemistsand chemical engineers, who can speak to the students either in class or in some
special forum. Contact with practicing scientists can help students put a human
face on a possible future career. It is especially important that women and minor-
ity scientists also play a role in such outreach to students, to show that indeed the
profession welcomes all with the talent to contribute. Some of this effort should
be directed toward the early parts of K-12 education. The future of the chemical
sciences may depend on the ability of educators to convince young students that
ÒitÕs cool to be excited by chemistry.ÓTHE MEDIAChemistry is to a large extent invisible in newspapers, news magazines, tele-vision, and radio. If the message from chemists and chemical engineers is soBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HOW TO ACHIEVE THESE GOALS185exciting, why is it not a focus of media attention? Part of the reason is the ten-dency of chemical scientists to present their work in such a complex and technical
way that it does not translate readily to a general format. Some argue that chemi-
cal results are too complicated to present to the publicÑbut that does not seem toinhibit those working in physics, biology, and astronomy, where news coverage
of new discoveries seems much more common. Consequently, the challenge is
clear. Chemists and chemical engineers must become more proficient in their
communication skillsÑparticularly in their interactions with the journalists whowill write the final stories. The goals and achievements of chemistry and chemi-
cal engineeringÑin basic science and in meeting human needsÑprovide amplejustification for efforts to work with the media.As described in this report, the role of chemistry and chemical engineering inmodern society is both important and central. It is therefore essential that this
message be made clear to the public, to decision makers, and to opinion leaders.
As an example, when a new medicine or electronics breakthrough is announced,
credit is usually given to those who carried out the last stepsÑthe physicians whotested the drug that was invented by chemists, or the electronics experts who
assembled the chemical science and engineering advances into the final version
of a chip. As a result, the chemical scientists with responsibility for the original
invention may not receive any credit whatsoever, and the public may not recog-
nize that chemists and chemical engineers made essential contributions. Chemi-
cal scientists and their professional organizations will need to work with media
experts if such patterns are to be changed.THE GENERAL PUBLICIf chemical scientists are to be successful in their efforts to improve the edu-cational experience of their students, they will need help from the public. One
step is to assure that there is a general understanding of the ways that chemistry is
central to understanding life itself, and to providing the medicines, products,
modern materials, and processes that support human needs. But the necessary
second step is to enlist the publicÕs supportÑto have them approve of studentsÕdesires to enter the chemical sciences and contribute to its goals and challenges.
If parents encourage their sons and daughters to take up such careers, and if the
public encourages financial support for research and education in chemistry and
chemical engineering, then progress can be expected.In a recent poll of the general public conducted by the American ChemicalSociety,6 chemistry as a career option was ranked third in a list of eight scientific
professions, and chemists scored high as visionary, innovative, and results-ori-
ented. Also, 59% said that chemicals made their lives better. These results sug-6Chemical & Engineering News, 78, 41, 60-61, 2000.
Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.186BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERgest that the public would indeed endorse the goals suggested here for enhancingthe infrastructure for education and research in the chemical sciences.GOVERNMENT AND PRIVATE FOUNDATIONSResearch and education go hand in hand in chemistry and chemical engineer-ing. While it is possible to teach students about the chemistry of the past by
lectures alone, participation in research gives them a chance to learn what science
really is, and to engage their creative and critical imaginations. In this way, the
support of research directly contributes to the education of chemical scientists. It
can also provide those students who want to go into other fieldsÑlaw, business,governmentÑwith a real understanding of the basic and applied work in chemis-try and chemical engineering.The unemployment rate for chemists has remained low during the past fewyears,7 reaching only the normal rate (2%) for people who are moving from one
job to another. Of course, this low unemployment rate can and does rise to some
extent in periods when the economy is weak, but chemistry and chemical engi-
neering have a huge advantage over many other disciplines. There is a very large
industry that uses chemistry to produce its products, so the opportunities for those
who are chemically trained include industrial jobsÑnot just the academic jobsthat some other disciplines have as their only option. Indeed, about two-thirds of
the members of the American Chemical Society work in chemically related in-
dustries. The Bureau of Labor Statistics reports that in 2000, employment in the
United States included more than 92,000 chemists and materials scientists, 73,000
chemical technicians, and 33,000 chemical engineers.8 Table 12-2 shows that
7Chemical & Engineering News, 79, 46, 38-39, 2001.
8U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics: Occupational Outlook Handbook, 2002-03Edition, http://www.bls.gov/oco/home.htm.TABLE 12-2Doctoral Scientists and Engineers Employed in the United States
in 1999.aFieldSubfieldNumber Employed
Physical Sciences110,300
Chemistry55,810
Engineering95,890
Chemical Engineering12,520
Total68,330206,190
aData from Federal Investment in R&D, E. Eiseman, K. Koizumi, and D. Fossum, RAND Scienceand Technology Policy Institute, Arlington, VA, 2002 (Table 23), p. 107.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HOW TO ACHIEVE THESE GOALS187chemists comprised just over fifty percent of the doctoral level physical scientistsin the U.S. workforce in 1999, while chemists and chemical engineers together
made up approximately one-third of all the doctoral-level physical scientists and
engineers.The basic research in our fields is now done largely in universities. It canhave incredibly important practical results, but those results cannot normally be
predicted in advance. Who would have thought that the basic study of induced
energy emission from excited states of atoms and molecules that led to the laser
would wind up giving us a better way to record music, or read supermarket prices?
Would a music company have funded that research? Who would have thought
that our increased understanding of the chemistry of life would have led to the
creation of biotechnology as an entirely new industry? The industry that ben-
efited from the basic research could not have funded it, since it did not yet exist.U.S. companies swiftly use the new leads from basic research in U.S. univer-sities, in part because they have good contacts, and in part because they hire
students or even faculty who have played a role in creating that basic knowledge.
However, support of the research itself is mainly the function of the federal gov-
ernment, and to a lesser extent of private foundations. A recent study carried out
by the Council for Chemical Research finds that on average, every $1 invested in
chemical R&D today produces $2 in corporate operating income over six yearsÑan average annual return of 17% after taxes.9 The study also reports a strong
linkage of industrial patents to publicly funded academic research.Federal agencies have been the major supporters of research and education inthe chemical sciences. For example, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) pro-
vide very important support to health-related science in universities, including
health-related chemistry and chemical engineering. This support has been directed
to basic science as well as to more applied studies. Thus NIH has supported the
basic work to understand the chemistry of proteins and of nucleic acids, funda-
mental building blocks of living systems. To assure continued support by the
NIH, it is important that the health relevance of chemistry and chemical engineer-
ing be clearly and explicitly recognized. After all, chemistry underlies the under-
standing of the basic processes of life, as was described in Chapter 7. Also, the
pharmaceutical industry, agriculture, and sanitation are the three principal con-
tributors to human health, and all three are heavily based on chemistry. Chemists
and chemical engineers constitute a large fraction of the scientists doing research
in pharmaceutical companies, inventing the medicines and the processes for
manufacturing them. Their education and training in U.S. universities is possible
only with adequate support by the NIH, support with both research grants and
training grants.9Measuring Up: Research & Development Counts in the Chemical Industry, Council for ChemicalResearch, Washington, D.C., 2000; http://www.ccrhq.org/news/studyindex.html.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.188BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERThe National Science Foundation (NSF) provides support to all the basicsciences and engineering in universities. NSF support of chemistry is very impor-
tant, both the support directed to fundamental research initiated by individual
investigators and the research done in research centers such as those aimed at
developing new materials or at understanding and improving the environment.
The support is critical, but more is needed for the chemistry division of NSF to
achieve its objectives.10 Considering the importance of basic and applied chemis-
try and chemical engineering to the economic future of the United States, it seems
that an increase in the ability of NSF to support fundamental and applied chemi-
cal science is warranted.The Department of Energy (DOE), the Department of Defense (DOD), theEnvironmental Protection Agency (EPA), all help support fundamental and ap-
plied chemistry and chemical engineering. Their support is fully justified, as pre-
vious sections of this report make clear. The Department of Agriculture (DOA)
also has a program of external support for chemistry and chemical engineering in
universities, in line with the role that chemistry and chemical engineering play in
agriculture.Table 12-3 summarizes federal funding for research in the physical sciencesand engineering over the last several decades. The numbers are reported in con-
stant dollars to facilitate comparisons across different years while minimizing the
effects of inflation. While there has been an overall steady increase in federal
support since 1970, the support for chemistry has lagged considerably behind the
overall trend, and the support for chemical engineering has actually decreased.
Strong support for chemistry and chemical engineering in the future will be es-
sential for scientific and technical progressÑboth to facilitate new discoveriesand to provide the technical workforce that will be needed to sustain the U.S.
economy.TABLE 12-3Federal Funding for Research in Science and Engineering
(Millions of 2000 Dollars)aField1970197519801985199019952000
Total, all S&E18,10418,60622,14123,46726,86031,00538,471
Physical sciences, total3,4963,0323,8194,4314,7314,6654,788

Chemistry8417908689469469421,226
Engineering, total5,6874,7495,4035,2625,2506,2246,346
Chemical Engineering404232184370301268197
aData from Federal Investment in R&D, E. Eiseman, K. Koizumi, and D. Fossum, RAND Scienceand Technology Policy Institute, Arlington, VA, 2002 (Table 13), p. 89.10Chemical & Engineering News, 80, 42, 37-39, 2002.
Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HOW TO ACHIEVE THESE GOALS189There is another way that federal government officials could provide supportfor the conclusions of this reportÑendorse the importance of the challenges andgoals that it describes. The federal government has a clear stake in supporting
enhanced education and training of chemical scientists and in encouraging re-
cruitment of more U.S. students to these fields. The major role of the chemical
industry emphasizes how the economic future of the United States depends on
continued scientific excellence in chemistry and chemical engineering.Many private foundations have agendas that are somewhat narrowly fo-cusedÑfor example, on a disease such as cancer. They often recognize the rolethat chemical scientists play in understanding the basic biology of the disease and
in inventing medicines for treatment or procedures for delivering such medicines.
Although their funding cannot replace federal support, the special programs they
create are valuable as support for research and education. Other foundations pro-
vide extremely valuable support for young chemical scientists at the early stages
of their careersÑwhen their records of accomplishment may not yet be adequateto let them compete successfully for federal funding.INDUSTRYThe chemical industry is involved with all parts of the chemical sciences.U.S. companies hire university graduates, carry out R&D programs, engage in
joint efforts with universities and national laboratories, and generate ideas that
stimulate further research in the academic arena. Consequently, it is of central
importance to the chemical industry that the health of chemistry and chemical
engineering be maintained. There are many ways that U.S. companies can help.
One is to continue the demonstrated progress in environmentally benign manu-
facturing as exemplified by the Responsible Care program. Past practices that led
to well-publicized problems are now recognized, changes have been implemented,
and improvements continue to be made. The more chemistry-based industry can
improve its public reputation, the better the consequences for chemists and chemi-
cal engineers.When a new medicine is announced, it is important that companies publiclyrecognize the chemistry that went into its creation and the chemical engineering
that went into the manufacturing process. When other valuable new products are
introduced, companies should not be afraid to describe the contribution of chemi-
cal scientists. The negative public reactions from past problems with chemical
manufacturing have led some companies to nearly hide the fact that they do chem-
istry. But if chemical companies can discuss behavior of which they are proud,
they may be willing to assert that they indeed do chemistry, and do it well. Pre-
tending otherwise demeans the entire profession and the incredible contributions
that it makes.There is a serious problem with public perception that the chemical industryneeds to correct. In a survey of 1,012 U.S. adults commissioned by the AmericanBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.190BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERChemical Society (see above) only 43% had a favorable opinion of the chemicalindustry. It was ranked lowest among a list of 10 industries, and only 1 in 10
respondents felt very well informed about the role of chemicals in improving
human health. The situation is not appreciably better elsewhere. In Canada only
40% of adults in a 1999 survey had a favorable view of the chemical industry, and
only 18% felt that the industry was excellent or good at being honest. A survey of
9,000 Western European citizens by the European Chemical Industry Council
showed that only 45% had a favorable view of the chemical industry. There is
still a lot of work to do to change these opinions and perceptions.Chemistry departments and chemical engineering departments in universi-ties need more help from industry. After all, companies need both the research
advances and the trained people that universities produce. At one time these com-
panies provided significant support, for example in the form of fellowships for
Ph.D. students. As research support shifted to the federal government in the sec-
ond half of the 20th century, many of these industrial programs disappeared.
They are now needed again, especially in the form of graduate fellowships, as
some of the federal fellowship programs have been terminated.As industrial R&D moves forward in an increasingly interdisciplinary fash-ion, it will be important for the chemical industry to recognize this trend in its
hiring procedures. If interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary work is to be encour-
aged, industry will need to seek and hire people who have worked at the intersec-
tions of chemistry and chemical engineering with biology, physics, and other
sciences.GRAND CHALLENGESThis report has summarized the contributions that chemical science and en-gineering have already made to human welfare and to economic strength. It has
focused to some extent on these contributions to the United States, but in truth all
of humanity benefits from advances in medicines, in a better environment, in
energy production and distribution, in materials production, information science,
and national security. On the one hand, this report draws attention to the rich
intellectual challenge of understanding our world through the chemical sciences.
On the other hand, it points out the very close connection between basic research
and useful applications in the chemical sciences. Basic science creates opportuni-
ties for exciting practical advances, but work to solve practical problems often
stimulates enquiry into new areas of basic science. Thus, the connections among
all aspects of chemistry and chemical engineering are strong and important.There is still much to be done. In every chapter of this report some of theremaining challenges for the field are described, together with the importance of
meeting those challenges. In addition, some especially exciting challenges start
each chapter. Chemistry and chemical engineering are very diverse fields, which
do not focus on only one or two central problems. This is in part their strength,Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HOW TO ACHIEVE THESE GOALS191since it means that they can make contributions to wide areas of human under-standing and human welfare. At the same time, it is a problem because great
advances can be made in one area without necessarily revolutionizing the entire
field. Some of the challenges are specific, but others are quite broad, with poten-
tial impact well beyond the chemical sciences. These are listed here as some
overriding themes, described as grand challengesÑthey are broad opportunitiesthat if met could have huge benefits to society. While they are goals not yet
reached, we propose that they can be realistically addressed with the new and
developing strengths in theories and procedures in the chemical sciences. As we
continue to push forward the frontiers of science, we will increasingly do so by
working with our colleagues in other disciplines. In this way, the chemical sci-
ences will be able to contribute in remarkable ways to an improved future for our
country, for humanity, and for our planet.We caution the reader that these grand challenges should not be taken as theonly areas for worthwhile research. The history of science shows again and again
that large revolutions in thought can arise from discoveries that were made by
individuals or teams who were not constrained by someone elseÕs list. Chemistryand chemical engineering enter the 21st century with exciting science ahead and
major contributions to make. The committee hopes this report will stimulate
young people to join them in meeting these challenges, and that society will sup-
port continued efforts of chemists and chemical engineers in their work on and
beyond the molecular frontier.Some Grand Challenges for Chemists and Chemical Engineers¥Learn how to synthesize and manufacture any new substance
that can have scientific or practical interest, using compact
synthetic schemes and processes with high selectivity for thedesired product, and with low energy consumption and benign
environmental effects in the process. This goal will require continu-ing progress in the development of new methods for synthesis and
manufacturing. Human welfare will continue to benefit from new sub-
stances, including medicines and specialized materials.¥Develop new materials and measurement devices that will pro-
tect citizens against terrorism, accident, crime, and disease, in
part by detecting and identifying dangerous substances andorganisms using methods with high sensitivity and selectivity.
Rapid and reliable detection of dangerous disease organisms, highly
toxic chemicals, and concealed explosives (including those in landcontinuesBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.192BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERmines), is the first important step in responding to threats. The nextimportant step for chemists and chemical engineers will be to devisemethods to deal with such threats, including those involved in terrorist
or military attacks.¥Understand and control how molecules reactÑover all time scales
and the full range of molecular size. This fundamental understand-
ing will let us design new reactions and manufacturing processes and
will provide fundamental insights into the science of chemistry. Major
advances that will contribute to this goal over the next decades in-clude: the predictive computational modeling of molecular motions
using large-scale parallel processing arrays; the ability to investigate
and manipulate individual molecules, not just collections of molecules;and the generation of ultrafast electron pulses and optical pulses down
to x-ray wavelengths, to observe molecular structures during chemi-
cal reactions. This is but one area in which increased understandingwill lead to a greater ability to improve the practical applications of thechemical sciences.¥Learn how to design and produce new substances, materials,
and molecular devices with properties that can be predicted,tailored, and tuned before production. This ability would greatly
streamline the search for new useful substances, avoiding consider-
able trial and error. Recent and projected advances in chemical theoryand computation should make this possible.¥Understand the chemistry of living systems in detail. Understandhow various different proteins and nucleic acids and small biological

molecules assemble into chemically defined functional complexes,and indeed understand all the complex chemical interactions amongthe various components of living cells. Explaining the processes of life
in chemical terms is one of the great challenges continuing into thefuture, and the chemistry behind thought and memory is an especiallyexciting challenge. This is an area in which great progress has been
made, as biology increasingly becomes a chemical science (andchemistry increasingly becomes a life science).¥Develop medicines and therapies that can cure currentlyuntreatable diseases. In spite of the great progress that has been
made in the invention of new medicines by chemists, and new mate-
rials and delivery vehicles by engineers, the challenges in these direc-
tions are vast. New medicines to deal with cancer, viral diseases, andmany other maladies will enormously improve human welfare.¥Develop self-assembly as a useful approach to the synthesis and
manufacturing of complex systems and materials. Mixtures of
Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HOW TO ACHIEVE THESE GOALS193properly designed chemical components can organize themselves intocomplex assemblies with structures from the nanoscale to themacroscale, in a fashion similar to biological assembly. Taking this

methodology from the laboratory experimentation to the practicalmanufacturing arena could revolutionize chemical processing.¥Understand the complex chemistry of the earth, including land,sea, atmosphere, and biosphere, so we can maintain its livabil-
ity. This is a fundamental challenge to the natural science of our field,
and it is key to helping design policies that will prevent environmentaldegradation. In addition, chemical scientists will use this understand-ing to create new methods to deal with pollution and other threats to

our earth.¥Develop unlimited and inexpensive energy (with new ways ofenergy generation, storage, and transportation) to pave the way
to a truly sustainable future. Our current ways of generating and
using energy consume limited resources and produce environmentalproblems. There are very exciting prospects for fuel cells to permit an
economy based on hydrogen (generated in various ways) rather thanfossil fuels, ways to harness the energy of sunlight for our use, andsuperconductors that will permit efficient energy distribution.¥Design and develop self-optimizing chemical systems. Building
on the approach that allows optimization of biological systems through
evolution, this would let a system produce the optimal new substance,
and produce it as a single product rather than as a mixture from which
the desired component must be isolated and identified. Self-optimizing
systems would allow visionary chemical scientists to use this approachto make new medicines, catalysts, and other important chemical prod-
uctsÑin part by combining new approaches to informatics with rapid
experimental screening methods.¥Revolutionize the design of chemical processes to make themsafe, compact, flexible, energy efficient, environmentally benign,
and conducive to the rapid commercialization of new products.
This points to the major goal of modern chemical engineering, in whichmany new factors are important for an optimal manufacturing pro-

cess. Great progress has been made in developing Green Chemistry,but more is needed as we continue to meet human needs with the
production of important chemical products using processes that are
completely harmless to the earth and its inhabitants.¥Communicate effectively to the general public the contributionsthat chemistry and chemical engineering make to society. Chem-
continuesBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.194BEYOND THE MOLECULAR FRONTIERists and chemical engineers need to learn how to communicate effec-
tively to the general public Ñ both through the media and directly 
Ñ to
explain what chemists and chemical engineers do and to convey the
goals and achievements of the chemical sciences in pursuit of a betterworld.¥Attract the best and the brightest young students into the chemi-cal sciences, to help meet these challenges. They can contributeto critical human needs while following exciting careers, working on
and beyond the molecular frontier.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AppendixesBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.197ABiographical Sketches of SteeringCommittee MembersRonald Breslow (Co-Chair) is University Professor of Chemistry, ColumbiaUniversity, and a founder of a new pharmaceutical company. He received his
B.A. (1952), M.A. (1954), and Ph.D. (1955) from Harvard University. His re-
search area is organic chemistry with specialization in biochemical model sys-
tems, biomimetic synthetic methods, reaction mechanisms, and aromaticity and
antiaromaticity. He served as president of the American Chemical Society in 1996

and has authored a book for the general public, Chemistry Today and Tomorrow:The Central, Useful, and Creative Science. He is a member of the National Acad-emy of Sciences, the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and the American
Philosophical Society. He received the U.S. National Medal of Science in 1991.Matthew V. Tirrell (Co-Chair) is Dean of the College of Engineering at theUniversity of California at Santa Barbara. He was previously Professor and Head
of the Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science at the Univer-
sity of Minnesota, where he served as Director of its Biomedical Engineering
Institute. He received a B.S. from Northwestern University and a Ph.D. from
University of Massachusetts. His interests are in transport and interfacial proper-
ties of polymers, with particular emphasis on molecular-scale mechanical mea-
surements, bioadhesion, and new materials development. He is a member of the
National Academy of Engineering.Jacqueline K. Barton is Arthur and Marian Hanisch Memorial Professor of
Chemistry at the California Institute of Technology. She received her A.B. from
Barnard College in 1974 and her Ph.D. from Columbia University in 1979. She
did subsequent postdoctoral work at both AT&T Bell Laboratories and Yale Uni-Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.198APPENDIX Aversity. Her research areas are biophysical chemistry and inorganic chemistry.She has focused on studies of recognition and reaction of nucleic acids by transi-
tion metal complexes, and particularly DNA-mediated charge transport chemis-
try. She is a member of the Board of Directors of the Dow Chemical Company
and a member of the National Academy of Sciences.Mark A. Barteau is Robert L. Pigford Professor and Chair of the Department of
Chemical Engineering at the University of Delaware. He received his B.S. degree
from Washington University in 1976 and his M.S. (1977) and Ph.D. (1981) from
Stanford University. His research area is chemical engineering with specialized
interests in application of surface techniques to reactions on nonmetals, hydrocar-
bon and oxygenate chemistry on metals and metal oxides, scanning probe mi-
croscopies, and catalysis by metal oxides.Carolyn R. Bertozzi is Professor of Chemistry and Molecular and Cell Biology
at the University of California, Berkeley, a Junior Investigator of the Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, and Faculty Associate of the Materials Sciences and
Physical Biosciences divisions of the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.
She received her A.B. from Harvard University in 1988 and her Ph.D. from the
University of California, Berkeley, in 1993. Her research focuses on organic
chemistry and the combination of molecular and cell biology to investigate the
biological functions of glycoconjugates and to develop new therapeutic strategies.Robert A. Brown is Warren K. Lewis Professor of Chemical Engineering and
Provost at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He received his B.S. (1973)
and M.S. (1975) from the University of Texas, Austin, and his Ph.D. from the
University of Minnesota in 1979. His research area is chemical engineering with
specialization in fluid mechanics and transport phenomena, crystal growth from
the melt, microdefect formation in semiconductors and viscoelastic fluids, bifur-
cation theory applied to transitions in flow problems, and finite element methods
for nonlinear transport problems. He is a member of the National Academy of
Engineering, the National Academy of Sciences, and the American Academy of
Arts and Sciences.Alice P. Gast (BCST liaison) is Vice President for Research and AssociateProvost at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where she coordinates
policy regarding research and graduate education and oversees the InstituteÕs
large interschool laboratories. In addition to her administrative positions, she is
the Robert T. Haslam Professor of Chemical Engineering. Prior to her appoint-
ment at MIT, Dr. Gast was Associate Chair and Professor of the Department of
Chemical Engineering at Stanford University, having joined the Stanford faculty
in 1985. She received her B.Sc. in chemical engineering (1980) from the Univer-Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A199sity of Southern California and her M.A. (1981) and Ph.D. (1984) fromPrinceton. Her research expertise is in the area of complex fluids and colloids,
with a focus on frontiers of the chemical physics of colloidal and polymer solu-
tions, polymer adsorption, and, most recently, proteins, using experimental scat-
tering methods and statistical mechanics. She is a member of the National Acad-
emy of Engineering.Ignacio E. Grossmann is Rudolph H. and Florence Dean Professor and head ofthe chemical engineering department at Carnegie Mellon University. He received
his B.Sc. (1974) from Universidad Iberoamericana, Mexico, and his M.Sc. (1975)

and Ph.D. (1977) degrees from Imperial College, London. He joined Carnegie
Mellon in 1979 and has focused his research on the synthesis of integrated flow
sheets, batch processes, and mixed-integer optimization. The goals of his work
are to develop novel mathematical programming models and techniques in pro-
cess systems engineering. He was elected to the Mexican Academy of Engineer-
ing in 1999, and he is a member of the National Academy of Engineering.James M. Meyer retired in 2001 as Vice President of DuPont Central Research
and Development. He joined DuPont in 1969 and held a variety of research and
management positions related to elastomers and polymers. He moved to Central
Research and Development in 1992 as director of materials science and engineer-
ing, and he assumed his current position in 1996. Dr. Meyer received his B.S.
degree in chemistry from Indiana University and his Ph.D. degree in inorganic
chemistry from Northwestern University.Royce W. Murray is Kenan Professor of Chemistry at the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill. He received his B.S. from Birmingham Southern College
in 1957 and his Ph.D. from Northwestern University in 1960. His research areas
are analytical chemistry and materials science with specialized interests in elec-
trochemical techniques and reactions, chemically derivatized surfaces in electro-
chemistry and analytical chemistry, electrocatalysis, polymer films and mem-
branes, solid state electrochemistry and transport phenomena, and molecular

electronics. He is a member of the National Academy of Sciences.Paul J. Reider is Vice President of Chemistry Research at Amgen, Inc. Before
moving to Amgen in 2002, he was Vice President of Process Research at Merck
Research Laboratories. His research has focused on synthetic organic and natural
product chemistry for the development of pharmaceuticals, and he has worked
extensively on drugs for AIDS, asthma, arthritis, and bacterial infections. He
received his A.B. from Washington Square College in 1972 and his Ph.D. from
the University of Vermont in organic chemistry in 1978. As a National Research
Awardee (NIH) he did his postdoctoral work at Colorado State University.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.200APPENDIX AWilliam R. Roush is Warner Lambert/Parke Davis Professor of Chemistry at the
University of Michigan. He received his B.S. from the University of California,
Los Angeles, in 1974 and his Ph.D. from Harvard University in 1977. His re-
search area is organic chemistry, with specialized interests in organic synthesis
and natural products chemistry, stereochemistry of organic reactions, develop-
ment of new methods and regents, asymmetric synthesis, and oligosaccharide
synthesis.Michael L. Shuler is Director and Professor of the School of Chemical Engi-
neering and Director of Bioengineering at Cornell University. He received his
B.S. from the University of Notre Dame in 1969 and his Ph.D. from the Univer-
sity of Minnesota in 1973. His research area is chemical engineering with special-
ized interests in mathematical models of cellular growth, plant cell suspension
cultures, utilization of genetically modified cells, insect cell cultures, novel

bioreactors, environmental biotechnology, and pharmacokinetic models and cell
culture analog systems. He is a member of the National Academy of Engineering.Jeffrey J. Siirola is a Research Fellow in the Chemical Process Research Labo-
ratory at Eastman Chemical Company in Kingsport, TN. He received his B.S.
degree in chemical engineering from the University of Utah in 1967 and his Ph.D.
in chemical engineering from the University of Wisconsin-Madison in 1970. His
research centers on chemical processing, including chemical process synthesis,
computer-aided conceptual process engineering, engineering design theory and
methodology, chemical technology, assessment, resource conservation and re-
covery, artificial intelligence, nonnumeric (symbolic) computer programming,
and chemical engineering education. He is a member of the National Academy of
Engineering.George M. Whitesides is Mallinckrodt Professor of Chemistry at Harvard Uni-
versity. He received his A.B. from Harvard College in 1960 and his Ph.D. from
the California Institute of Technology in 1964. His research areas are Materials
Science and Organic Chemistry, with specific focus in surface chemistry, materi-
als science, self-assembly, capillary electrophoresis, organic solid state, molecu-
lar virology, directed ligand discovery, and protein chemistry. He is a member of
the National Academy of Sciences, and he received the U.S. National Medal of
Science in 1998.Peter G. Wolynes is Professor of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the Universityof California, San Diego. He was previously Professor of Chemistry at the Uni-
versity of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. He received his A.B. from Indiana Uni-
versity in 1971 and his Ph.D. from Harvard University in 1976. His research area
is physical chemistry with specialized interests in chemical physics of condensed
matter, quantum dynamics and reaction kinetics in liquids, dynamics of complexBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A201fluids, phase transitions and the glassy state, and biophysical applications of sta-tistical mechanics, especially protein folding. He is a member of the National
Academy of Sciences.Richard N. Zare is Marguerite Blake Wilbur Professor in Natural Science in the
Department of Chemistry at Stanford University. He received his B.A. in 1961
and his Ph.D. in 1964 from Harvard University. His research areas are physical
and analytical chemistry with specialized interests in application of lasers to
chemical problems, molecular structure, molecular reaction dynamics, and chemi-
cal analysis. Zare has been a member of various NRC committees and served as
co-chair of the Commission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and Applica-
tions and chair of the National Science Board. He is a member of the National
Academy of Sciences, and he received the U.S. National Medal of Science in
1983.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.202BStatement of Task
The overview report will identify recent advances and current challenges infundamental understanding of the basic science, and it will explore the impact
beyond the chemical sciences that these advances have had in the past. It will also
explore the possibilities for such impact in the future, recognizing that such de-
velopments are frequently serendipitous. Issues to be addressed include:¥Discovery: Identify major discoveries or advances in the chemical sci-
ences during the last several decades, and evaluate their impactÑincluding the
length of time for impact beyond basic chemical sciences to be realized.¥Interfaces: Identify the major discoveries and challenges at the interfaces
between chemistry/chemical engineering and such areas as biology, environmen-
tal science, materials science, medicine, and physics.¥Challenges: Identify the grand challenges that exist in the chemical sci-
ences today. Explore how advances at the interfaces create new challenges in the
core disciplines.¥Infrastructure: Identify infrastructure that will be required to allow the
potential of future advances in the chemical sciences to be realized. Identify op-
portunities that exist to integrate research and teaching, broaden the participation
of underrepresented groups, improve the infrastructure for research and educa-
tion, and demonstrate the value of these activities to society.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.203CContributorsWhen the Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st Century projectwas initiated in 2000, the Committee solicited input from the chemical sciences
community. A specific request for input was sent via e-mail to a large number of
scientists and engineers, and a general request for information appeared in Chemi-cal & Engineering News.1 In addition to the responses to these requests, input
from the broader community was obtained as the committee wrote this report,
when individual members of the committee consulted with their colleagues to
obtain specific and detailed technical input. The committee is pleased to acknowl-
edge the assistance of all these contributors:Harold M. Agnew, San Diego Supercomputer CenterMikael Akke, Lund University
Robert J. Angelici, Iowa State University
Gary C. April, University of Alabama
Mick J. Apted, Monitor Scientific
Frances H. Arnold, California Institute of Technology
David Awschalom, University of California, Santa Barbara
Robert E. Babcock, University of Arkansas
Christina A. Bailey, California Polytechnic State University
James K. Bashkin, Monsanto Company
Patricia A. Baisden, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
R. Stephen Berry, University of Chicago1ÒYour Ideas, Please!Ó Madeleine Jacobs, Editor-in-chief, Chemical & Engineering News, 78(14),
April 3, 2000.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.204APPENDIX CBruce J. Berne, Columbia UniversityLorenz T. Biegler, Carnegie Mellon University
Mary P. Boyle, George Mason University
John F. Brady, California Institute of Technology
Jean-Claude Bradley, Drexel University
Thomas B. Brill, University of Delaware
Joseph F. Bunnett, University of California, Santa Cruz
Laurie J. Butler, University of Chicago
Richard A. Caldwell, University of Texas, Dallas
Arthur Cammers-Goodwin, University of Kentucky
James A. Carroll, University of Nebraska
A. Welford Castleman, Jr., The Pennsylvania State University
Arup K. Chakraborty, University of California, Berkeley
Michael J. Clarke, Boston College
Edward L. Clennan, University of Wyoming
Geoff W. Coates, Cornell University
Robert Graham Cooks, Purdue University
Peter T. Cummings, Vanderbilt University
Christopher C. Cummins, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Dady B. Dadyburjor, West Virginia University
Mark E. Davis, California Institute of Technology
Robert H. Davis, University of Colorado
Ken A. Dill, University of California, San Francisco
Frank J. DiSalvo, Cornell University
Jerry R. Ebner, Monsanto Company
Warren Eister, Gaithersburg, Md.
Arthur B. Ellis, University of Wisconsin-Madison
J. Eric Enholm, University of Florida
Thomas P. Fehlner, University of Notre Dame
Dan Feldheim, North Carolina State University
L. Frank Flora, United States Department of Agriculture
Henry C. Foley, The Pennsylvania State University
Felice Frankel, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Glenn H. Fredrickson, University of California, Santa Barbara
Richard Friesner, Columbia University
Sujata Gamage, Ohio State University
Bruce C. Gates, University of California, Davis
Robert E. Gawley, University of Miami
Andrew J. Gellman, Carnegie Mellon University
Thomas F. George, University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point
Judith C. Giordan, Aileron Partners
Wayne L. Gladfelter, University of Minnesota
David S. Glueck, Dartmouth CollegeBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C205David B. Graves, University of California, BerkeleyStephen E. Griffin, InnovaQuartz, Inc.
Michael L. Gross, Washington University
Georges A. Guiochon, The University of Tennessee
Jane Halverson, Yale University
Bryce E. Hathoorn, Deere & Company
Steinar Hauan, Carnegie Mellon University
James F. Haw, University of Southern California, University Park
Fred M. Hawkridge, Virginia Commonwealth University
Heinz Heinemann, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Joseph J. Helble, University of Connecticut
George R. Helz, University of Maryland, College Park
Craig L. Hill, Emory University
George M. Homsy, University of California, Santa Barbara
Paul A. Jennings, Florida Institute of Technology
Michael P. Harold, DuPont
Howard E. Katz, Bell Laboratories, Lucent Technologies
James R. Katzer, ExxonMobil
C. Judson King, University of California, Office of the President
Douglas A. Klumpp, California State Polytechnic University
Gustavo Larsen, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
Ronald G. Larson, University of Michigan
Robert L. Letsinger, Northwest University
Nathan S. Lewis, California Institute of Technology
James W. Libby, DuPont (retired)
Stephen J. Lippard, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Raul F. Lobo, University of Delaware
Nichalos T. Loux, Environmental Protection Agency
Andrew J. Lovinger, National Science Foundation
Peter Lykos, Illinois Institute of Technology
Patricia Ann Mabrouk, Northeastern University
Preston J. MacDougall, Middle Tennessee State University
Alexander Maclachlan, DuPont (retired)
Vladimir Mahalec, Aspen Technology, Inc.
Wolfgang Marquardt, Rheinisch-Westf−lische Technische Hochschule AachenAlan G. Marshall, Florida State University
Stephen L. Matson, Sepracor, Inc.
James M. Mayer, University of Washington
David McCollum, Merck & Company, Inc.
Henry A. McGee, Jr., Virginia Commonwealth University
Thomas J. Meyer, Los Alamos National Laboratory
Larry L. Miller, University of Minnesota
Scott J. Miller, Boston CollegeBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.206APPENDIX CKaren W. Morse, Western Washington UniversityHeather S. Mortell, Neenah, Wis.
James S. Murday, National Research Laboratory
Catherine J. Murphy, University of South Carolina
James Y. Oldshue, Oldshue Technologies International, Inc.
Thomas L. Netzel, Georgia State University
Mark Nicholas, AstraZeneca International
Tucker Norton, DuPont
James S. Nowick, University of California, Irvine
Ralph G. Nuzzo, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
Babatunde A. Ogunnaike, DuPont
Julio M. Ottino, Northwestern University
Costas C. Pantelides, Imperial College, London
Leo A. Paquette, The Ohio State University
David H. Petering, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
Gene Petersen, National Renewable Energy Laboratory
Steve Picataggio, DuPont
Thomas J. Pinnavaia, Michigan State University
Elizabeth J. Podlaha, Louisiana State University
Tomas D. Pollard, the Salk Institute of Biological Studies
Stephen W. Ragsdale, University of Nebraska
Thomas B. Rauchfuss, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
Michael Reagan, Van Dyke, Pace, and Westlake
Elsa Reichmanis, Bell Laboratories, Lucent Technologies
R. Russel Rhinehart, North Oklahoma State University
William Rosen, University of Rhode Island
John Ross, Stanford University
James F. Roth, Air Products and Chemicals, Inc. (retired)
William B. Russel, Princeton University
Lynn M. Russell, Princeton University
Sarah C. Rutan, Virginia Commonwealth University
Dalibor Sames, Columbia University
Edward T. Samulski, University of North Carolina
Stanley I. Sandler, University of Delaware
Alfred P. Sattelberger, Los Alamos National Laboratory
Martin Saunders, Yale University
Jacqueline Savani, University of California, Santa Barbara
Richard H. Schlosberg, Bridgewater, N.J.
Fred G. Schreiber, Livingston, N.J.
James Scinta, Phillips Petroleum
Edmund G. Seebauer, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
Raymond Seltzer, Ciba Specialty Chemicals Company
Fred R. Sheldon, Yale UniversityBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C207David A. Shirley, Lawrence Berkeley LaboratoryJames P. Shoffner, Columbia College
Panagiotis G. Smirniotis, University of Cincinnati
Paul H. Smith, United States Department of Energy
Edward I. Solomon, Stanford University
Jack Solomon, Praxair
Gabor A. Somorjai, University of California, Berkeley
David M. Stanbury, Auburn University
Arnold F. Stancell, Georgia Institute of Technology
Wayne E. Steinmetz, Pomona College
J. Fraser Stoddart, University of California, Los Angeles
Carlyle B. Storm, Gordon Research Conferences
Rex C. Stratton, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Eric M. Stuve, University of Washington
William C. Stwalley, University of Connecticut
Kimberly Thomas, Los Alamos National Laboratory
Randolph P. Thummel, University of Houston
Paul F. Torrence, Northern Arizona University
Joan S. Valentine, University of California, Los Angeles
David E.W. Vaughan, Pennsylvania State University
David L. Venezky, Naval Research Laboratory
John G. Verkade, Iowa State University
Dionisios G. Vlachos, University of Massachusetts
David L. Van Vranken, University of California, Irvine
Robert S. Weber, Arthur D. Little, Inc.
John C. Wright, University of Wisconsin-Madison
John T. Yates, University of Pittsburgh
Ahmed H. Zewail, California Institute of Technology
Steven C. Zimmerman, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
Raymond R. Zolandz, DuPont
Charles F. Zukoski, University of Illinois, Urbana-ChampaignBeyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.209Index
AAb initio methods, 58, 79, 82, 90
Absorption techniques, 57. See also individual
techniquesActivation barriers, 42Adaptive materials, 144-145
Addressable molecules, 140Adhesivessynthetic, 127Adsorptive microfiltration membranes, 39-40Advanced discrete-continuous optimization, 91Affinity membranes, 40
Age of the Molecule, The, 14
Agingchemistry of, 121Airport securityat checkpoints, 65detecting explosives in baggage, 56Algorithmscomputational, 61nonlinear optimization, 87Allara, 135Alternatives to fossil fuels, 163-165nuclear energy, 164-165
solar energy, 163-164water and wind, 165Altman, Sidney, 112
AlzheimerÕs disease, 115American Chemical Society (ACS), 15, 158,186, 189-190American Institute of Chemical Engineers(AIChE), 158Ammoniamanufacturing, 30-31Amphiphilic molecules, 130Amundson, Neal R., 12
Amundson report. See Frontiers in ChemicalEngineering: Research Needs andOpportunitiesAnalysisclinical, 56high-throughput, 31, 70
process, 68of solutions, 58Analytical characterizationcritical in pharmaceutical products, 56Analytical chemistry, 17, 63-68, 173macromolecules and biomacromolecules,65-66process analysis, 68sample complexity, 64-65
sensitivity, 63-64small dimensions, 66-67throughput of analytical information, 67Analytical informationthroughput of, 67†ngstrım scale processes, 79Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.210INDEXAnthrax, 174-175Anti-inflammatory drugs, 101selectivity and, 108-110Antibioticsbacterial resistance to, 115
polyketide, 103Applicationsinteracting with fundamental research, 12Applied chemistry, 17, 42Arachidonic acid, 108Architecturecomputer, 72microchannel, 37-38of molecules, three-dimensional, 57Aromatic compounds, 23Artificial enzymes, 53Artificial kidneys, 102
Artificial noses, 57, 65Assessing the Value of Research in theChemical Sciences, 14
Asymmetric centers, 43Atmospheric and environmental chemistry, 5,148-159Atom economy, 25Atomic force microscope (AFM), 136ATPmulti-step synthesis of, 48Auger photoelectron spectroscopy (AES), 66Azeotropic separations, 84BBall, Philip, 15Base pairing, 112BASFcorporate network optimization by, 88-89Bayh-Dole Act of 1980, 20Bednorz, Johannes G., 28
Bell Laboratories, 135Benzene, 23Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges forthe Chemical Sciences, 13
Binding energies, 59Biocatalytic systemsdeveloping more selective, 34Biochemical chemistry, 17Biochemical engineering, 101-105large-scale production of proteins fromrecombinant DNA using suspensions ofanimal cells, 103-105Biocompatible surface layersadding to materials, 135Bioengineering and biotechnologychemical science integral to, 18Bioinformatics, 98
Biological aspects of military security, 174-175Biological metabolic networks, 53Biological terrorism, 5, 174-175
Biologychemistry underlying, 4interface with, 4, 95-122Biomacromolecules, 65-66Biomimetic catalysts, 52Biomimetic chemistry, 27, 118, 135
Biomimetic synthesis, 31-32Biopolymers, 65time scales within, 81Bioreactorshuman-design, 105Bioremediation, 154-155, 157
Biosensorsimplanted, 122Birth control, 158
Block copolymers, 50-51, 126Blood-brain barrier, 117, 122Board on Chemical Sciences and Technology(BCST), 1, 6, 13, 14Bohr, Neils, 12-13Boyer, Paul, 48
Boyle, Robert, 49Brain tumorstreating, 117Branching (macromolecules), 139Breslow, Ronald, 15Brown, Herbert, 28
Brownian dynamics, 77Bureau of Labor Statistics, 186Business considerations, 73. See also Capital
efficiency; Commercialization;Commodity products; Profitability ofthe chemical industryCCalmodlin structures, 46Capacitive chargingquantized, 138Capillary electrophoresis (CE), 65Capital efficiency, 36Carbohydrate ÒcodeÓcracking, 101Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDEX211Carbon dioxide emissions, 34, 150-151, 156-157,162-163, 169Carbon fibers, 125Carbon monoxide detectors, 65Carbon sequestration, 163
Carbon sheetsaromaticity of, 134Carbon structures, 133-135
Carbonylation, 34Carboxylation, 34Carnot, Sadi, 49
Catalysissynthesis by, 30-31Catalystsbiomimetic, 52efficient, 42libraries of, 33
metal-based, 29, 125platinum, 49research opportunities in, 14, 27
solid, 52synthetic, 53Catalytic activitypredicting, 76Catalytic antibodies, 32Catalytic converters, 151
Catalytic reagents, 153Catalytic systemsdeveloping more selective, 34Cech, Thomas, 112Celanese FibersÒcapability to promiseÓ at, 89
Celecoxib, 109Central Dogma, 97Ceramics, 133-135overcoming fragility of, 134Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the21st Century, 6-7. 
See also Frontiers inChemical Engineering: Research Needsand OpportunitiesChallenges for the future of chemistry andchemical engineering. See also Goals;
Grand challengesprioritizing, 7Charge-coupled devices (CCDs), 146Chemical aspectsof military security, 175-176Chemical compoundsrate of creation of, 18Chemical engineeringevolution as a distinct discipline, 19formal origin of, 17nfull-time graduate students in, 183
the practice of, 181Chemical engineersinvolvement in product design, 29Chemical industrypublic opinion of, 190Chemical kinetic studies, 43-44
Chemical plants, 19Chemical processesredesigning for safety and easiercommercialization, 10, 193Chemical reactor modeling, 29Chemical sciencescurrent status of, 1defined, 2involving creation as well as discovery, 17
subdisciplines of, 16-17unlocking the worldÕs mysteries, 21Chemical supply chain, 74
Chemical terrorism, 5Chemical theory and computer modeling, 4, 71-94in integration of the chemical supply chain,91in process control, 91
process systems engineering, 90-92process systems engineering in process andproduct design, 91in R&D and process operations, 91Chemical transformations of matter, 2-3, 41-54Chemical vapor deposition (CVD), 136
Chemically functional membranes, 38-39Chemistry. See also Analytical chemistry;
Applied chemistry; Atmospheric and
environmental chemistry; Biochemicalchemistry; Combinatorial chemistry;Computational chemistry; Green
chemistry; Inorganic chemistry;Medicinal chemistry; Organicchemistry; Physical chemistry; Synthetic
chemistry; Theoretical chemistryof aging, 121full-time graduate students in, 183
interface with biology and medicine, 4, 95-122of memory, 121
in motion, 44-47the practice of, 181promoting awareness of its contributions tosociety, 10, 193-194Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.212INDEXChemistry: Opportunities and Needs, 1, 11
Chemistry Today and Tomorrow: The Central,Useful, and Creative Science, 15
Chemists and chemical engineersin atmospheric and environmentalchemistry, 148in chemical and physical transformations ofmatter, 41in chemical theory and computer modeling,71in energy, 160-161
interfacing with biology and medicine, 95-96isolating, identifying, imaging, andmeasuring substances and structures, 55in materials by design, 123in national and personal security, 171synthesis and manufacturing, 22-23
training, 181-184Chess analogy, 24Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) celltransformations, 104-105Chirality, 32, 43, 99Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), 150, 152, 154,157Cholesterol-reducing drugs, 53Chromatography, 64. See also Gas
chromatography; High-performanceliquid chromatographyChromium oxidantseliminating, 26Clausius, R.J., 49Clinical analysis, 56
Coal gasification, 162Colloids, 50, 135quantum box behavior of, 137Combinatorial chemistry, 31Commercializationredesigning chemical processes for easier,10, 193Commodity productsproducing large-volumes of, 19Complementary metal oxide semiconductor(CMOS) transistorsnonleaking, 72Composite materials, 141Computational algorithms, 61Computational chemistryefficiency in, 40, 61research opportunities in, 14, 98Computational steering, 93
Conducting molecules, 140Controlled deliveryof therapeutics, 117-118Corey, Elias J., 28Council for Chemical Research, 187COX-2 selectivity, 110
CPUcycles, 145speed, 72Cram, Donald J., 32Creativity, 28Critical pathwaysturning off and on, 116Critical pointsphenomena near, 49Critical Technologies: The Role of Chemistryand Chemical Engineering, 6, 12-14
Crutzen, Paul, 152
Crystal engineering, 133-135Crystallographyneutron, 61
X-ray, 60Crystalsliquid, 127
ribosome, 112Curl, Robert F., Jr., 134Current state of progressin atmospheric and environmentalchemistry, 149-155in chemical and physical transformations ofmatter, 42-52in chemical theory and computer modeling,81-89in creating materials by design, 126-138in interfacing with biology and medicine,105-111in isolating, identifying, imaging, andmeasuring substances and structures, 57-68in national and personal security, 172-173in providing energy for the future, 162-169in synthesizing, manufacturing andexploiting new substances and newtransformations, 25-29Cyclooxygenase (COX) enzymes, 108DDangerous substances and organismsdetecting and identifying, 8, 56, 174-178,191-192DDT, 152, 154Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDEX213Dendrimers, 139Density-functional theory (DFT) calculations, 82
improving, 89Department of Agriculture (DOA), 188Department of Defense (DOD), 188
Department of Energy (DOE), 188Design of new materials, 4-5, 123-147Designing the Molecular World: Chemistry atthe Frontier, 15
Detection technologies, 174Deuteriumreplacing hydrogen atoms by, 43Diesenhofer, Johann, 119Differential algebraic equations (DAEs), 87
Diffraction techniques, 60-62Dill, Ken, 80-81Disjunctive programminggeneralized, 85Displacement reactions, 25DNAmolecular structure of, 4Docking status, 45Doppler shift, 60
Draper Prize, 48, 118Dynamic simulation, 86Dynamics. See Brownian dynamics; Molecular
dynamics; Stokesian dynamics;ThermodynamicsEEarthunderstanding its complex chemistry tomaintain its livability, 9, 193Earth systems engineering, 149
Eastman Chemical, 35Ebola virus, 115Eco-technologygreen materials and, 142-143Ecosystemsimportance of maintaining, 97Edison, Thomas, 12-13EducatorsÕ role, 184
Electric fieldsexternal, 51Electro- and magneto-rheological (ER/MR)fluids, 144Electrochemical cells, 166-167Electrodeschemically modified, 67Electrolytespolymer, 125Electron beam writing, 137Electron diffraction, 61Electron microscopy, 118
Electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy, 57Electron tunneling, 136Electronic commerce, 33
Electronic materials, 130-133Electronic spectroscopies, 59-60Electrophoresis, 64. See also Capillary
electrophoresis (CE)Electrorheology, 78Electrospray ionization (ESI), 62, 66
Elimination reactions, 25Emission techniques, 57. See also individual
techniquesEmpirical invention, 12Energy for the future, 5, 160-170developing unlimited and inexpensive, 9-10,193distributing, 169electrochemical cells, 166-167
fuel cells, 167-168generating, 162-163reducing need for, 84
storage batteries, 168-169Energy transferunderstanding and predicting, 90Environment. See Atmospheric and
environmental chemistryEnvironmental Protection Agency (EPA), 188
Enzyme membrane reactor, 39Enzyme-substrate complex, 31-32Enzymesartificial, 53properties of, 53Equationsmultiparameter, 49of state, 49Ernst, Richard, 58
Erythropoietin, 102European Chemical Industry Council, 190Evans aldol reaction, 99
Excited states, 76energy of particles used for, 57laser energy used for, 48, 64
transformations of, 53Execution speedsingle-threaded, 92Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.214INDEXExplosives. See also Nuclear weapons
detecting in airplane baggage, 56
in military security, 176-177Extent of reaction, 68FFace-centered-cubic crystals, 51Fast Fourier-transform techniques, 61Federal fundingfor research in science and engineering, 20-21, 187-188Femtosecond time scale, 3, 77spectroscopy in, 52Fenn, John B., 62Field flow fractionation, 64Fischer, Emil, 3
Fisher, Ernest O., 28Floppy molecules, 57Flow processes, 50synthesizing, 84Fluid mechanics, 77-78Fluids. See also Microfluidics
electro- and magneto-rheological, 144structured, 51Fluorescencelaser-induced, 64Fluorescence resonance energy transfer(FRET), 44, 146Foldingpolypeptide, 76protein, 90, 94Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 104Fossil fuelsalternatives to, 163-165
combustion of, 34, 151Fractionationfield flow, 64Free electron lasersresearch opportunities in, 14Frontiers in Chemical Engineering: ResearchNeeds and Opportunities, 1, 11-12
Fuel cells, 167-168Fuel efficiency, 151
Fukui, Kenichi, 48Fullerenes, 134Future challenges and opportunitiesin atmospheric and environmentalchemistry, 155-159in chemical and physical transformations ofmatter, 52-54in chemical theory and computer modeling,89-94in creating materials by design, 138-146in interfacing with biology and medicine,111-121in isolating, identifying, imaging, andmeasuring substances and structures,68-70in national and personal security, 174-178in providing energy for the future, 169-170in synthesizing, manufacturing andexploiting new substances and newtransformations, 29-40GGamma emissions, 60Gas chromatography (GC), 65Gas chromatography/mass spectrometry(GC/MS), 65Gasification, 34of coal, 162GasolineMobil process for converting methanol to, 52production of, 48-49GastropathyNSAID, 108Gene manipulation, 53Gene therapy, 96
Genentech, Inc., 104Genetic engineering, 163Genetic predispositions to disease, 120
Genetic screening, 115Genomic sequence, 97-99Genomics, 115
Geometric requirementsof enzymes, 43Giant magnetoresistance (GMR) effect, 72materials demonstrating, 144Gibbs, J. Willard, 49Gilbert, W., 119
Glassy polymers, 126Global optimization, 85Globalizationof the chemical enterprise, 33ÒGlycomics,Ó 101
Glycosylation, 122
Goalsachieving, 5-6, 180-194in atmospheric and environmentalchemistry, 149Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDEX215in chemical and physical transformations ofmatter, 41-42in chemical theory and computer modeling,75-81in creating materials by design, 124-126
in interfacing with biology and medicine,96-105in isolating, identifying, imaging, andmeasuring substances and structures,55-57in national and personal security, 172
in providing energy for the future, 161in synthesizing, manufacturing andexploiting new substances and new
transformations, 23-25Government role, 186-189Grand challenges, 8-10, 190-194attracting the brightest students into thechemical sciences, 10, 194designing and developing self-optimizingchemical systems, 10, 193designing and producing new materials anddevices with predictable properties, 8-9,
192detecting and identifying dangeroussubstances and organisms, 8, 191-192developing medicines and therapies that cancure untreatable diseases, 9, 192developing new materials and measurementdevices, 8, 191-192developing self-assembly to synthesize andmanufacture complex systems and
materials, 9, 192-193developing unlimited and inexpensiveenergy, 9-10, 193learning to synthesize and manufacture newsubstances, 8, 191promoting awareness of chemistryÕscontributions to society, 10, 193-194protecting citizens against terrorism, 8, 191-192redesigning chemical processes for safetyand easier commercialization, 10, 193understanding and controlling howmolecules react, 8, 192understanding the chemistry of livingsystems in detail, 9, 192understanding the earthÕs complexchemistry to maintain its livability, 9,193Granular media, 78Green chemistry, 34, 152-153
Green materialsand eco-technology, 142-143HHadju, J., 61-62Haensel, Vladimir, 48Handedness, 43-44Hauptmann, Herbert, 62
Hazard reduction, 34Heavy metalssoil contamination from, 154Heeger, Alan J., 164Herbicides, 152Herschbach, Dudley, 48
Hierarchical computationsfor conceptual design, 92High-field nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)spectroscopy, 66High-performance liquid chromatography(HPLC), 65High-throughput analysis, 31, 70High-volumetric productivity, 37Higher order structures, 139
Highly complex moleculessynthesis of, 25Hoffmann, Roald, 48
Huber, Robert, 119Human-design bioreactors, 105Human genomesequencing, 4, 48, 119-120Human Genome Project, 65, 67, 69, 113-114,119Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1), 98-100, 115protease inhibitors, 100
replication cycle, 99Hybrid materials, 141Hydroelectric dams, 165
Hydrogenas a fuel, 166-167, 170Hypothesis-driven science and technology, 68IImage analysis, 144Imaging substances and structures, 3-4, 55-70Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.216INDEXImpact of Advances in Computing andCommunications Technologies on
Chemical Science and Technology, The,14Inflammatory conditions, 101
Influenza, 115Information-driven science and technology, 68Information-modeling tools, 92
Information technologyadvances in, 87Infrared spectroscopy, 59
Inorganic chemistry, 17of metallic elements, 31Insecticides, 157
Instrumentationchemical, 3miniaturized, 67
Òsmart,Ó 68
Integrated process/product design/optimization(IPPDO) applications, 93-94Integrationof the chemical supply chain, 91of scientific fields, 20Intellectual property rights, 20Interfaces between phases, 125Intermolecular interactionsharnessing, 127Internetadvances in, 87-88, 92Interparticle forces, 51Interstellar gas clouds, 59Inventionspredictability of, 15Ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry(ICR-MS), 62Ion mobility spectrometry (IMS), 65Iron Age, 126Iron oresmelting, 162Isolating substances and structures, 3-4, 55-70Isotope effects, 43JJacobsen epoxidation, 99KKarle, Jerome, 62
Ketone groupsincorporating into polyethylene, 143Kidneysartificial, 102Kinetics. See also Chemical kinetic studies;
Pharmacokinetic models; Reaction ratesand reaction engineering, 17Knowles, William S., 32Kohn, Walter, 81-82Kroto, Harold W., 134LLaboratory reactionsv. manufacturing, 26-27Land minesdetecting, 56, 174Langer, Robert, 117-118Langmuir, Irving, 12
Large-scale differential-algebraic models, 91Large-scale production of proteinsfrom recombinant DNA using suspensionsof animal cells, 103-105Lasers. See also X-ray laser sources
used for excitation, 48, 64Law enforcement, 173Layered materialsand surface modification, 135-136Lee, Yuan, 48Lehn, Jean-Marie, 32Length scalesspanning, 78-81Leukotriene modifiers, 106-107Librariesof catalysts, 33screening rapidly, 31Light scattering, 50
Liquid crystals, 127, 135Living polymerizations, 139Living systemsunderstanding their chemistry in detail, 9,96-98, 192MMacDiarmid, Alan G., 164Macromolecular assemblies, 119Macromolecular therapeutics, 117Macromolecules, 65-66
Mad cow disease, 114Made to Measure: New Materials for the 21stCentury, 15
Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDEX217Magnetic fieldsexternal, 51Magnetic levitation, 131Magnetic materials, 130-133Magnetic nanostructuresdispersed, 130Magneto-optical spin control, 132Magnetorheology, 78
Man-machine hybrids, 138Manufacturing, 33-36biomimetic synthesis, 31-32
catalysis, 30-31combinatorial chemistry, 31creating and exploiting new substances andnew transformations, 2, 8, 22-40development of new synthetic methodology,30emerging platforms for processintensification and miniaturization,36-40new substances, criteria required of, 24self-assembly, 32-33Manufacturing reactionsv. laboratory, 26-27Marcus, Rudolf, 48Mass Spectrometry (MS), 62, 66
Materials by design, 4-5, 123-147adaptive and responsive materials, 144-145adding biocompatible surface layers to, 135
analysis and simulation, 143-144anisotropic strength of, 127ceramics, carbon structures, and crystalengineering, 133-135composite and hybrid materials, 141electronic, optoelectronic, photonic,magnetic, and superconductingmaterials, 130-133green materials and eco-technology, 142-143higher order structures, 139layered materials and surface modification,135-136molecular electronic materials, 140nanomaterials, 136-138
semiconductor processing, 140surface modification and interfaces withbiology and electronics, 141-142synthetic polymers and self-assembly, 126-130templating, 139
tools, resources, and infrastructures, 145-146Mathematical modeling and analysis, 19Matrix assisted laser ionization-desorption(MALDI), 62, 66Measurement devices for substances andstructures, 3-4, 55-70developing, 8, 191-192with predictable properties, 8-9, 192Measurement science, 63-68macromolecules and biomacromolecules,65-66process analysis, 68
sample complexity, 64-65sensitivity, 63-64small dimensions, 66-67
throughput of analytical information, 67Media. See also News media
granular, 78Medicinal chemistry, 4, 95-122developing cures for untreatable diseases, 9,192synergy with biology, 30Memorychemistry of, 121Mercury pollution, 158Merrifield, Robert Bruce, 29Metabolic engineering, 103, 122
Metabolic processesneed to balance, 121Metal armorreplacing, 174Metal-based catalysts, 29, 125Metal hydrides, 167
Metallocenes, 28Metalloprotein catalysis, 118Metastable states, 142
Methane, 150-151converting to methanol, 31Methanolconverting methane to, 31as a fuel, 168Mobil process for converting to gasoline, 52Methyl acetate columns, 35, 37Methyl tertiary-butyl ether (MTBE), 152Micelles, 139
Michel, Hartmut, 119Micro heat exchangers, 38Microchannel architecture, 37-38
Microcontact printing, 129Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS), 128analytical instrumentation using, 146Microelectronics, 136Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.218INDEXMicrofabricationon silicon, 122Microfluidics, 51Microphase separation, 51Military security, 172-177biological, 174-175chemical, 175-176explosives, 176-177
nuclear and radiological, 176Miniaturized instrumentation, 67. See alsoProcess intensification and
miniaturizationMinoritiesattracting to chemistry, 5, 183Mobil processfor converting methanol to gasoline, 52Model predictive control (MPC), 87
Modeling, 85-89of molecules, 83of self-assembly, 144
and simulation, 77Molecular calculations, 144Molecular complexes, 32
Molecular dynamics, 77multi-dimensional techniques in, 58Molecular electronic materials, 140
Molecular frontier, 7, 21, 183Molecular-level constructionof structures, 124Molecular mechanics, 76-77Molecular medicine, 116Molecular recognition, 116
Molecular signalingÒtuning,Ó 111
Molecules. See also Biomacromolecules;
Intermolecular interactions;Macromolecules; Single-moleculespectroscopy; Supramolecular
assembliesaddressable, 140amphiphilic, 130
conducting, 140floppy, 57interesting topography of, 25
modeling, 83observing individual, 3switchable, 140
synthesis of highly complex, 25three-dimensional architecture of, 57understanding and controlling reactions of,8, 192volatilizing, 62Molina, Mario, 152Monte Carlo methods, 77-78
MooreÕs law, 72Mıssbauer spectroscopy, 60Muller, Karl A., 28
Mller, Paul, 152Multi-dimensional techniquesin molecular dynamics, 58Multimolecular photosynthetic reaction center,119Multiple instruction, multiple data (MIMD)computer architecture, 72coordination of, 92Multistep synthesis, 24of ATP, 48Mutantsselection of, 33NNano-particles, 51Nanocomposite materialsorganized, 141Nanoimprint lithography, 137Nanolithography, 51Nanomaterials, 136-138
Nanoporesmembranes containing, 138Nanoscience and nanotechnology, 32synthetic v. natural, 125Nanotubes, 136-137, 139National Academy of Engineering, 147Draper Prize, 48, 118National Institutes of Health (NIH), 187National Research Council (NRC), 176Board on Chemical Sciences andTechnology (BCST), 1, 6, 13, 14Chemical Sciences Roundtable, 14National Science Foundation (NSF), 188National security, 5, 63, 171-179Natta, Giulio, 28
Nature as a chemistextending synthetically, 23highly innovative, 97Near-critical transition phenomenon, 50Negative ionsphotodetachment of, 59Nematodes, 100Neurodegenerative diseases, 115Neurotransmitterssingle-vesicle release of, 67Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDEX219Neutron crystallography, 61New materials, 8, 22-40designing, 4-5, 123-147developing, 8, 191-192learning to synthesize and manufacture, 8,191with predictable properties, 8-9, 192New transformations, 8, 22-40
News media, 184-185Nitrogenase, 118Nobel prizes in chemistry, 3, 25, 28-29, 32, 42,48-49, 58, 62, 81, 112, 119, 134, 152,164Nonbiological polymerstime scales within, 81Nonprotein enzyme mimics, 32Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs(NSAIDs), 108Noyori, Ryoji, 32Nuclear energy, 164-165
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)instruments, 46, 57-58, 98, 118, 184pulsed, 59Nuclear structure spectroscopies, 60Nuclear weaponsand military security, 165, 173, 176Nucleotide sequences, 112Nuzzo, Ralph G., 135OOdor detection, 57, 65Olah, George A., 42Oligomeric materialstailoring, 140Oligonucleotide synthesis, 119Opportunities in Chemistry, 1, 11
Optical fibers, 130
Optical propertiesswitchable, 127Optimization, 85-89advanced discrete-continuous, 91global, 85nonlinear algorithms for, 87Optoelectronic materials, 130-133Organelles, 65Organic chemistry, 17
Organismsdetecting and identifying dangerous, 8, 191-192Organometallic reagents, 52Organsdeveloping semisynthetic, 96, 121Oxidationpartial, 34performing safely, 26Oxidation-reduction reactions, 166Ozone layerdepletion of, 150PPaclitaxel, 102synthesizing, 26Paintswater-based, 127Palladiumcatalysis by, 27Parallelizable tasks, 92-93Particlesused for excitation, 57Pasteur, Louis, 12-13Pedersen, Charles J., 32Penicillinlarge-scale production of, 102synthesizing, 24Personal security, 173, 177-178
Pharmaceutical productsanalytical characterization critical in, 56controlled release of, 102Pharmacia-Upjohn, 89Pharmacokinetic models, 102Phase transition phenomenon, 49-50
Phasesinterfaces between, 125Photodetachmentof negative ions, 59Photodissociation, 46Photoexcitation, 52
Photoionization, 59Photolithography, 128-129, 136using UV wavelengths, 138Photonic materials, 130-133Photosynthetic reaction centermultimolecular, 119Photosynthetic systems, 27, 150, 163Photovoltaics, 164Physical chemistry, 17, 29
Physical transformations of matter, 2-3, 41-54Pimentel, George, 11Pimentel report. See Opportunities in ChemistryPioglitazone, 120Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.220INDEXPlasticsmanufacturing, 49Platforms for process intensification andminiaturization, 36-40enzyme membrane reactor, 39
methyl acetate columns, 35, 37micro heat exchangers, 38silicon chip, 38Platinumcatalysis by, 27reforming, 49Plutoniumweapons-grade, 173Polanyi, John, 48
Poly(dimethyl siloxane) (PDMS), 128-129Polydispersity, 146Polyethyleneincorporating ketone groups into, 143Polyketide antibiotics, 103Polymer blends, 50molecule alignment within, 50Polymer electrolytes, 125Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) techniques,114, 119Polymeric materials, 19. See also Biopolymers;
Block copolymerselectrically conductive, 164glassy, 126research opportunities in, 14
rubbery, 126synthesizing, 29, 49, 65Polymerizationsliving, 139Polypeptidescalculating folding of, 76
synthesizing, 29Polysaccharideschemistry of, 100-101Pople, John, 81-82Post-genomic therapies, 120-121Pioglitazone, 120
Rosiglitazone, 120Potential energy curves, 47Powder diffraction, 60
Precessioninducing, 131Predictabilityof catalytic activity, 76designing and producing new materials anddevices with, 8-9, 76, 192of energy transfers, 90of inventions, 15Prion diseases, 114Private foundations, 186-189
Process analysis, 68. See also Chemical
processes; Flow processes; TransportprocessesProcess control, 91Process engineering technologiesfor manufacturing, 35Process intensification and miniaturizationemerging platforms for, 36-40enzyme membrane reactor, 39
methyl acetate columns, 35, 37micro heat exchangers, 38silicon chip, 38Process simulationrevolution in, 86-87Process synthesis, 84-85
Process systems engineering, 17, 83-92increasing profitability of, 88-89modeling and optimization, 85-89
in process and product design, 91Processing plantszero-effluent, 143Productivity. See High-volumetric productivity
Profitability of the chemical industrysupply-chain management increasing, 88-89Promises to customerscapability to make, 89Prosperity, 180
Prostaglandin synthesis, 109Prostate screening antigen (PSA) test, 114Protectionof citizens against terrorism, 8, 191-192of health and the environment, 34Protein structurepredicting, 76Proteinscrystallizing, 61
folding of, 90, 94synthesizing, 29, 112Proteomics, 114-115
Pulsed NMR spectroscopy, 59Pure science, 12QQuadrant model of scientific research, 12-13, 20Quantized capacitive charging, 138Quantum bits, 131Quantum box behaviorof colloids, 137Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDEX221Quantum computation, 75, 131-133magneto-optical spin control, 132Quantum corrals, 66Quantum dotsCdSe, 51Quantum mechanics, 75-76Quantum wells, 133RRadiological aspectsof military security, 176Rain forestsimportance of maintaining, 97Raman spectroscopy, 59, 66Rate. See Reaction rates
R&Dand process operations, 91Reaction cascades, 53Reaction engineeringkinetics and, 17Reaction pathways, 42Reaction productsrelative proportions of, 56Reaction rateseffects of, 43
increasing, 142predicting, 76Reactionsdisplacement, 25elimination, 25excited state, 76
extent of, 68manufacturing v. laboratory, 26-27oxidation-reduction, 166
putting laser energy into, 48in a vacuum, 48Reactive distillation, 36
Reagentsorganometallic, 52Redesign of chemical processesfor safety and easier commercialization, 10,193Research. See also R&D; Scientific research
synthetic, 56Research Teams and Partnerships: Trends inthe Chemical Sciences, 14
Responsible Care, 151, 159, 189Responsive materials, 144-145Rheology, 50Ribonucleasecleavage of RNA by, 48Ribosomes, 112-113Ribozyme molecules, 45Tetrahymena Group I, 44RNAcleavage by ribonuclease, 48Robotsmilitary, 174Rofecoxib, 109Rosiglitazone, 120
Rotational spectroscopies, 59Rowland, F. Sherwood, 152Royal Society of Chemistry (Great Britain), 14
Rubbery polymers, 126SSafetyredesigning chemical processes for, 10, 193Sample complexity, 64-65Samuelsson, Bengt, 106-107Sandwich compounds, 28
Sanger, F., 119Scale-bridging, 78-81Scanning probe microscopy (SPM), 137, 146
Scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), 66-67,130, 136School childrenattracting to chemistry, 6Schrıdinger wave equation, 75, 81Sciencepure, 12Scientific computing, 92-94Scientific researchfundamental, interactions with applications, 12need for more interactions among chemists,engineers, biologists, and physicists, 126quadrant model of, 12-13Second-order phase transition phenomenon, 50Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS), 66
Selectionvital in chemical self-assembly, 33Selective asthma therapy, 105-107leukotriene formation, 106Selectivity and anti-inflammatory drugs, 108-110Celecoxib, 109
COX-2 selectivity, 110NSAID gastropathy, 108prostaglandin synthesis, 109
Rofecoxib, 109Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.222INDEXSelf-assembled monolayers (SAMs), 127, 129interrogating, 146
thiol, 135Self-assembly, 51chemical, 33
modeling, 144synthesis by, 9, 32-33, 137, 192-193synthetic polymers and, 126-130Self-optimizing chemical systemsdesigning and developing, 10, 193Semiconductor processing, 140
Semiconductors, 130GaAs, 132sandwiches of compound heterostructures,133Sensitivity, 63-64Separation technologieshybrid, 65novel, 35Separationsazeotropic, 84September 11 attacks, 172Serotonin, 110
Sharpless, K. Barry, 32Sharpless epoxidation, 99Shaw, George Bernard, 28
Shirakawa, Hideki, 164Silicon chip, 38Single-molecule spectroscopy, 64
Single-threaded execution speed, 92Slow reacting substance of anaphylaxis (SRS-A), 105-106Small dimensions, 66-67Small-scale reactors, 51Smalley, Richard E., 134
Smallpox, 174-175ÒSmartÓ devices
for diabetics, 117
for instrumentation, 68Soft lithography, 127-129, 137, 140, 145Solar energy, 163-164
Solid catalysts, 29Solutionsanalysis of, 58Solventseliminating or replacing, 24-25Solvophilic and solvophobic regions, 130
Specificity and therapy for the human brain,110-111Paxil, 111
Prozac, 111SpectroscopyAuger photoelectron, 66
electron spin resonance, 57femtosecond, 52high-field nuclear magnetic resonance, 66
infrared, 59Mıssbauer, 60pulsed NMR, 59
Raman, 66single-molecule, 64surface enhanced Raman, 66
ultraviolet photoelectron, 59X-ray photoelectron, 58Spin, 131
Spintronics, 133Standard of living differentialroot cause of conflict, 177States of matter. See also Excited states;
Metastable statestransformations between, 49Statistical mechanicsand fluid mechanics, 77-78Stereochemical control, 107
Stereoregularity, 139Stoichiometric reagents, 153Stokesian dynamics, 77
Storage batteries, 168-169Stories of the Invisible: A Guided Tour ofMolecules, 15
Structure determination, 57-62. See also Protein
structurediffraction techniques, 60-62
electronic spectroscopies, 59-60isolating, identifying, imaging, andmeasuring, 3-4, 55-70mass spectrometry, 62nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopies,58nuclear structure spectroscopies, 60rotational spectroscopies, 59vibrational spectroscopies, 59Structured fluids, 51Structuresmolecular-level construction of, 124Strychninesynthesizing, 25-26Studentsattracting into the chemical sciences, 10,183-184, 194Submicron-particles, 51Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDEX223Substancesdetecting and identifying dangerous, 8, 191-192isolating, identifying, imaging, andmeasuring, 3-4, 55-70physical properties of, 18transformations of, 18, 23Sulfur dioxide pollution, 152, 158
Superconducting materials, 4, 28, 130-133, 169high-temperature, 131Supercritical CO2 (sCO
2), 156Supercritical processing, 156-157Supply-chain managementincreasing profitability of the chemicalindustry through computer tools, 88-89Supramolecular assemblies, 119, 145Surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS),66Surface modificationand interfaces with biology and electronics,141-142layered materials and, 135-136Surfaces, 29reactions on, 52Surfactant solutions, 50Sustainability, 34
Switchable molecules, 140Synchrotron radiation, 61Synthesisof ATP, 48biomimetic, 31-32by catalysis, 30-31, 53
combinatorial chemistry of, 31creating and exploiting new substances andnew transformations, 2, 8, 22-40development of new methodologies for, 30and emerging platforms for processintensification and miniaturization, 36-
40of highly complex molecules, 25in manufacturing, 33-36
multistep, 24, 48oligonucleotide, 119of proteins, 29, 112
by self-assembly, 32-33Synthetic chemistry, 18, 29, 33Synthetic polymersand self-assembly, 126-130TTanaka, Koichi, 62
Taube, Henry, 48
Taxol, 102Technology Vision 2020, 14
Templating, 139
Terrorismprotecting citizens against, 8, 165, 179, 191-192Theoretical chemistry, 17Theoryguiding experimental work, 48, 75Therapeuticscontrolled delivery of, 117-118that can cure untreatable diseases, 9, 192Thermal cracking of petroleum, 48-49Thermodynamicsand chemical property estimation, 17Thiol self-assembled monolayers, 135Three-dimensional architectureof molecules, 57Throughput, 37. See also High-throughput
analysisof analytical information, 67Time-averaged structural information, 61Time scaleswithin biopolymers and nonbiologicalpolymers, 81in molecular simulation, 80-81spanning, 78-81Tissue engineering, 138Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), 102, 104Tissuesdeveloping semisynthetic, 96Topographyof molecules, 25Trace componentsdetecting, 57Trace-metal analysis, 63-64
Transformations. See also Synthesis
by catalysis, 27defined, 42
of excited states, 53interaction between experiment and theory,48inventing new types of, 23, 28visualizing, 47Transport processes, 51and separations, 17Tricyclic drugs, 111Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical EngineeringCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.224INDEXTunneling. See also Scanning tunneling
microscopy (STM)electron, 136UUltraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS),59Unit operationsparadigm of, 19United Statesdoctoral scientists and engineers employedin, 186prosperity of, 180Universal Oil Products Co. (UOP), 48Uraniumweapons-grade, 173UV wavelengthsphotolithography using, 138VValue preservation and value growth, 85VanÕt Hoff, Jacobus, 3Vibrational spectroscopies, 59Virus phage packaging, 141
Visionproduction of, 48Volatilization, 63WWald, George, 48Walker, John E., 48Waste productsminimizing production of, 34Water power, 165Westheimer, Frank, 11Westheimer report. See Chemistry:Opportunities and NeedsWilkinson, Geoffrey, 28Wilson, Kenneth, 49
Wind energy, 165Wireless computing, 93Wittig, Georg, 28
Womenattracting to chemistry, 5, 183Woodward, Robert Burns, 25
Wound-healing, 142XX-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) data,60X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES)data, 60X-ray crystallography, 60-62, 118
X-ray diffraction, 112X-ray laser sources, 61X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), 58ZZeolitic materials, 52, 142uses for, 25-27Zero-effluent processing plants, 143
Zewail, Ahmed, 42Ziegler, Karl, 28Zinc-air cells, 166-167