DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/10640Information Technology for Counterterrorism: ImmediateActions and Future Possibilities144 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-08736-0 | DOI 10.17226/10640John L. Hennessy, David A. Patterson, and Herbert S. Lin, Editors; Committee onthe Role of Information Technology in Responding to Terrorism; Computer Scienceand Telecommunications Board; Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences;National Research CouncilInformation Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee on the Role of Information Technologyin Responding to TerrorismComputer Science and Telecommunications BoardJohn L. Hennessy, David A. Patterson, and Herbert S. Lin, EditorsTHE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSWashington, D.C.
www.nap.eduINFORMATION    
TECHNOLOGYFORCOUNTERTERRORISM
IMMEDIATE ACTIONS 
ANDFUTURE POSSIBILITIESInformation Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS  ¥  500 Fifth Street, N.W.  ¥ Washington, DC  20001NOTICE:  This project was approved by the Governing Board of the National
Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the NationalAcademy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of
Medicine.  The members of the committee responsible for this final report were
chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.The study from which this report is largely derived was supported by privatefunds from the National Academies.  The additional work required to produce
this report was supported by core funding from the Computer Science and Tele-
communications Board (CSTB).  Core support for CSTB in this period was pro-
vided by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research, Department of Energy, Na-tional Institute of Standards and Technology, National Library of Medicine,
National Science Foundation, Office of Naval Research, and the Cisco, Intel, andMicrosoft corporations.    Sponsors enable but do not influence CSTBÕs work.  Any
opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publica-
tion are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the organi-zations or agencies that provide support for CSTB.International Standard Book Number 0-309-08736-8Library of Congress Control Number:   2003101593
Copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 500 FifthStreet, N.W., Lockbox 285, Washington, DC 20055; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313 in the Washington metropolitan area.  Internet, http://www.nap.edu.
Additional copies of this report are available in limited quantity from the Com-puter Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, 500
Fifth Street, N.W., Washington, DC  20001.  Call (202) 334-2605 or e-mail the CSTB
at cstb@nas.edu.Copyright 2003 by the National Academy of Sciences.  All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
Suggested citation: Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, Informa-tion Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future Possibilities, TheNational Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2003.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating soci-
ety of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedi-
cated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the generalwelfare.  Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863,
the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on
scientific and technical matters.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts is president of the NationalAcademy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter
of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstandingengineers.  It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its mem-
bers, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advis-
ing the federal government.  The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors
engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages educationand research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers.  Dr. Wm. A.

Wulf is president of the National Academy of Engineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in
the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public.  The
Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciencesby its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and,
upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and educa-tion.  Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sci-
ences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology withthe AcademyÕs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal gov-ernment.  Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the

Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both theNational Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in pro-viding services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering
communities.  The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the
Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts and Dr. Wm. A. Wulf are chair and
vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.www.national-academies.orgInformation Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ivCOMMITTEE ON THE ROLE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYIN RESPONDING TO TERRORISMJOHN HENNESSY, Stanford University, ChairDAVID A. PATTERSON, University of California at Berkeley, Vice ChairSTEVEN M. BELLOVIN, AT&T Laboratories
W. EARL BOEBERT, Sandia National Laboratories
DAVID BORTH, Motorola Labs
WILLIAM F. BRINKMAN, Lucent Technologies (retired)
JOHN M. CIOFFI, Stanford University
W. BRUCE CROFT, University of Massachusetts at Amherst
WILLIAM P. CROWELL, Cylink Inc.
JEFFREY M. JAFFE, Bell Laboratories, Lucent Technologies
BUTLER W. LAMPSON, Microsoft Corporation
EDWARD D. LAZOWSKA, University of Washington
DAVID LIDDLE, U.S. Venture Partners
TOM M. MITCHELL, Carnegie Mellon University
DONALD NORMAN, Northwestern University
JEANNETTE M. WING, Carnegie Mellon UniversityStaffHERBERT S. LIN, Senior Scientist and Study DirectorSTEVEN WOO, Program Officer
DAVID DRAKE, Senior Project AssistantInformation Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARD2002-2003DAVID D. CLARK, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, ChairERIC BENHAMOU, 3Com Corporation
DAVID BORTH, Motorola Labs
JOHN M. CIOFFI, Stanford University
ELAINE COHEN, University of Utah
W. BRUCE CROFT, University of Massachusetts at Amherst
THOMAS E. DARCIE, AT&T Labs Research
JOSEPH FARRELL, University of California at Berkeley
JOAN FEIGENBAUM, Yale University
HECTOR GARCIA-MOLINA, Stanford University
WENDY KELLOGG, IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center
BUTLER W. LAMPSON, Microsoft Corporation
DAVID LIDDLE, U.S. Venture Partners
TOM M. MITCHELL, Carnegie Mellon University
DAVID A. PATTERSON, University of California at Berkeley
HENRY (HANK) PERRITT, Chicago-Kent College of Law
DANIEL PIKE, Classic Communications
ERIC SCHMIDT, Google Inc.
FRED SCHNEIDER, Cornell University
BURTON SMITH, Cray Inc.
LEE SPROULL, New York University
WILLIAM STEAD, Vanderbilt University
JEANNETTE M. WING, Carnegie Mellon UniversityStaffMARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL, Executive DirectorHERBERT S. LIN, Senior Scientist
ALAN S. INOUYE, Senior Program Officer
JON EISENBERG, Senior Program Officer
LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Program Officer
CYNTHIA A. PATTERSON, Program Officer
STEVEN WOO, Dissemination Officer
JANET BRISCOE, Administrative Officer
RENEE HAWKINS, Financial Associate
DAVID PADGHAM, Research Associate
KRISTEN BATCH, Research Associate
PHIL HILLIARD, Research Associate
MARGARET HUYNH, Senior Project AssistantInformation Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viDAVID DRAKE, Senior Project AssistantJANICE SABUDA, Senior Project Assistant
JENNIFER BISHOP, Senior Project Assistant
BRANDYE WILLIAMS, Staff AssistantFor more information on CSTB, see its Web site at <http://www.cstb.org>, write to CSTB, National Research Council, 500 Fifth Street,
N.W., Washington, DC 20001, call at (202) 334-2605, or e-mail at
cstb@nas.edu.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiPreface
Immediately following the events of September 11, 2001, the NationalAcademies (including the National Academy of Sciences, the National
Academy of Engineering, the Institute of Medicine, and the National Re-
search Council) offered its services to the nation to formulate a scientific
and technological response to the challenges posed by emerging terrorist
threats that would seek to inflict catastrophic damage on the nationÕspeople, its infrastructure, or its economy.  Specifically, it supported a

project that culminated in a report entitled Making the Nation Safer: TheRole of Science and Technology in Countering Terrorism (The National Acad-emies Press, Washington, D.C.) that was released on June 25, 2002.  That

project, chaired by Lewis M. Branscomb and Richard D. Klausner, sought
to identify current threats of catastrophic terrorism, understand the most
likely vulnerabilities in the face of these threats, and identify highly lever-
aged opportunities for contributions from science and technology to coun-
terterrorism in both the near term and the long term.Taking the material on information technology contained in Makingthe Nation Safer as a point of departure, the Committee on the Role of
Information Technology in Responding to Terrorism, identical to the
Panel on Information Technology that advised the Branscomb-Klausner
committee, drew on sources, resources, and analysis unavailable to that
committee during the preparation of its report.  In addition, the present

report contains material and elaborations that the Branscomb-Klausner
committee did not have time to develop fully for the parent report.  Both

reports are aimed at spurring research in the science and technology com-Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiiPREFACEmunities to counter and respond to terrorist acts such as those experi-enced on September 11.In addition to presenting material on information technology (IT),Making the Nation Safer includes chapters on nuclear and radiological
threats, human and agricultural health systems, toxic chemicals and ex-
plosive materials, energy systems, transportation systems, cities and fixed
infrastructure, and the response of people to terrorism.  The present

report focuses on ITÑits role as part of the national infrastructure, sug-gested areas of research (information and network security, IT for emer-
gency response, and information fusion), and the people and organiza-
tional aspects that are critical to the acceptance and use of the proposed
solutions.  Note that policy is not a primary focus of this report, although

policy issues are addressed as needed to provide context for the research
programs outlined here.Information Technology for Counterterrorism draws on many past re-
ports and studies of the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
(CSTB).  These CSTB reports include 
Cybersecurity Today and Tomorrow:Pay Now or Pay Later; Computers at Risk: Safe Computing in the InformationAge; Embedded, Everywhere: A Research Agenda for Networked Systems of
Embedded Computers; Realizing the Potential of C4I: Fundamental Challenges;Information Technology Research for Crisis Management; and Computing andCommunications in the Extreme, among others.  Furthermore, the report
leverages current CSTB studies on geospatial information, authentication
technologies, critical infrastructure protection and the law, and privacy.The Committee on the Role of Information Technology in Respond-ing to Terrorism included current and past CSTB members as well as
other external experts.  The 16 committee members (see the appendix for

committee and staff biographies) are experts in computer, information,
Internet, and network security; computer and systems architecture; com-
puter systems innovation, including interactive systems; national security
and intelligence; telecommunications, including wireline and wireless;
data mining and information fusion and management; machine learning
and artificial intelligence; automated reasoning tools; information-pro-
cessing technologies; information retrieval; networked, distributed, and
high-performance systems; software; and human factors.  To meet its

charge, the committee met several times over a 2-month period and con-
ducted extensive e-mail dialogue to discuss the report text.As was the parent report, this focused report was developed quickly,with the intent of informing key decision makers with respect to the role
of information technology in the homeland security effort.  The treatment

of any of the subjects in this report is far from comprehensive or exhaus-
tiveÑinstead, the report highlights those subject aspects that the commit-tee deems critical at this time.  Accordingly, the report builds on, and cites
Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ixPREFACEheavily, prior CSTB reports that more substantially address the relevantissues.The committee wishes to thank the CSTB staff (Herbert Lin as studydirector, Steven Woo for research support, and D.C. Drake for adminis-
trative support) for developing coherent drafts from scraps of e-mail and
brief notes from committee meetings.John L. Hennessy, ChairDavid A. Patterson, Vice ChairCommittee on the Role of Information Technologyin Responding to TerrorismInformation Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiAcknowledgment of ReviewersThis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen fortheir diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with pro-
cedures approved by the National Research CouncilÕs (NRCÕs) ReportReview Committee.  The purpose of this independent review is to pro-

vide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in mak-
ing the published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report
meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsive-
ness to the study charge.  The review comments and draft manuscript

remain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process.
We wish to thank the following individuals for their participation in the
review of this report:Edward Balkovich, The RAND Corporation,Richard Baseil, The MITRE Corporation,
Jules A. Bellisio, Telcordia,
Tom Berson, Anagram Laboratories,
James Gray, Microsoft,
Daniel Huttenlocher, Cornell University,
Richard Kemmerer, University of California at Santa Barbara,
Keith Marill, New York University Bellevue Hospital Center,
William Press, Los Alamos National Laboratory,
Fred Schneider, Cornell University, and
Edward Wenk, University of Washington.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERSAlthough the reviewers listed above provided many constructivecomments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclu-
sions or recommendations, nor did they see the final draft of the report
before its release.  The review of this report was overseen by R. Stephen

Berry of the University of Chicago.  Appointed by the NRC
Õs ReportReview Committee, he was responsible for making certain that an inde-
pendent examination of this report was carried out in accordance with
institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully con-
sidered.  Responsibility for the final content of this report rests entirely

with the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board and the Na-
tional Research Council.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiiContentsEXECUTIVE SUMMARY1
1BACKGROUND AND INTRODUCTION10
1.1What Is Terrorism?, 10

1.2The Role of Information Technology in National Life
and in Counterterrorism, 111.3The Information Technology Infrastructure and
Associated Risks, 122TYPES OF THREATS ASSOCIATED WITH
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE15

2.1Attack on IT as an Amplifier of a Physical Attack, 15

2.2Other Possibilities for Attack Involving IT, 16
2.2.1Attacks on the Internet, 16

2.2.2Attacks on the Public Switched Network, 18

2.2.3The Financial System, 20

2.2.4Embedded/Real-Time Computing, 20

2.2.5Control Systems in the National Critical
Infrastructure, 212.2.6Dedicated Computing Facilities, 23
2.3Disproportionate Impacts, 23

2.4Threats in Perspective: Possibility, Likelihood,
and Impact, 24Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xivCONTENTS3INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH28
3.1Information and Network Security, 31
3.1.1Authentication, 33

3.1.2Detection, 35

3.1.3Containment, 37

3.1.4Recovery, 40

3.1.5Cross-cutting Issues in Information and Network
Security Research, 413.2Systems for Emergency Response, 46
3.2.1Intra- and Interoperability, 47

3.2.2Emergency Deployment of Communications
Capacity, 553.2.3Security of Rapidly Deployed Ad Hoc Networks, 57

3.2.4Information-Management and Decision-Support
Tools, 583.2.5Communications with the Public During an
Emergency, 593.2.6Emergency Sensor Deployment, 60

3.2.7Precise Location Identification, 61

3.2.8Mapping the Physical Aspects of the
Telecommunications Infrastructure, 623.2.9Characterizing the Functionality of Regional Networks
for Emergency Responders, 623.3Information Fusion, 63
3.3.1Data Mining, 68

3.3.2Data Interoperability, 69

3.3.3Natural Language Technologies, 69

3.3.4Image and Video Processing, 70

3.3.5Evidence Combination, 70

3.3.6Interaction and Visualization, 71
3.4Privacy and Confidentiality, 71

3.5Other Important Technology Areas, 75
3.5.1Robotics, 75

3.5.2Sensors, 76

3.5.3Simulation and Modeling, 78
3.6People and Organizations, 80
3.6.1Principles of Human-Centered Design, 81

3.6.2Organizational Practices in IT-Enabled
Companies and Agencies, 893.6.3Dealing with Organizational Resistance to Interagency
Cooperation, 91Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xvCONTENTS3.6.4Principles into Practice, 93
3.6.5Implications for Research, 95
4WHAT CAN BE DONE NOW?97

5RATIONALIZING THE FUTURE RESEARCH AGENDA106

APPENDIX:  BIOGRAPHIES OF COMMITTEE AND
STAFF MEMBERS115
WHAT IS CSTB?127
Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Executive SummaryMaking the Nation Safer: The Role of Science and Technology in CounteringTerrorism, a report released by the National Academies in June 2002,
1articulated the role of science and technology in countering terrorism.That report included material on the specific role of information tech-
nology (IT).  Building on that report as a point of departure, the panel of

experts responsible for the IT material in Making the Nation Safer was
reconvened as the Committee on the Role of Information Technology in
Responding to Terrorism in order to develop the present report.DEFINING TERRORISM FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS REPORTTerrorism can occur on many different scales and with a wide rangeof impacts.  While a terrorist act can involve a lone suicide bomber or a

rental truck loaded with explosives, AmericansÕ perception of catastrophic
terrorist acts will forever be measured against the events of September 11,
2001.  In one single day, thousands of lives and tens of billions of dollars

were lost to terrorism.  This report focuses primarily on the high-impact

catastrophic dimensions of terrorism as framed by the events of Septem-
ber 11.  Thus, in an IT context, the Òlone hacker,Ó or even the cyber-

criminalÑwhile bothersome and capable of doing damageÑis not the
focus of this report.  Instead, the report considers the larger threat posed
1National Research Council.  2002.  
Making the Nation Safer: The Role of Science and Tech-nology in Countering Terrorism. The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMby smart, disciplined adversaries with ample resources.  (Of course,
measures taken to defend against catastrophic terrorism will likely have
application in defending against less sophisticated attackers.)THE ROLE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INSOCIETY AND IN COUNTERTERRORISMInformation technology is essential to virtually all of the nationÕs criti-cal infrastructures, from the air-traffic-control system to the aircraft them-
selves, from the electric-power grid to the financial and banking systems,
and, obviously, from the Internet to communications systems.  In sum,

this reliance of all of the nationÕs critical infrastructures on IT makes anyof them vulnerable to a terrorist attack on their computer or telecommu-
nications systems.An attack involving IT can take different forms.  The IT itself can be
the target. Or, a terrorist can either launch or exacerbate an attack by
exploiting the IT infrastructure, or use IT to interfere with attempts to
achieve a timely response.  Thus, IT is both a target and a weapon.  Like-

wise, IT also has a major role in counterterrorismÑit can prevent, detect,and mitigate terrorist attacks. For example, advances in information fusion
and data mining may facilitate the identification of important patterns of
behavior that help to uncover terrorists or their plans in time to prevent
attacks.While there are many possible scenarios for an attack on someelement(s) of the IT infrastructure (which includes the Internet, the tele-
communications infrastructure, embedded/real-time computing such as
SCADA [supervisory control and data acquisition] systems, and dedi-
cated computing devices such as desktop computers), the committee
believes that the most devastating consequences would occur if an attack
on or using IT were part of a multipronged attack with other, more physi-
cal components.  In this context, compromised IT could expand terrorist

opportunities to widen the damage of a physical attack, diminish timely
responses to the attack, and heighten terror in the population by provid-
ing false information about the nature of the threat.The likelihood of a terrorist attack against or through the use of the ITinfrastructure must be understood in the context of terrorists.  Like other

organizations, terrorist groups are likely to utilize their limited resources
in activities that maximize impact and visibility.  A decision by terrorists

to use IT, or any other means, in an attack depends on factors such as the
kinds of expertise and resources available, the publicity they wish to gain,
and the symbolic value of an attack.  How terrorists weigh such factors is

not known in advance.  Those wanting to create immediate public fear
Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3EXECUTIVE SUMMARYand terror are more likely to use a physical attack than an attack thattargets IT exclusively.WHAT CAN BE DONE NOW:SHORT-TERM RECOMMENDATIONSThe committee makes two short-term recommendations with respectto the nationÕs communications and information systems.Short-Term Recommendation 1: The nation should develop a pro-gram that focuses on the communications and computing needs of emer-
gency responders.  Such a program would have two essential compo-

nents:¥Ensuring that authoritative, current-knowledge expertise and sup-port regarding IT are available to emergency-response agencies
prior to and during emergencies, including terrorist attacks.¥Upgrading the capabilities of the command, control, communica-tions, and intelligence (C3I) systems of emergency-response agen-
cies through the use of existing technologies.  Such upgrades might

include transitioning from analog to digital systems and deploying
a separate emergency-response communications network in the
aftermath of a disaster.Short-Term Recommendation 2: The nation should promote the useof best practices in information and network security in all relevant public
agencies and private organizations.¥For IT users on the operational level: Ensure that adequate informa-tion-security tools are available.  Conduct frequent, unannounced

red-team penetration testing of deployed systems.  Promptly fix

problems and vulnerabilities that are known.  Mandate the use of

strong authentication mechanisms.  Use defense-in-depth in addi-

tion to perimeter defense.¥For IT vendors: Develop tools to monitor systems automatically forconsistency with defined secure configurations.  Provide well-

engineered schemes for user authentication based on hardware
tokens.  Conduct more rigorous testing of software and systems for

security flaws.¥For the federal government: Position critical federal information sys-tems as models for good security practices.  Remedy the failure of

the market to account adequately for information security so that
appropriate market pro-security mechanisms develop.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMWHAT CAN BE DONE IN THE FUTUREBecause the possible attacks on the nationÕs IT infrastructure vary sowidely, it is difficult to argue that any one type is more likely than others.
This fact suggests the value of a long-term commitment to a strategic
research and development program that will increase the overall robust-
ness of the computer and telecommunications networks.  Such a program

could improve the nationÕs ability to prevent, detect, respond to, andrecover from terrorist attacks. This agenda would also have general appli-
cations, such as reducing cybercrime and responding to natural disasters.
Three critical areas of research are information and network security, C3I
systems for emergency response, and information fusion.  Although tech-

nology is central to these three areas, it is not the sole element of concern.
Research in these areas must be multidisciplinary, involving technolo-
gists, social scientists, and domain experts.  Since technology deployed

for operational purposes is subject to the reality of implementation and
use by humans, technology cannot be studied in isolation from how it is
deployed and used.Information and Network SecurityResearch in information and network security is relevant to the nationÕscounterterrorism efforts for several reasons. IT attacks can amplify the
impact of physical attacks and lessen the effectiveness of emergency
responses.  IT attacks on SCADA systems could be devastating.  The

increasing levels of social and economic damage caused by cybercrime
suggest a corresponding increase in the likelihood of severe damage
through cyberattacks.  The technology discussed here is relevant to fight-

ing cybercrime and to conducting efforts in defensive information warfare.Research in information and network security can be grouped in fourareas: authentication, detection, containment, and recovery; a fifth set of
topics such as dealing with buggy code is broadly applicable.¥Authentication is relevant to better ways of preventing unautho-rized parties from gaining access to a computer system to cause harm.
¥Detection of intruders with harmful intentions is critical for thwart-ing their actions.  However, because intruders take great care to hide their

entry and/or make their behavior look innocuous, such detection is a
very challenging problem (especially when the intruder is an insider gone

bad).¥Containment is necessary if the success of an attacker is to be limitedin scope.  Although the principle of graceful degradation under attack is

well accepted, system and network design for graceful degradation is not
well understood.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5EXECUTIVE SUMMARY¥Recovery involves backup and decontamination.  In a security con-text, backup methods for use under adversarial conditions and applicable
to large systems are needed.  Decontamination
Ñthe process of distin-guishing the clean system state from the infected portions and eliminat-
ing the causes of those differencesÑis especially challenging when a sys-tem cannot be shut down.¥Other areas.  Buggy code (i.e., flawed computer programs) is prob-ably the oldest unsolved problem in computer science, and there is no
particular reason to think that research can solve the problem once and
for all.  One approach to the problem is to provide incentives to install

fixes, even though the fixes themselves may carry risks such as exposing
other software flaws.  Many system vulnerabilities result from 
improperadministration, and better system administration tools for specifying secu-rity policies and checking system configurations are necessary.  Research
in tools for auditing functionality to ensure that hardware and software
have the prescribedÑand no additionalÑfunctionality would be helpful.Security that is more transparent would have higher adoption rates.  Under-
standing the failure in the marketplace of previous attempts to build incomputer security would help guide future research efforts.IT and C3I for Emergency ResponseC3I systems are critical to emergency responders for coordinatingtheir efforts and increasing the promptness and effectiveness of their
response.  C3I for emergency response to terrorist attacks poses chal-

lenges that differ from natural disasters:  the number of responding agen-

ciesÑfrom local, state, and federal governmentsÑincreases the degree ofcomplexity, while the additional security or law-enforcement presence
that is required may interfere with rescue and recovery operations.C3I systems for emergency responders face many challenges:¥Regarding ad hoc interoperability, different emergency respondersmust be able to communicate with each other and other agencies, and
poor interoperability among responding agencies is a well-known prob-
lem.  Thus, for example, there is a technical need for protocols and tech-

nology that can facilitate interconnection and interoperation.¥Emergency situations result in extraordinary demands on commu-nications capacity.  Research is needed on using residual capacity more
effectively and deploying additional (ÒsurgeÓ) capacity.¥In responding to disasters, emergency-response managers needdecision-support tools that can assist them in sorting, evaluating, filtering,and integrating information from a vast array of voice and data traffic.¥During an emergency, providing geographically sensitive publicInformation Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMinformation that is relevant to where people are (e.g., for evacuation pur-
poses) is a challenging technical problem.¥Sensors deployed in an emergency could track the spread of nuclear orbiological contaminants, locate survivors (e.g., through heat emanations
or sounds), and find pathways through debris.¥Location identification of people and structures is a major problemwhen there is physical damage to a structure or an area.Information FusionInformation fusion promises to play a central role in the prevention,
detection, and response to terrorism.  For example, the effectiveness of

checkpoints such as airline boarding gates could be improved signifi-
cantly by creating information-fusion tools to support checkpoint opera-
tors in real time (a prevention task).  Also, advances in the automatic

interpretation of image, video, and other kinds of unstructured data could
aid in detection.  Finally, early response to biological attacks could be

supported by collecting and analyzing real-time data such as admissions
to hospital emergency rooms and purchases of nonprescription drugs in
grocery stores.  The ability to acquire, integrate, and interpret a range and

volume of data will support decision makers such as emergency-response
units and intelligence organizations.Data mining is a technology for analyzing historical and current online
data to support informed decision making by learning general patterns
from a large volume of specific examples.  But to be useful for counter-

terrorist purposes, such efforts must be possible over data in a variety of
different and nonstructured formats, such as text, image, and video in
multiple languages.  In addition, new research is needed to normalize and

combine data collected from multiple sources to improve data inter-operability.  And, new techniques for 
data visualization will be useful in
exploiting human capabilities for pattern recognition.Privacy and ConfidentialityConcerns over privacy and confidentiality are magnified in a counter-terrorism intelligence context.  The perspective of intelligence gatherers,

Òcollect everything in case something might be useful,Ó conflicts with thepro-privacy tenet of ÒdonÕt collect anything unless you know you needit.Ó  To resolve this conflict, research is needed to provide policy makers
with accurate information about the impact on privacy and confidentiality
of different kinds of data disclosure.  Furthermore, the development of

new privacy-sensitive techniques may make it possible to provide useful
information to 
analysts without compromising individual privacy.  A va-
Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.7EXECUTIVE SUMMARYriety of policy actions could also help to reduce the consequences of pri-vacy violations.Other Important Technology AreasThis report also briefly addresses three other technology areas: robotics,sensors, and modeling and simulation:¥Robots, which can be used in environments too dangerous for human
beings, combine complex mechanical, perceptual, and computer and tele-
communications systems, and pose significant research challenges such
as the management of a team of robots and their integration.¥Sensors, used to detect danger in the environment, are most effec-
tive when they are linked in a distributed sensor network, a problem that
continues to pose interesting research problems.¥Modeling and simulation can play important roles throughout crisis-
management activities by making predictions about how events might
unfold and by testing alternative operational choices.  A key challenge is

understanding the utility and limitations of models hastily created in
response to an immediate crisis.People and OrganizationsTechnology is always used in some social and organizational context,and human culpability is central in understanding how the system might
succeed or fail.  The technology cannot be examined in isolation from how

it is deployed.  Technology aimed at assisting people is essential to modern

everyday life.  At the same time, if improperly deployed, the technology

can actually make the problem worse; human error can be extremely
costly in time, money, and lives.  Good design can dramatically reduce

the incidence of error.Principles of Human-Centered DesignSystems must be designed from a holistic, systems-oriented perspec-tive.  Principles that should guide such design include the following:
¥Put human beings Òin the loopÓ on a regular basis.  Systems that use
human beings only when automation is incapable of handling a situation
are invariably prone to Òhuman error.Ó¥Avoid common-mode failures, and recognize that common modes are notalways easy to detect.¥Observe the distinction between work as prescribed and work as practiced.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMProcedures that address work as prescribed (e.g., tightening proceduresand requiring redundant checking) often interfere with getting work done
(i.e., work as practiced).¥Probe security measures independently using tiger teams.  Tiger-team
efforts, undertaken to test an organizationÕs operational security postureusing teams that simulate what a determined attacker might do, do what
is necessary in order to penetrate security.Organizational Resistance to Interagency CooperationAn effective response to a serious terrorist incident will inevitablyrequire interagency cooperation.  However, because different agencies

developÑand could reasonably be expected to developÑdifferent inter-nal cultures for handling the routine situations that they mostly address,
interagency cooperation in a large-scale disaster is likely to be difficult
under the best of circumstances.There are no easy answers for bridging the cultural gulfs betweenagencies that are seldom called upon to interact.  Effective interagency

cooperation in times of crisis requires strong, sustained leadership that
places a high priority on such cooperation and is willing to expend budget
and personnel resources in support of it.  Exercises and activities that

promote interagency cooperation help to identify and solve some social,
organizational, and technical problems, and also help to reveal the rival-
ries between agencies.Research Implications Associated with Human andOrganizational FactorsTo better integrate the insights of social science into operational ITsystems, research is relevant in at least four different areas:¥Formulating of system development methods that are more ame-
nable to the incorporation of domain knowledge and social science exper-
tise;¥Translating social science research findings into guidelines andmethods that are readily applied by the technical community;¥Developing reliable security measures that do not interfere withwork processes of legitimate employees; and¥Understanding the IT issues related to the disparate organizationalcultures of agencies that will be fused under the Department of Home-
land Security.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.9EXECUTIVE SUMMARYRATIONALIZING THE LONG-TERM RESEARCH AGENDAThe committee is silent on which government agency would bestsupport the proposed research agenda.  However, the research agenda

should be characterized by the following:¥Support of multidisciplinary problem-oriented research that is use-ful both to civilian and to military users;¥A deep understanding and assessment of vulnerabilities;¥A substantial effort in research areas with a long time horizon forpayoff, and tolerance of research directions that may not promise imme-
diate applicability;¥Oversight by a board or other entity with sufficient stature to at-tract top talent to work in the field and to provide useful feedback; and¥Attention to the human resources needed to sustain the counter-terrorism IT research agenda.One additional attribute of this R&D infrastructure would be desir-able:  the ability of researchers to learn from each other in a relatively free

and open intellectual environment.  Constraining the openness of that

environment such as with classified research would have negative conse-
quences for the research itself.  Yet the free and open dissemination of

information has potential costs, as terrorists may obtain information that
they can use against us.  The committee believes (or at least hopes) that

there are other ways of reconciling the undeniable tension, and calls for
some thought to be given to a solution to this dilemma.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.101Background and Introduction
1.1WHAT IS TERRORISM?
Terrorism is usually defined in terms of non-state-sponsored attackson civilians, perpetrated with the intent of spreading fear and intimida-
tion.  Terrorism can occur on many different scales and can cause a wide

range of impacts.  For many Americans, the events of September 11, 2001,

changed dramatically their perceptions of what terrorism could entail.  In

the space of a few hours, thousands of American lives were lost, and
property damage in the tens of billions of dollars occurredÑan obviously
high-impact event.  However, as illustrated by the subsequent anthrax

attacks, widespread disruption of key societal functions, loss of publicconfidence in the ability of governmental institutions to keep society safe,widespread loss of peace of mind, and/or pervasive injury to a societyÕs
way of life also count as manifestations of Òhigh impact.Ó  It is on such

high-impact, catastrophic dimensions of terrorism that the Committee on
the Role of Information Technology in Responding to Terrorism decided
to concentrate in order to keep the analytical focus of this report manage-
able.The committee does not mean to suggest that only events of the mag-nitude of those on  September 11 are worth considering. But the commit-

tee is primarily addressing events that would result in long-lasting and/
or major financial or life-safety impacts and that would generally require
a coordinated response among multiple agencies, or are in many other
respects very complicated to manage.   Damaging and destructive though

individual attacks are, the digital equivalent of a single car bomb withInformation Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11BACKGROUND AND INTRODUCTIONconventional explosives (e.g., a single hacker breaking into a nominally
unsecured 
system that does not tunnel into other critical systems) is notthe primary focus of this report.In the context considered here, the adversary must be conceptualizedas a very patient, smart, and disciplined opponent with many resources
(money, personnel, time) at its disposal.  Thus, in an information tech-

nology context, the Òlone hackerÓ threat
Ñoften described in terms ofmaladjusted teenage males with too much time on their handsÑis not theappropriate model.  Protection against 
Òankle bitersÓ and 
Òscript kiddiesÓwho have the technical skills and understanding as well as the time
needed to discover and exploit vulnerabilities is of course worth some
effort, but it is important as well to consider seriously the larger threat
that potentially more destructive adversaries pose.1.2THE ROLE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN
NATIONAL LIFE AND IN COUNTERTERRORISMInformation technology (IT) is essential to virtually all of the nationÕscritical infrastructures, which makes any of them vulnerable to a terrorist
attack on the computer or telecommunications networks of those infra-
structures.  IT plays a critical role in managing and operating nuclear-

power plants, dams, the electric-power grid, the air-traffic-control system,
and financial institutions. Large and small companies rely on computers
to manage payroll, track inventory and sales, and perform research and
development.  Every stage in the distribution of food and energy from

producer to retail consumer relies on computers and networks.  A more

recent trend is the embedding of computing capability in all kinds of
devices and environments, as well as the networking of embedded sys-
tems into larger systems.1  And, most obviously, IT is the technological
underpinning of the nationÕs communications systems, from the localloop of Òplain old telephone serviceÓ to the high-speed backbone connec-
tions that support data traffic. These realities make the computer and
communications systems of the nation a critical infrastructure in and of
themselves, as well as major components of other kinds of critical infra-
structure, such as energy or transportation systems.In addition, while IT per se refers to computing and communicationstechnologies, the hardware and software (i.e., the technological artifacts1Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  2001.
Embedded, Everywhere: A Research Agenda for Networked Systems of Embedded Computers.National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.  (Note that most Computer Science and Tele-
communications Board reports contain many references to relevant literature and addi-tional citations.)Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMof computers, routers, operating systems, browsers, fiber-optic lines, andso on) are part of a larger construct that involves people and organiza-
tions.  The display on a computer system presents information for a person

who has his or her own psychological and emotional attributes and who
is usually part of an organization with its own culture and standard oper-
ating procedures.  Thus, to understand how IT might fail or how the use

of IT might not achieve the objectives desired, it is always necessary to
consider the larger entity in which the IT is embedded.IT also has a major role in the prevention, detection, and mitigation ofterrorist attacks.2  This report focuses on two critical applications.  First,
emergency response involves the agencies, often state and local, that are
called upon to respond to terrorist incidentsÑfirefighters, police, ambu-lance, and other emergency health care workers, and so on.  These agen-

cies are critically reliant on information technology to communicate, to
coordinate, and to share information in a prompt, reliable, and intelligible
fashion.  Second, information awareness involves promoting a broad

knowledge of critical information in the intelligence community to iden-
tify important patterns of behavior.  Advances in information fusion,

which is the aggregation of data from multiple sources for the purpose of
discovering some insight, may be able to uncover terrorists or their plans
in time to prevent attacks.  In addition to prevention and detection, IT

may also help rapidly and accurately identify the nature of an attack and
aid in responding to it more effectively.1.3THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE
AND ASSOCIATED RISKSThe IT infrastructure can be conceptualized as having four majorelements: the Internet, the conventional telecommunications infrastruc-
ture, embedded/real-time computing (e.g., avionics systems for aircraft
control, supervisory control and data acquisition [SCADA] systems con-2Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, 1996,Computing and Communications in the Extreme:  Research for Crisis Management and Other

Applications, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.; Computer Science and Tele-communications Board, National Research Council, 1999, Information Technology Research forCrisis Management, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.  For purposes of the present
report, prevention is relevant to the period of time significantly prior to an attack; duringthat period, a pending attack can be identified and the terrorist planning process for thatattack disrupted or preempted.  Detection is relevant in the period of time immediately

before or during an attack (since an attack must first be detected before a response occurs).Mitigation is relevant during the time immediately after an attack, and it generally involvesactions related to damage and loss minimization, recovery, and reconstitution.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.13BACKGROUND AND INTRODUCTIONtrolling electrical energy distribution), and dedicated computing devices(e.g., desktop computers).Each of these elements plays a different role in national life, and eachhas different specific vulnerabilities.  Nevertheless, the ways in which IT

can be damaged fall into three categories.3  A system or network can
become:¥Unavailable.  That is, using the system or network at all becomes
very difficult or impossible.  The e-mail does not go through, or the com-
puter simply freezes, or response time becomes intolerably long.¥Corrupted.  That is, the system or network continues to operate, but
under some circumstances of operation, it does not provide accurate resultsor information when one would normally expect.  Alteration of data, for

example, could have this effect.¥Compromised.  That is, someone with bad intentions gains access to
some or all of the capabilities of the system or network or the information
available through it.  The threat is that such a person could use privileged

information or system control to further his or her malign purposes.These types of damage are not independentÑfor example, an attackercould compromise a system in order to render it unavailable.Different attackers might have different intentions with respect to IT.In some cases, an element of the IT infrastructure itself might be a target
to be destroyed (e.g., the means for people to communicate or to engage
in financial transactions).  Alternatively, the target of the terrorist might

be another kind of critical infrastructure (e.g., the electric-power grid),
and the terrorist could either launch or exacerbate the attack by exploiting
the IT infrastructure, or use it to interfere with attempts to achieve a
timely and effective response.In short, IT is both a target and a weapon that can be deployed againstother targets.  Counterterrorist activities thus seek to reduce the likeli-

hood that IT functionality will be diminished as a result of an attack or as
a result of the damage that might come from the use of IT as a weapon
against valued targets.A terrorist attack that involves the IT infrastructure can operate inone of several modes. First, an attack can come in Òthrough the wiresÓ as
a hostile program (e.g., a virus or a Trojan horse program) or as a denial-3Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  2002.
Cybersecurity Today and Tomorrow: Pay Now or Pay Later.  National Academy Press, Washing-ton, D.C.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMof-service attack.4  Second, some IT element may be physically destroyed(e.g., a critical data center or communications link blown up) or compro-
mised (e.g., IT hardware surreptitiously modified in the distribution
chain).  Third, a trusted insider may be compromised (such a person, for

instance, may provide passwords that permit outsiders to gain entry);5such insiders may also be conduits for hostile software or hardware modi-
fications.  All of these modes are possible and, because of the highly

public and accessible nature of our IT infrastructure and of our society in
general, it is impossible to fully secure this infrastructure against them.
Nor are they mutually exclusive, and in practice they can be combined to
produce even more destructive effects.4A Òthrough-the-wiresÓ attack is conducted entirely at a distance and requires no physical
proximity to the target.5Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council. 1999.Trust in Cyberspace. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.152Types of Threats
Associated with InformationTechnology Infrastructure
Most of the nationÕs civil communications and data network infra-structure is not hardened against attack, but this infrastructure tends to be
localized either in geography or in mode of communication.  Thus, if no

physical damage is done to them, the computing and communications
capabilities disrupted in an attack are likely to be recoverable in a rela-
tively short time.  Although their scope or scale is limited, they are none-

theless potentially attractive targets for what might be called Òincremen-
talÓ terrorism.  That is, terrorists could use IT as the weapon in a series of
relatively local attacks that are repeated against different targetsÑsuch as
banks, hospitals, or local government servicesÑso often that public confi-
dence is shaken and significant economic disruption results.However, this report focuses primarily on catastrophic terrorism, andthe committeeÕs analysis is aimed at identifying threats of that magnitude
in particular and at proposing science and technology (S&T) strategies for
combating them.  Of course, serious efforts are needed to develop and

deploy security technologies to harden all elements of the IT infrastruc-
ture to reduce the potential for damage from repeated attacks.2.1ATTACK ON IT AS AN AMPLIFIER
OF A PHYSICAL ATTACKGiven ITÕs critical role in many other elements of the national infra-structure and in responding to crises, the committee believes that the
targeting of IT as part of a multipronged attack scenario could have the
most catastrophic consequences. Compromised IT can have several disas-
trous effects:   expansion of terroristsÕ opportunities to widen the damage
Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMof a physical attack (e.g., by providing false information that drives peopletoward, rather than away from, the point of attack); diminution of timely
responses to an attack (e.g., by interfering with communications systems
of first responders); and heightened terror in the population through mis-
information (e.g., by providing false information about the nature of a
threat). The techniques to compromise key IT systemsÑfor example,launching distributed denial-of-service (DDOS) attacks against Web sites
and servers of key government agencies at the federal, state, and local
levels; using DDOS attacks to disrupt agenciesÕ telephone services and
the emergency-response 911 system; or sending e-mails containing false
information with forged return addresses so that they appear to be from
trusted sourcesÑare fairly straightforward and widely known.2.2OTHER POSSIBILITIES FOR ATTACK INVOLVING IT
When an element of the IT infrastructure is directly targeted, the goalis to destroy a sufficient amount of IT-based capability to have a signifi-
cant impact, and the longer that impact persists, the more successful it is
from the terroristÕs point of view.  For example, one might imagine at-
tacks on the computers and data storage devices associated with impor-
tant facilities.  Irrecoverable loss of critical operating data and essential

records on a large scale would likely result in catastrophic and irrevers-
ible damage to the U.S. economy. However, most major businesses al-
ready have disaster-recovery plans in place that include the backup of
their data in a variety of distributed and well-protected locations (and in
many cases, they augment backups of data with backup computing and
communications facilities).1  While no law of physics prevents the simul-taneous destruction of all data backups and backup facilities in all loca-
tions, such an attack would be highly complex and difficult to execute
and is thus highly unlikely.2.2.1Attacks on the Internet
The infrastructure of the Internet is another possible terrorist target,and given the InternetÕs public prominence, it may appeal to terrorists asan attractive target.  The Internet could be seriously degraded for a rela-

tively short period of time by a denial-of-service attack,2 but such impact1On the other hand, backup sites are often sharedÑone site may protect the data ofmultiple firms.2A denial-of-service attack floods a target with a huge number of requests for service,thus keeping it busy servicing these (bogus) requests and unable to service legitimate ones.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.17TYPES OF THREATS ASSOCIATED WITH IT INFRASTRUCTUREis unlikely to be long lasting. The Internet itself is a densely connectednetwork of networks that automatically routes around links that become
unavailable,3 which means that a large number of important nodes would
have to be destroyed simultaneously to bring it down for an extended
period of time.  Destruction of some key Internet nodes could result in

reduced network capacity and slow traffic across the Internet, but the
ease with which Internet communications can be rerouted would mini-
mize the long-term damage.4 (In this regard, the fact that substantial
data-networking services survived the September 11 disaster despite the
destruction of large amounts of equipmentÑconcentrated in the WorldTrade Center complexÑreflected redundancies in the infrastructure anda measure of good fortune as well.)The terrorist might obtain higher leverage with a Òthrough-the-wiresÓattack that would require the physical replacement of components in
Internet relay points on a large scale,5 though such attacks would be
much harder to plan and execute.  Another attack that would provide

higher leverage is on the InternetÕs Domain Name System (DNS), whichtranslates domain names (e.g., example.com) to specific Internet Protocol
(IP) addresses (e.g., 192.0.34.72) denoting specific Internet nodes.  A rela-

tively small number of Òroot name serversÓ underpins the DNS.  Al-
though the DNS is designed to provide redundancy in case of accidental
failure, it has some vulnerability to an intentional physical attack that
might target all name servers simultaneously.  Although Internet opera-

tions would not halt instantly, an increasing number of sites would, over
a period of time measured in hours to days, become inaccessible without
root name servers to provide authoritative translation information.  How-

ever, recovery from such an attack would be unlikely to take more than
several daysÑdamaged servers can be replaced, since they are general-purpose computers that are in common use.In addition, most companies today do not rely on the Internet to carryout their core business functions.  Even if a long-term disruption to the

Internet were a major disruption to an e-commerce company such as
Amazon.com or Dell, most other companies could resort to using phones3Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  2001.
The InternetÕs Coming of Age.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.  Note, however,
that the amount of redundancy is primarily limited by economic factors.4This comment largely applies to U.S. use of the Internet.  It is entirely possible that other
nationsÑwhose traffic is often physically routed through one or two locations in the UnitedStatesÑwould fare much worse in this scenario.5For example, many modern computers allow certain hardware components to be repro-grammed under software control.  Improper use of this capability can damage hardware
permanently.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMand faxes again to replace the Internet for many important functions.  (For
example, the Department of the Interior has been largely off the Internet
since December 5, 2001,6 but it has continued to operate more or less as
usual.)Because the Internet is not yet central to most of American society, theimpact of even severe damage to the Internet is less than what might be
possible through other modes of terrorist attack.  However, current trends

suggest that the reliance on the Internet for key functions is likely to grow
in the future, despite the existence of real security threats, and so this
assessment about lower levels of impact from attacks on the Internet may
become less valid in the future.Box 2.1 provides some historical examples of attacks on the Internet.2.2.2Attacks on the Public Switched Network
The telecommunications infrastructure of the public switched net-work is likely to be less robust than the Internet. Although the long-haul
telecommunications infrastructure is capable of dealing with single-point
failures (and perhaps even double-point failures) in major switching cen-
ters, the physical redundancy in that infrastructure is finite, and damag-
ing a relatively small number of major switching centers for long-distance
telecommunications could result in a fracturing of the United States into
disconnected regions.7  Particular localities may be disrupted for a con-
siderable length of timeÑin the aftermath of the September 11 attacks inNew York City, telephone service in the downtown area took months to
restore fully.  Note also that many supposedly independent circuits are

trenched together in the physical trenches along certain highway and rail
rights-of-way, and thus these conduits constitute not just Òchoke pointsÓbut rather Òchoke routesÓ that are hundreds of miles long and that could
be attacked anywhere.An additional vulnerability in the telecommunications infrastructureis the local loop connecting central switching offices to end users; full
recovery from the destruction of a central office entails the tedious rewir-
ing of tens or hundreds of thousands of individual connections.  Destruc-

tion of central offices on a large scale is difficult, simply because even an
individual city has many of them, but destruction of a few central offices6For additional information, see <http://www.computerworld.com/storyba/0,4125,NAV47_STO66665,00.html>.7An exacerbating factor is that many organizations rely on leased lines to providehigh(er)-assurance connectivity.  However, these lines are typically leased from providers
of telecommunications infrastructure and hence suffer from many of the same kinds ofvulnerabilities as those that affect ordinary lines.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.19TYPES OF THREATS ASSOCIATED WITH IT INFRASTRUCTUREBOX 2.1Historical Examples of Attacks on the Internet
¥In March 1999, the Melissa virus infected e-mail systems worldwide.  Accord-
ing to estimates from federal officials, the virus caused $80 million in disruption, lost
commerce, and computer downtime, and infected 1.2 million computers.  The virus
launched when a user opened an infected Microsoft Word 8 or Word 9 documentcontained in either Office 97 or Office 2000.1  The virus, programmed as a macro in
the Word document, prompted the Outlook e-mail program to send the infecteddocument to the first 50 addresses in the victimÕs Outlook address book.  When a
recipient opened the attachment in the e-mail, which appeared to be from a friend,
co-worker, boss or family member, the virus spread to the first 50 e-mail addresses inthat personÕs address book, and thus continued to propagate.  Six months after the
first appearance of Melissa, variant strains continued to make their way into usersÕ
inboxes despite warnings and widespread publicity about opening attachments whilethe macro function is enabled.¥Over a four-day period beginning February 7, 2000, distributed denial-of-
service attacks temporarily shut down Yahoo, Amazon, E*Trade, eBay, CNN.com,and other Web sites.  Yahoo shut down its site for several hours during peak viewing
hours at an estimated cost of $116,000.2  While the companies behind the targetedWeb sites said that the attacks themselves would have minor financial impact, theattacks were of such importance that the White House convened a group of comput-er-security experts and technology executives to discuss the InternetÕs vulnerabilities.
Federal officials spent millions in investigations of the DDOS attacks that garneredsignificant public attention.¥On July 19, 2001, the Code Red program ÒwormÓ infected more than 359,000
computers in less than 14 hours and 2,000 new infections per minute occurred dur-ing the height of its attack.  Nimda, a similar hostile program first appearing on
September 18, 2001, was potentially more damaging because it combined success-
ful features of previous viruses such as Melissa and ILOVEYOU.  During the first 24
hours, Nimda spread through e-mail, corporate networks, and Web browsers, infect-ing as many as 150,000 Web server and personal computers (PCs) in the United
States.  The virusÑÒadminÓ spelled backwardsÑwas designed to affect PCs and
servers running the Windows operating system and to resend itself every 10 daysunless it was deleted.  Nimda reproduced itself both via e-mail and over the WebÑ
a user could be victimized by merely browsing a Web site that was infected.  Further-
more, the infected machines sent out a steady stream of probes looking for newsystems to attack.  The additional traffic could effectively shut down company net-

works and Web sites; Nimda-generated traffic did not slow down the Internet over-all, but infected companies reported serious internal slowdowns.3   Code Red and
Nimda are examples of these new blended threats.  Both are estimated to have

caused $3 billion worldwide in lost productivity and for testing, cleaning, and de-ploying patches to computer systems.41Ann Harrison.  1999.  ÒFAQ: The Melissa Virus,Ó COMPUTERWORLD, March 31.  Avail-
able online at <http://www.computerworld.com/news/1999/story/0,11280,27617,00.html>.2Ross Kerber.  2000.  ÒVandal Arrests Would Only Be the Beginning Penalties, Damages
Seen Hard to Determine,Ó The Boston Globe, February 11.3Henry Norr.  2001.  
ÒNew Worm Plagues Systems Worldwide,Ó The San Francisco Chron-icle, September 19.4Gregory Hulme.  2002.  
ÒOne Step AheadÑSecurity Managers Are Trying to Be Preparedfor the Next Blended Threat Attack,Ó InformationWeek, May 20.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMassociated with key facilities or agencies (e.g., those of emergency-re-sponse agencies or of the financial district) would certainly have a signifi-
cant immediate though localized impact.  However, the widespread avail-

ability of cellular communications, and mobile base-stations deployable
in emergency conditions, may mitigate the effect of central office losses.2.2.3The Financial System
The IT systems and networks supporting the nationÕs financial sys-tem are undeniably critical.  The financial system is based on the Federal

Reserve banking system, a system for handling large-value financial trans-
actions (including Fedwire operated by the Federal Reserve, CHIPS, and
SWIFT), and a second system for handling small-value retail transactions
(including the Automated Clearing House, the credit-card system, and
paper checks).8  By its nature, the system for retail transactions is highly
decentralized, while the system for large-value transactions is more cen-
tralized.  Both the Federal Reserve system and the system for large-value
transactions operate on networks that are logically distinct from the pub-
lic telecommunications system or the Internet, and successful information
attacks on these systems likely necessitate significant insider access.92.2.4Embedded/Real-Time Computing
Embedded/real-time computing in specific systems could be at-tacked.  For example, many embedded computing systems could be cor-

rupted over time.10  Of particular concern could be avionics in airplanes,
8For an extended (though dated) discussion of the infrastructure underlying the financialsystem, see John C. Knight et al., 1997, Summaries of Three Critical Infrastructure Applications,Computer Science Report No. CS-97-27, Department of Computer Science, University ofVirginia, Charlottesville, November 14.9The fact that these networks are logically separate from those of the Internet and thepublic switched telecommunications network reduces the risk of penetration considerably.In addition, security consciousness is much higher in financial networks than it is on theInternet.  On the other hand, the fact that these networks are much smaller than the Internet

suggests that there is less redundancy in them and that the computing platforms are likelyto be less diverse compared with those on the Internet, a factor that tends to reduce securitycharacteristics as compared with those of the Internet.  Also, the physical infrastructure

over which these financial networks communicate is largely shared, which means that theyare vulnerable to large-scale physical disruptions or attacks on the telecommunicationsinfrastructure.10An inadvertent demonstration of this possibility was illustrated with the Y2K problemthat was overlooked in many embedded/real-time systems designed in the 1980s and ear-lier.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.21TYPES OF THREATS ASSOCIATED WITH IT INFRASTRUCTUREcollision-avoidance systems in automobiles, and other transportation sys-tems.  Such attacks would require a significant insider presence in techni-

cally responsible positions in key sectors of the economy over long peri-
ods of time.   Another example is that sensors, which can be important

elements of counterterrorism precautions, could be the target of an attack
or, more likely, precursor targets of a terrorist attack.2.2.5Control Systems in the National Critical Infrastructure
Another possible attack on embedded/real-time computing wouldbe an attack on the systems controlling elements of the nationÕs criticalinfrastructure, for example, the electric-power grid, the air-traffic-control
system, the financial network, and water purification and delivery.  An

attack on these systems could trigger an event, and conceivably stimulate
an inappropriate response that would drive large parts of the the overall
system into a catastrophic state.  Still another possibility is the compro-

mise or destruction of systems and networks that control and manage
elements of the nationÕs transportation infrastructure; such an attack couldintroduce chaos and disruption on a large scale that could drastically
reduce the capability of transporting people and/or freight (including
food and fuel).To illustrate, consider the electric-power grid, which is one of the few,if not the only, truly national infrastructures in which it is theoreticallypossible that a failure in a region could cascade to catastrophic propor-
tions before it could be dealt with.  The electric-power grid is controlled

by a variety of IT-based SCADA systems.  (Box 2.2 describes some of the

security issues associated with these systems.)  Attacks on SCADA sys-

tems could obviously result in disruption of the network (ÒsoftÓ damage),
but because SCADA is used to control physical elements, such attacks
could also result in irreversible physical damage.  In cases in which back-

ups for damaged components were not readily available (and might have
to be remanufactured from scratch), such damage could have long-lasting
impact.  (Similar considerations apply to other parts of the nationÕs infra-structure.)An electronic attack on a portion of the electric-power grid couldresult in significant damage, easily comparable to that associated with a
local blackout.  However, if terrorists took advantage of the chaos caused

by a local blackout, they could likely inflict greater physical damage than
would be possible in the absence of a blackout.Another plausible disaster scenario that could rise to the level of cata-strophic damage would be an attack on a local or regional power system
that cascaded to shut down electrical power over a much wider area and
possibly caused physical damage that could take weeks to repair.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMBOX 2.2Security Vulnerabilities and Problems of SCADA Systems
TodayÕs supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) systems have beendesigned with little or no attention to security.  For example, data in SCADA systems
are often sent Òin the clear.Ó Protocols for accepting commands are open, with no
authentication required.  Control channels are often wireless or leased lines that pass

through commercial telecommunications facilities.  Unencrypted radio-frequency
command pathways to SCADA systems are common and, for economic reasons, theInternet itself is increasingly used as a primary command pathway.  In general, there

is minimal protection against the forgery of control messages or of data and statusmessages.  Such control paths present obvious vulnerabilities.
In addition, todayÕs SCADA systems are built from commercial off-the-shelf com-ponents and are based on operating systems that are known to be insecure.  Dereg-
ulation has meant placing a premium on the efficient use of existing capacity, andhence interconnections to shift supply from one location to another have increased.
Problems of such distributed real-time dynamic control, in combination with thecomplex, highly interactive nature of the system being controlled, have become
major issues in operating the power grid reliably.A final problem arises because of the real-time nature of SCADA systems, inwhich timing may be critical to performance and optimal efficiency (timing is impor-tant because interrupts and other operations can demand millisecond accuracy):
security add-ons in such an environment can complicate timing estimates and causesevere degradation to SCADA performance.Compounding the difficulty of securing SCADA systems is the fact that informa-tion about their vulnerability is so readily available.  Such information was first
brought into general view in 1998-1999, when numerous details on potential Y2Kproblems were put up on the World Wide Web.  Additional information of greater

detailÑdealing with potential attacks that were directly or indirectly connected tothe PresidentÕs Commission on Critical Infrastructure ProtectionÑwas subsequentlyposted on Web pages as well.  Product data and educational videotapes from engi-

neering associations can be used to familiarize potential attackers with the basics ofthe grid and with specific elements.  Information obtained through semiautomated
reconnaissance to probe and scan the networks of a variety of power suppliers could
provide terrorists with detailed information about the internal workings of theSCADA network, down to the level of specific makes and models of equipment usedand version releases of corresponding software.  And more inside information could

be obtained from sympathetic engineers and operators.By comparison with the possibility of an attack on only a portion ofthe power grid, the actual feasibility of an attack that would result in a
cascading failure with a high degree of confidence is not clear; a detailed
study both of SCADA systems and the electric-power system would prob-

ably be required in order to assess this possibility.  However, because of

the inordinate complexity of the nationÕs electric-power grid, it would bedifficult for either grid operators or terrorists to predict with any confi-Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.23TYPES OF THREATS ASSOCIATED WITH IT INFRASTRUCTUREdence the effects on the overall grid from a major disruptive event in onepart of the system.  Thus, any nonlocalized impact on the power grid

would be as much a matter of chance as a foreseeable consequence.2.2.6Dedicated Computing Facilities
In many of the same ways that embedded computing could be at-tacked, dedicated computers such as desktop computers could also be
corrupted in ways that are hard to detect.  One possible channel comes

from the extensive use of untrustworthy IT talent among software ven-
dors.11  Once working on the inside, perhaps after a period of years in
which they act to gain responsibility and trust, it could happen that these
individuals would be able to introduce additional but unauthorized func-
tionality into systems that are widely used.  Under such circumstances,

the target might not be the general-purpose computer used in the major-
ity of offices around the country, but rather the installation of hidden
rogue code in particular sensitive offices.  Another possible channel for

attacking dedicated computing facilities results from the connection of
computers through the Internet; such connections provide a potential
route through which terrorists might attack computer systems that do
provide important functionality for many sectors of the economy.  Ex-

amples of widely used Internet-based vectors that, if compromised would
have a large-scale effect in a short time, include the operating systems
upgrades and certain shareware programs, such as those for sharing mu-
sic files. (It is likely that Internet-connected computer systems that pro-
vide critical functionality to companies and organizations are better pro-
tected through firewalls and other security measures than is the average
system on the Internet, but as press reports in recent years make clear,
such measures do not guarantee that outsiders cannot penetrate them.)2.3DISPROPORTIONATE IMPACTS
Some disaster scenarios could result in significant loss or damage thatis out of proportion to the actual functionality or capability destroyed.  In
11Untrustworthy talent may be foreign or domestic in origin.  Because foreign IT work-
ersÑwhether working in the United States (e.g., under an H1-B visa or a green card) oroffshore on outsourced workÑare generally not subject to thorough background investiga-tions, an obvious route is available through which foreign terrorist organizations can gain
insider access.  On the other hand, reports of American citizens having been successfully
recruited by foreign terrorist organizations add a degree of believability to the scenario ofdomestic IT talentÕs being used to compromise systems for terrorist purposes.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMparticular, localized damage that resulted in a massive loss of confidencein some critical part of the infrastructure could have such a dispropor-
tionate impact.  For example, if terrorists were able to make a credible

claim that the control software of a popular Òfly-by-wireÓ airliner was
corrupted and could be induced to cause crashes on demand, perhaps
demonstrating it once, public confidence in the airline industry might
well be undermined.  A more extreme scenario might be that the airlines

themselves would ground airplanes until they could be inspected and the
software validated.To the extent that critical industries or sectors rely upon any elementof the IT infrastructure, such disproportionate-impact disaster scenarios
are a possibility. For this reason, certain types of attack that do not cause
extensive actual damage must be considered to have some catastrophic
potential.  Accordingly, response plans must take into account how to

communicate with the public for purposes of reassurance. (This point is
beyond the scope of this report but is addressed in Making the NationSafer.12)2.4THREATS IN PERSPECTIVE:
POSSIBILITY, LIKELIHOOD, AND IMPACTWhile the scenarios described above are necessarily speculative, it ispossible to make some judgments that relate to their likelihood:¥For a variety of reasons, state support of terrorism poses threats ofa different and higher order of magnitude than does cybercrime or terror-
ism without state sponsorship.  These reasons include access to large

amounts of financial backing and the ability to maintain an actively
adversarial stance at a high level for extended periods of time.  For ex-

ample, terrorists with the support of a state might be able to use the stateÕsintelligence services to gain access to bribable or politically sympathetic
individuals in key decision-making places or to systematically corrupt
production or distribution of hardware or software.¥The most plausible threats are simple attacks launched againstcomplex targets.  The successful execution of complex attacks requires

that many things go right, so simplicity in attack planning is an important
consideration.  Complex rather than simple targets are desirable because

of the likelihood that the failure modes of a complex target are usually not12National Research Council.  2002.  
Making the Nation Safer: The Role of Science and Tech-nology in Countering Terrorism.  National Academies Press, Washington, D.C.
Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.25TYPES OF THREATS ASSOCIATED WITH IT INFRASTRUCTUREwell understood by its designers, and thus there are many more ways inwhich failure can occur in such systems.¥Attacks that require insider access are more difficult to carry outand thus less likely to occur than attacks that do not.  Insiders must be

placed or recruited and are not necessarily entirely trustworthy even from
the standpoint of the attacker.  Individuals with specialized expertise

chosen to be placed as infiltrators may not survive the screening process,
and because there is a limited number of such individuals, it can be diffi-
cult to insert an infiltrator into a target organization.  In addition, com-

pared to approaches not relying on insiders, insiders may leave behind
more tracks that can call attention to their activities.  This judgment de-

pends, of course, on the presumed diligence of employers in ensuring that
their key personnel are trustworthy, and it is worth remembering that the
most devastating espionage episodes in recent U.S. history have involved
insiders (i.e., Aldrich Ames and Robert Hanssen).¥Attacks that require execution over long periods of time are harderand thus less likely to mount than attacks that do not.  Planning often

takes place over a long period of time, but the actual execution of a plan
can be long as well as short.  When a plan requires extended activity that,

if detected, would be regarded as abnormal, it is more likely to be discov-
ered and/or thwarted.¥Terrorist attacks can be sustained over time as well as occurring inindividual instances.  If the effects of an attack sustained over time (per-

haps over months or years) are cumulative, and if the attack goes unde-
tected, the cumulative effects could reach very dangerous proportions.
Because such an attack proceeds a little bit at a time, the resources needed
to carry it out may well be less than those needed in more concentrated
attacks, thus making it more feasible.¥Plans that call for repeated attacks are less likely to succeed thanthose calling for a single attack.  For example, it is true that repeated

attacks against the Internet could have effects that would defeat efforts to
repair or secure it after one initial attack.  Such an onslaught would be

difficult to sustain, however, because it is highly likely to be detected, and
efforts would be made to counter it.  Instead, an adversary with the where-

withal to conduct such repeated attacks would more likely make the ini-
tial strike and then use the recovery period not to stage and launch an-
other strike against the Internet but to attack the physical infrastructure;
this strategy could leverage the inoperative Internet to cause additional
damage and chaos. (Of course, the fact that physical attacks may be more
difficult to conduct must also be taken into account.)¥The IT infrastructure (or some element of it) can be a weapon usedin an attack on something else as well as being the target of an attack.  An

attack using the IT infrastructure as a weapon has advantages and disad-Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMvantages from the point of view of a terrorist planner.  It can be conducted
at a distance in relative physical safety, in a relatively anonymous fashion,
and in potentially undetectable ways.  However, the impact of such an

attack (by assumption, on some other critical national asset) would be
indirect, harder to predict, and less certain.¥Some of the scenarios described above are potentially relevant toinformation warfare attacks against the United StatesÑthat is, attackslaunched or abetted by hostile nation-states and/or directed against U.S.
military forces or assets.  A hostile nation conducting an information

attack on the United States is likely to conceal its identity to minimize the
likelihood of retaliation, and thus it may resort to sponsoring terrorists
who can attack without leaving clear national signatures.The committee wishes to underscore a very important point regard-ing terrorist threats to the IT infrastructureÑthey are serious enough towarrant considerable national attention, but they are, in the end, only one
of a number of ways through which terrorists could act against the United
States.  Thus, the likelihood of some kind of terrorist attack against or

using the IT infrastructure must be understood in the context of a terrorist
organization that may have many other types of attack at its disposal,
including (possibly) chemical, biological, nuclear, radiological, suicide,
and explosive attacks.  This point is important because terrorists, like

other parties, have limited resources.  Thus, they are likely to concentrate

their efforts where the impact is largest for the smallest expenditure of
resources.Many factors would play into a terrorist decision to use one kind ofattack or another.  The particular kinds of expertise and level of resources

available, the effect that the terrorists wished to produce, the publicity
they wished to gain, the complexity of any attack contemplated, the sym-
bolic value of an attack, the risk of being caught, the likelihood of sur-
vival, the defenses that would be faced if a given attack was mounted,
and the international reaction to such an attack are all relevant to such a
decision.  How any given terrorist will weigh such factors cannot be

known in advance.For example, terrorists who want to create immediate public fear andterror are more likely to use a physical attack (perhaps in conjunction
with an attack using IT to amplify the resulting damage) than an attack
that targets IT exclusively.  The reason is that the latter is not likely to be

as cinematic as other attacks.  What would television broadcast?  There

would be no dead or injured people, no buildings on fire, no panic in the
streets, and no emergency-response crews coming to the rescue.  (This is

not to say that an attack targeting IT exclusively could not shake publicInformation Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.27TYPES OF THREATS ASSOCIATED WITH IT INFRASTRUCTUREconfidenceÑbut it would not have the same impact as images of deathand destruction in the streets.)Note also that ÒlikelihoodÓ is not a static quantity.  While it is true, all
else being equal, that it is appropriate to devote resources preferentially
to defending against highly likely attacks, the deployment of a defense
that addresses the threat of a highly likely Attack A may well lead to a
subsequent increase in the likelihood of a previously less likely Attack B.
In short, terrorists may not behave in accordance with expectations that
are based on static probability distributions.  It is therefore very difficult

to prioritize a research program for countering terrorism in the same way
that one might, for example, prioritize a program for dealing with natural
disasters.How likely are terrorist attacks on the IT infrastructure or attacksusing the IT infrastructure compared to terrorist attacks spreading small-
pox or smuggling a stolen nuclear weapon into the United States?  For

obvious reasons, the committee is not in a position to make such judg-
ments.  But while the considerations discussed in this section make cer-

tain types of attack more or less likely, none of the scenarios described in
Section  2.2 can be categorically excluded.
This fact argues in favor of a long-term commitment to a strategicR&D program that will contribute to the overall robustness of the tele-
communications and data networks and of the platforms associated with
them.  Such a program would involve both fundamental research into the

scientific underpinnings of information and network security as well as
the development of deployable technology that would contribute to in-
formation and network security.  Ultimately, the strengthening of the

nationÕs IT infrastructure can improve our ability to prevent, detect, re-spond to, and recover from terrorist attacks on the nation.1313Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, 1996,Computing and Communications in the Extreme:  Research for Crisis Management and Other
Applications, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C; Computer Science and Telecom-munications Board, National Research Council, 1999, Information Technology Research forCrisis Management, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.283Investing in InformationTechnology Research
This chapter describes the shape of a strategic research and develop-ment (R&D) program with respect to information technology for counter-
terrorism.  However, it should be noted that this program has broad

applicability not only for efforts against terrorism and information war-
fare but also for reducing cybercrime and responding to natural disasters.
While the scope and complexity of issues with respect to each of these
areas may well vary (e.g., a program focused on cybercrime may place
more emphasis on forensics useful in prosecution), the committee be-
lieves that there is enough overlap in the research problems and ap-
proaches to make it unwise to articulate a separate R&D program for each
area.Although many areas of information technology research could bepotentially valuable for counterterrorist purposes, the three areas de-
scribed below are particularly important for helping reduce the likeli-
hood or impact of a terrorist attack:1.Information and network security.  Research in information and net-work security is critically relevant to the nationÕs counterterrorism efforts
for several reasons.1  First, IT attacks can amplify the impact of physical
1Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council(NRC), 1991, Computers at Risk:  Safe Computing in the Information Age
, National AcademyPress, Washington, D.C. (hereafter cited as CSTB, NRC, 1991, Computers at Risk);  Computer
Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, 1999, Trust inCyberspace, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C. (hereafter cited as CSTB, NRC, 1999,Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.29INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCHattacks and lessen the effectiveness of emergency responses; reducingsuch vulnerabilities will require major advances in information and net-
work security.  IT attacks on supervisory control and data acquisition

(SCADA) systems in the control infrastructure could also be highly dam-
aging, and research to improve the security of such systems will be
needed.  Second, the increasing levels of social and economic damage

caused by cybercrime and the tendency to rely on the Internet as the
primary networking and communications channel both suggest that the
likelihood of severe damage through a cyberattack is increasing.  Finally,
the evolution of the Internet and the systems connected to it demonstrates
increasing homogeneity in hardware and software (Box 3.1), which makes
the Internet more vulnerable at the same time that it becomes more criti-
cal.  To address these problems, more researchers and trained profession-

als who are focused on information and network security will be needed.2.Systems for emergency response.  
ÒC3IÓ (command, control, commu-
nications, and intelligence) systems are critical to emergency responders
for coordinating efforts and increasing the promptness and effectiveness
of response (e.g., saving lives, treating the injured, and protecting prop-
erty).  While terrorist attacks and natural disasters have many similarities

with respect to the consequences of such events, the issues raised by C3I
for emergency response for terrorist disasters differ from those for natural
disasters for several reasons.  First, the number of responding agencies,

including those from the local, regional, state, and federal levelsÑwithpossibly conflicting and overlapping areas of responsibilityÑincreasesthe level of complexity.  (For example, in a terrorist attack scenario, the

Department of Defense [DOD] might be much more involved than it
would be in a natural disaster.)  Second, ongoing security and law-en-

forcement concerns are much stronger in the wake of a terrorist attack.
While looting is often a threat to the community affected by a natural
disaster (and may result in the deployment of a police presence in the
midst of the recovery effort), the threat from a follow-on terrorist attack
may well be much greater or more technologically sophisticated than that
posed by looters.  And, to the extent that an additional security or law-

enforcement presence is required, the sometimes-conflicting needs of se-
curity and law-enforcement agencies with the needs of othersÑfor ex-Trust in Cyberspace); Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National ResearchCouncil, 2001, Embedded, Everywhere:  A Research Agenda for Networked Systems of Embedded
Computers, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C. (hereafter cited as CSTB, NRC, 2001,Embedded, Everywhere).Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMBOX 3.1Monoculture and System Homogenity
The existence of ÒmonocultureÓ on the Internet has both advantages and disad-vantages.  Its primary advantage is that increased standardization of systems general-

ly allows for greater efficiencies (e.g., easier interoperability).  On the other hand,
monocultural environments are generally more vulnerable to a single well-designedattackÑa fact greatly exacerbated by the extensive interconnections that the Internet
provides.For example, a constant barrage of computer viruses has been designed to at-tack the weaknesses of the Windows operating system and its associated browser
and office productivity programs.  However, these viruses have had a negligible
direct effect on computers running other operating systems. Furthermore, while theseattacks can be propagated through computer servers running other operating sys-
tems, they are not propagated on these systems.
A monoculture is highly vulnerable to attacks because once a successful attackon the underlying system is developed, it can be multiplied at extremely low cost.
Thus, for all practical purposes, a successful attack on one system means that allsimilar (and similarly configured) systems connected to it can be attacked as well.As a general rule, inhomogeneity of systems would make broad-based attacksmore difficult.  This should be considered carefully when designing primary or re-
dundant critical network systems.(Natural Òliving systemsÓ provide an interesting analogy to the importance ofdiversity.  Heterogeneity plays an important role in preventing minor changes in theclimate, environment, or parasites from destroying the entire system.  Different spe-
cies demonstrate varying levels of vulnerability to the variety of challenges encoun-
tered, and this lends resilience to the system as a whole.  The diversity of species also
lessens the possibility of infectious disease spreading across the entire system.)ample, the fire and medical personnel on-siteÑmean that security andlaw enforcement may interfere with rescue and recovery operations.3.Information-fusion systems for the prevention, detection, attribution, andremediation of attacks.  ÒInformation fusionÓ promises to play a central role
in countering future terrorist efforts.  Information fusion is an essential

tool for the intelligence analysis needed if preemptive disruption of ter-
rorist attacks is to be successful.  Knowing that a biological attack is in

progress (an issue of detection) or determining the perpetrators of an
attack (an issue of attribution) may depend on the fusion of large amounts
of information  And, in many cases, early warning of an attack increases

the effectiveness of any counterresponse to it.  In every case, information

from many sources will have to be acquired, integrated, and appropri-
ately interpreted to support decision makers (ranging from emergency-
response units to intelligence organizations).  Given the range of formats,

the permanence and growing volume of information from each source,
and the difficulty of accurately analyzing information from single let alone

multiple sources, information fusion offers researchers a challenge.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.31INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCHIt must also be noted that although technology is central to all of theareas listed above, it is not the sole element of concern.  Research in these
areas must be multidisciplinary, involving technologists, social scientists,
and domain experts (e.g., the people from the multiple agencies that need
to work together during crisis solutions).  All technology deployed for

operational purposes is subject to the reality of implementation and op-
eration by humans.  Thus, systems issues, including human, social, and

organizational behavior, must be part of the research to develop the
needed technology and the system design to implement it.  Technology

cannot be studied in isolation of the ways in which it is deployed, and
failure to attend to the human, political, social, and organizational aspects
of solutions will doom technology to failure.  For this reason, Section 3.6

addresses social and organizational dimensions that must be incorpo-
rated into study in these areas.To assist decision makers in the formulation of a research program,Table 3.1 presents the committeeÕs rough assessment of the criticality ofthe various research areas identified, the difficulty of the research prob-
lems, and the likely time scale on which progress could be made.  The

criticality of a research area reflects an assessment of the vulnerabilities
that might be reduced if significant advances in that area were accom-
plished and deployed; areas are ranked ÒHigh,Ó ÒMedium,Ó or 
ÒLow.ÓHow hard it will be to make significant progress is rated ÒVery Difficult,ÓÒDifficult,Ó or 
ÒEasy.Ó  The time frame for progress is ranked as 
Ò1-4years,Ó Ò5-9 years,Ó or 
Ò10+ years.Ó  Of course, the deployment of research
results also presents obstacles, which may reduce effectiveness or lengthen
the time until a research result can become a reality.  It must also be noted

that these assessments are both subjective and subject to some debate, as
they were intended to provide readers with a quick calibration of these
issues rather than a definitive conclusion.Finally, while R&D is an essential element of the nationÕs response tocounterterrorism, it is not alone sufficient.   Indeed, the history of infor-

mation security itself demonstrates that the availability of knowledge or
technology about how to prevent certain problems does not necessarily
translate into the application of that knowledge or the use of that technol-
ogy.  It is beyond the scope of this report to address such issues in detail,

but policy makers should be cautioned that R&D is only the first step on
a long road to widespread deployment and a genuinely stronger and
more robust IT infrastructure.3.1INFORMATION AND NETWORK SECURITY
A broad overview of some of the history of and major issues in infor-mation and network security is contained in the CSTB report CybersecurityInformation Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMTABLE 3.1 A Taxonomy of PrioritiesTime Scale forR&D forSignificantResearchProgress and
CategoryCriticalityDifficultyDeployment
Improved Informationand Network SecurityHighDifficult5-9 years
Detection and identificationHighDifficult5-9 years

Architecture and design forcontainmentHighDifficult5-9 years
Large system backup anddecontaminationHighDifficult5-9 years
Less buggy codeHighVery difficult5-9 years
Automated tools for systemconfigurationHighDifficult1-4 years
Auditing functionalityLowDifficult10+ years
Trade-offs between usabilityand securityMediumDifficult5-9 years
Security metricsMediumDifficult1-4 years
Field studies of securityHighEasy1-4 years
C3I for Emergency ResponseHighDifficult1-4 years
Ad hoc interoperabilityHighEasy1-4 years
Emergency deployment ofcommunications capacityHighEasy1-4 years
Security of rapidly deployedad hoc networksMediumDifficult5-9 years
Information managementand decision-support toolsMediumDifficult5-9 years
Communications with thepublic during emergencyHighDifficult1-4 years
Emergency sensor deploymentHighEasy1-4 years
Precise location identificationMediumDifficult5-9 years
Mapping the physicaltelecommunicationsinfrastructureHighEasy1-4 years
Characterizing the functionalityof regional networks foremergency respondersHighDifficult1-4 years
Information FusionHighDifficult1-4 years
Data miningHighDifficult1-4 years

Data integrationHighDifficult1-4 years
Language technologiesHighDifficult1-4 years
Image and video processingHighDifficult5-9 years

Evidence combinationMediumDifficult1-4 years
Interaction and visualizationMediumDifficult1-4 years
Privacy and ConfidentialityHighDifficult1-4 years

Planning for the FutureMediumDifficult10+ years
Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.33INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCHToday and Tomorrow: Pay Now or Pay Later.2  That report builds on a varietyof earlier, more detailed CSTB studies related to information and network
security.Despite diligent efforts to create effective perimeter defenses, the pen-etration of defended computer and telecommunications systems by a de-
termined adversary is highly likely.  Software flaws, lax procedures for

creating and guarding passwords, compromised insiders, and insecure
entry points all lead to the conclusion that watertight perimeters cannot
be assumed.  Nevertheless, strengthening defensive perimeters is helpful,

and this section deals with the methodologies of today and tomorrow that
can detect or confine an intruder and, if necessary, aid in recovery from
attack by taking corrective action.  (Box 3.2 describes some of the funda-

mental principles of defensive strategy.)As noted above, the technology discussed here is relevant for effortsin defensive information warfare and for fighting cybercrime.  In addi-

tion, many advances in information and network security can improve
the reliability and availability of computer systems, which are issues of
importance to users even under ordinary, nonthreatening conditions.  The

fact that such advances have dual purposes could help to generate broader
interest and support in R&D in this area, as well as to motivate its incor-
poration into industry products.Research and development in this area should be construed broadlyto include R&D on defensive technology (including both underlying tech-
nologies and architectural issues), organizational and sociological dimen-
sions of such security, forensic and recovery tools, and best policies and
practices. Research in information and network security can be grouped
in four generic areas: authentication, detection, containment, and recov-
ery.  A fifth set of topics (e.g., reducing buggy code, dealing with miscon-

figured systems, auditing functionality) is broadly applicable to more
than one of these areas.3.1.1Authentication
A terrorist may seek to gain access to a computer system that he orshe is not authorized to use.  Once access is gained, many opportunities

for causing harm are available, including the installation of hostile pro-2Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council(NRC).  2002.  
Cybersecurity Today and Tomorrow: Pay Now or Pay Later.  National AcademyPress, Washington, D.C. (hereafter cited as CSTB, NRC, 2002, 
Cybersecurity Today and To-morrow).Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMBOX 3.2Principles of Defensive Strategy
Computing and communications systems that contain sensitive information orwhose functioning is critical to an enterpriseÕs mission must be protected at higherlevels of security than are adequate for other systems.  Several policies should be
mandatory for such critical systems:¥The use of encryption for communication between system elements and theuse of cryptographic protocols.  These practices help to ensure data confidentiality
against eavesdroppers and data integrity between major processing elements (e.g.,
host to host, site to site, element to element); prevent intrusion into the networkbetween nodes (e.g., making Òman-in-the-middleÓ attacks much more difficult); andprovide strong authentication (e.g., through the use of public-key-based authentica-
tion systems that use encryption and random challenge to strengthen the authentica-tion process or to bind other elements of the authentication, such as biometrics, tothe identity of a user).¥Minimal exposure to the Internet, which is inherently insecure.  Firewalls
provide a minimal level of protection, but they are often bypassed for convenience.(Balancing ease of use and security is an important research area discussed in the
main text of this report.)  Truly vital systems may require an 
Òair gapÓ that separates
them from public networks.  Likewise, communication links that must remain secure
and available should use a private network.  (From a security perspective, an alterna-

tive to a private network may be the use of a connection on a public network that isappropriately secured through encryption.  However, depending on the precise char-
acteristics of the private network in question, a private network mayÑor may notÑprovide higher availability.)¥Strong authentication technology for authenticating users.  Security tokens
based on encryption (such as smart cards) are available for this purpose, and all
entrances from a public data network (such as a network access provider or insecuredial-in) should use them.  Furthermore, for highly critical systems, physical security
must also be assured.¥Robust configuration control.   Such control is needed to ensure that only
approved software can run on a system and that all of the security-relevant knobsand switches are correctly set.Such measures are likely to affect ease of use and convenience, as well as cost.These are prices that must be paid, however, because hardening critical systems will
greatly reduce vulnerability to a cyberattack.grams and the destruction or compromise of important data.   In other
instances, a terrorist might orchestrate the actions of multiple computers
to undertake harmful acts, for example through denial-of-service attacks.33Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council(NRC), 1999, Realizing the Potential of C4I: Fundamental Challenges,
 National Academy Press,
Washington D.C., pp. 144-152 (hereafter cited as CSTB, NRC, 1999, Realizing the Potential ofC4I); CSTB, NRC, 1999, Trust in Cyberspace.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.35INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCHTo prevent a terrorist from gaining unauthorized access to a com-puter, it is necessary to prevent that person from successfully posing as an
authorized user.4  In other words, an authorized user must pass success-
fully through an authentication process that confirms his or her asserted
identity as an authorized user.  The same is true of computer-to-computer

interactionsÑfor some transactions, it is necessary for Computer A todetermine if Computer B is one of the computers authorized to interact
with it.  Here too, a computer-to-computer authentication process is nec-

essary so that only individual authorized devices connecting to a network
can receive services.Today, the prevailing method of user authentication is the password.Passwords are easily compromised by the use of weak password-choos-
ing techniques, the recording of passwords in open places, the communi-
cation channel used for the password entry or administration, and by
password-cracking techniques.  Requiring several log-in procedures (and

usually with different passwords for each) for mapping to permission or
authorization techniques makes system administration even more com-
plex for the user and the system administrator.  Other devices, such as

hardware tokens, are usually more secure than are passwords, but a user
must have them available when needed.The ideal authentication system would be a simple, easy-to-use sys-tem that verified identity, could be managed in a distributed manner, had
the trustworthiness of cryptographically based systems without todayÕscomplexity, could be scaled to hundreds of thousands (or even millions),
and had a cost of ownership that was competitive with passwords.  In

practice, these desirable attributes often entail trade-offs with one an-
other; one way to focus a research effort in authentication would be to
address the reduction of these trade-offs.53.1.2Detection
Even with apparently secure authentication processes and technolo-gies, it might still be possible for an intruder to gain unauthorized access
to a system, though with more effort if the system were more secure.  This

possibility suggests a need for detecting and identifying intruders.  How-
4The case of a terrorist as an insider who has already been granted access is not withinthe scope of this particular problem.  Insider attacks are addressed in other parts of this
report.5An ongoing CSTB project examines in detail the technologies underlying authentica-tion.  See the Web site <http://www.cstb.org> for more information on this subject.
Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMever, intruders are often indistinguishable from valid users and frequentlytake great care to hide their entry and make their behavior look innocu-
ous.Intrusion-detection systems are designed to monitor users and trafficto detect either anomalous users or unusual traffic patterns that might
indicate an active attack.  Of course, such monitoring requires good char-

acterizations of what ÒnormalÓ behavior is and knowledge of what vari-
ous kinds of behavior mean in the context of specific applications.  Today,

the major deficiency in this approach is the occurrence of too many false
positives.  That is, the behavior of legitimate users is sufficiently diverse

that some types of legitimate behavior are mischaracterized as anomalous
(and hence hostile).  Thus, research is needed on reducing the rate of false

positives in intrusion-detection systems.Another approach to intrusion is based on deceiving the cyber-attacker.  For example, traps (sometimes referred to as honeypots)Ñsuchas apparently interesting filesÑcan be crafted to attract the attention of anintruder so that he or she might spend extra time examining it.  That extra

time can then be used to provide warning of hostile intent, and it might
help in forensic investigation while the hostile party is connected to the
system.  Alternatively, tools might be created that disguise the actual

details of a network when it is probed.  Tools of this nature, as well as the

development of forensic tools for use in attacker-deceiving environments,
may be fruitful areas of research.A related challenge is the development of intruder-detection methodsthat scale to function efficiently in large systems.  Current approaches to

intrusion detection generate enormous amounts of data; higher priority
must be given to systems that can analyze rather than merely collect such
data, while still retaining collections of essential forensic data.  Moreover,

the collection and analysis of such large amounts of data may degrade
performance to unacceptable levels.Intrusion-detection systems are also one element of technology thatcan be used to cope with the threat of insider attack.  Because the trusted

insider has legitimate access to system resources and information, his or
her activities are subject to far less suspicion, which usually allows the
insider to act with much greater freedom than would be permitted an
outsider who had penetrated the system.  Thus, new technologies specifi-

cally focused on the possibility of insider attack may be a particularly
fruitful avenue of research (Box 3.3).  In addition, research focused on

understanding common patterns of insider attack (e.g., through the use of
application-level audits to examine usage patterns) could be integrated
with other kinds of audits to provide a more robust picture of system
usage.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.37INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH3.1.3Containment
TodayÕs systems and networks often fail catastrophically.  That is, a
successful attack on one part of a system can result in an entire system or
networkÕs being compromised.  (For example, the failure of a perimeter
defense, such as a firewall, surrounding otherwise unprotected systems
can result in an intruderÕs gaining full and complete access to all of thosesystems.)   A system that degrades gracefully is more desirable
Ñin thiscase, a successful attack on one part of a system results only in that partÕsBOX 3.3Illustrative Technologies for Dealing with the
Insider AttackAuthentication, access control, and audit trails are three well-understood tech-nologies that can be used in combating the insider threat.  Using these mechanisms
to enforce strict accountability can improve protection against the insider threat, butin practice they are often not as successful as they might be.  For example, many

current tools for access control and audits are difficult to use, or they generate largevolumes of data that are, for practical purposes, unreviewable.Other technology research areas that may be relevant to dealing with insiderattack include:¥Attack-specification languages. Programming languages designed for easeof modeling attacks and/or expressing attack behaviors and modalities.¥Modeling and simulation of insider attacks.  Better understanding of such
attacks to help those seeking to validate technologies to counter the insider threat.
Today, simulations of such attacks are difficult to perform and are personnel-inten-sive.¥Authentication of roles, rights, privileges. Approaches to using finer-grainedauthentication strategies based not on authenticating an individual as an individualbut as the holder of certain rights and privileges or embodying a certain role.¥Semantics of authorized access. Development of the semantics of opera-tions and authorization that enable more fine-grained authorization decisions or theflagging of potentially suspect audit trails.¥Automated, dynamic revocation of privileges. Development of effectivestrategies for the automatic revocation of privileges based on policy-specified factorssuch as the timing of certain types of access or other user behavior.¥Fingerprinting of documents. Strategies for embedding identifying informa-
tion into a document so that its subsequent disposition can be more effectively traced.Such information would be analogous to a copyright notice in a document that canhelp to determine its origin, except that it would not be easily removable from the
document itself.¥Continuous authentication. Technologies for authenticating a user after the
initial authentication challenge (to deal with the fact that people walk away from
their computers without logging out).Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMbeing compromised, and the remainder of the system continues to func-tion almost normally.6The principle of graceful degradation under attack is well accepted,but system and network design for graceful degradation is not well un-
derstood.  Nor are tools available to help design systems and networks in

such a manner.  Even more difficult is the challenge of modifying existing

legacy systems to fail gracefully.In addition, the building blocks of todayÕs systems are generally com-mercial off-the-shelf components.7  Despite the security limitations of
such components, the economics of system development and the speed
with which the IT environment changes inevitably require them to be
built this way.  However, it is not known today how to integrate compo-

nents safely, how to contain faults in them, and how to disaggregate them
when necessary.  While this lack of understanding applies to systems

ranging from accounting and payroll systems to telephone switching sys-
tems, SCADA systems are a particularly important case.Architectural containment as a system-design principle calls for theability to maintain critical functionality (such as engine control on a ship)
despite failures in other parts of a system.8  A sophisticated control sys-
tem used during Ònormal operationsÓ must be able to provide basic func-
tionality even when parts of it have been damaged.9  Such an approach
could be one of the most effective long-term methods for hardening IT
targets that oversee critical operations.For the most part, current approaches to system design involve eitherthe independence of system components (which in modern large-scale
systems leads to inefficiencies of operation) or the integration of system
components (with the inherent vulnerabilities that this approach entails).
Containment essentially navigates between the two extremes; its essential
element is the ability to Òlock downÓ a system under attack
Ñperhaps tosuspend normal operation temporarily while preserving some basic func-
tionality as the system finds and disables potential intruders and to re-
sume normal system operation afterwardÑwith less disruption thanmight be caused by shutting down and rebooting.Research is thus necessary in several areas:  in understanding how to6CSTB, NRC, 1999,  Realizing the Potential of C4I, pp. 144-152.7CSTB, NRC, 1999,  Trust in Cyberspace.8It should be noted that an essential aspect of designing for containment is the ability todefine and prioritize which functions count as essential.  For systems used by multiple
constituencies, this ability cannot be taken for granted.9As an example, a shipboard networking failure on the USS Yorktown
 left the ship with-
out the ability to run its engines.  (Gregory Slabodkin. 1998. 
ÒSoftware Glitches Leave NavySmart Ship Dead in the Water.Ó Government Computing News, July 13.)Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.39INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCHfuse a simple, highly secure, basic control system used primarily for op-erations under attack with a sophisticated, highly effective, and optimized
control system used for normal operations; in the ÒdecontaminationÓ of a
system while it is being used (see Section 3.1.4); and in the resumption of
operations without the need for going offline.  One 
Ògrand challengeÓmight be the development of a system that could be made more secure at
the touch of a button; the cost would be the loss of some nonessential
functionality while the system simultaneously decontaminated itself or
shut out attackers.  A second challenge involves existing systems that

need to be examined and restructured.  Methods and tools for analyzing

systems to identify essential functionality and to restructure those sys-
tems to tolerate the loss of nonessential functions could be productively
applied to existing designs well before a body of design principles and
theories become clear.A serious problem for which few general solutions are known is thedenial-of-service (DOS) attack.  For example, consider a DOS attack that is

launched against the major Internet news services to coincide with a
physical bomb attack on some other target such as a crowded sports
stadium.  It would be nearly impossible to distinguish legitimate users,

who would simply be looking for information, from attackers inundating
the news service Web sites to try to prevent access to that information,
possibly increasing panic and spreading misinformation.   A 
distributeddenial-of-service (DDOS) attack uses many computers to launch attacks
against a given target, rendering ineffective the obvious approach of sim-
ply cutting off an attacking computer.One approach to countering a DOS attack calls for authentication sothat intruders and bogus traffic can more easily be distinguished.  Devel-
oping such methods that are both fast and scalable (i.e., effective and fast
even when they involve the authentication of large numbers of parties)
remains the major challenge in this area, however.  (A technique that may

be worth further development, at least in the context of authenticating
traffic to and from heavily used Web sites, is easy-to-use subscription
models.10)  In any event, research on countering DOS attacks is impor-
tant.Another approach within this general area of containment is the de-10A subscription model calls for a user to register for service in some authenticated way,so that a site can distinguish that user from a random bad user.  Because denial-of-service
attacks depend on a flood of bogus requests for service, the availability of a database ofregistered users makes it easy to discard service requests from requests that are not regis-
teredÑand those are likely to account for the vast majority of bogus requests.  (Of course,
there is nothing in this scheme to prevent a registered user from conducting a hostile action,but the number of hostile registered users is likely to be small, allowing counteractions to
be taken on an individual basis.)Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMvelopment of broad architectural principles of robust infrastructure fordifferent kinds of applications (e.g., SCADA systems).  For example, prin-

ciples are needed to guide decisions about the relative robustness of dis-
tributed power generation versus centralized power generation in the
face of attack.3.1.4Recovery
Once an intruder has been detected, confined, and neutralized, thegoal becomes recoveryÑthe restoration of a systemÕs full functional oper-ating capability as soon as possible.  As with containment, recovery is

highly relevant for reliability, although the presence of a determined ad-
versary makes the problem considerably harder.  Recovery includes

preparations not only to help ensure that a system is recoverable but also
to be able to actively reconstitute a good system state.Backup is an essential prerequisite for reconstitution.  Although the
basic concepts of system backup are well understood, there are major
challenges to performing and maintaining backups in real time so that as
little system state as possible is lost.  However, normal backup methods

have been developed under the assumption of benign and uncorrelated
failure, rather than that of a determined attacker who is trying to destroy
information.  Further, backups of large systems take a long time, and if

they are in use during the backup, the system state can change apprecia-
bly during that time.  Thus, research is needed on ways to preserve infor-

mation about system state during backup.Reconstituting a computer system after an intrusion relies on the useof backup.  Unlike a restore operation used to re-create a clean system

after a failure, reconstitution requires an additional step: decontamina-
tion, which is the process of distinguishing between clean system state
(unaffected by an intruder) and the portions of infected system state, and
eliminating the causes of those differences.  Because system users would

prefer that as little good data as possible be discarded, this problem is
quite difficult.  Decontamination must also remove all active infections, as

well as any dormant ones.  Once decontamination is performed, attention

can be turned to forensics in an attempt to identify the attacker11 and
acquire evidence suitable for prosecution or retaliation.  In the end, this

ability is critical to long-term deterrence.Given that penetration of computer and telecommunications net-works is likely to continue despite our best efforts to build better perim-
eter security, more resilient and robust systems are necessary, with backup
and recovery as essential elements.11CSTB, NRC, 1999,  Realizing the Potential of C4I, pp. 144-152.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.41INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH12CSTB, NRC,  1991, 
Computers at Risk; CSTB, NRC, 1999, 
Trust in Cyberspace.13Catherine Meadows, 1996,  ÒThe NRL Protocol Analyzer: An Overview,Ó Journal ofLogic Programming, Vol. 26 (2); Dawn Song et al., 2001,  ÒAthena, a Novel Approach toEfficient Automatic Security Protocol Analysis,Ó Journal of Computer Security, Vol. 9 (1, 2).New approaches to decontamination are also needed, especially whena system cannot be shut down for decontamination purposes.  At present,

much of the activity associated with a properly running system interferes
with decontamination efforts (particularly with respect to identifying a
source of contamination and eliminating it).3.1.5Cross-cutting Issues in Information and
Network Security ResearchA number of issues cut across the basic taxonomy of detection, con-tainment, and recovery described above.Reducing Buggy CodeProgress in making systems more reliable will almost certainly makethem more resistant to deliberate attack as well.   But buggy code under-

lies many problems related both to reliability and to security, and no
attempt to secure systems and networks can succeed if it does not take
this basic fact into account.12Buggy software is largely a result of the fact that, despite many yearsof serious and productive research in software engineering, the creation
of software is still more craft than science-based engineering.  Further-

more, the progress that has been made is only minimally relevant to the
legacy software systems that remain in all infrastructures.The fact that essentially all software systems contain bugs is not new.Bugs can result from a variety of causes, ranging from low-level errors
(e.g., a mathematical expression uses a plus sign when it should use a
minus sign) to fundamental design flaws (e.g., the system functions as it
was designed to function, but these functions are inappropriate in the
circumstances of operation).Dealing with buggy code is arguably the oldest unsolved problem incomputer science, and there is no particular reason to think that it can be
solved once and for all by any sort of crash project.  Nevertheless, two

areas of research seem to be particularly important in a security context:¥Security-oriented tools for system development.  More tools that sup-
port security-oriented development would be useful.13  For example,
Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMmodel-checking tools, which have been used successfully for hardwareverification, can be used for analyzing designs of security protocols in-
cluding authentication protocols14 and electronic commerce protocols;
15static analyzers that have been used successfully for compiler optimiza-
tion may be usable to analyze code for information flow properties;16dynamic analyzers for online monitoring (detection) and reconfiguring
(response and recovery) may be used for intrusion detection and foren-
sics;17 and theorem-proving tools
18 that have been used for proof-carry-
ing code19 can be extended to handle more expressive security-specific
logics.¥Trustworthy system upgrades and bug fixes.  It often happens that a
system bug is identified and a fix to repair it is developed.  Obviously,

repairing the bug may reduce system vulnerability, and so system admin-
istrators and usersÑin principleÑhave some incentive to install the patch.However, with current technology, the installation of a fix or a system
upgrade carries many risks, such as a nontrivial chance of causing other
problems, a disruption of existing functionality, or possibly the creation
of other security holes, even when the fix is putatively confined to a
module that can be reinstalled.20  The essential reason for this problem is14Gavin Lowe, 1996, ÒBreaking and Fixing the Needham-Schroeder Public-Key ProtocolUsing FDR,Ó in 
Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems, TizianaMargaria and Bernard Steffen (eds.), Vol. 1055 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, SpringerVerlag; Will Marrero et al., 1997,  Model Checking for Security Protocols, Technical Report 97-139, Department of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pa., May;J.C. Mitchell et al., 1997,  ÒAutomated Analysis of Cryptographic Protocols Using Murphi,ÓIEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, Oakland, available online at <http://theory.
stanford.edu/people/jcm/papers/murphi-protocols.ps>.15Nevin Heintze et al., 1996, ÒModel Checking Electronic Commerce ProtocolsÓ (extended
abstract), USENIX Workshop on Electronic Commerce; Darrell Kindred and Jeannette M.
Wing, 1996, ÒFast, Automatic Checking of Security Protocols,Ó in 
Proceedings of the USENIX1996 Workshop on Electronic Commerce, November.16Andrew C. Myers and Barbara Liskov. 1997.  ÒA Decentralized Model for InformationFlow Control,Ó in 
Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Operating System Principles (SOSPÕ97). Saint Malo, France, October.17Giovanni Vigna and Richard A. Kemmerer. 1999. ÒNetSTAT. A Network-based Intru-sion Detection System.Ó Journal of Computer Security, Vol. 7 (1).18Lawrence C. Paulson. 1999.  ÒProving Security Protocols Correct,Ó pp. 370-381 in 
IEEESymposium on Logic in Computer Science. Trento, Italy. Available online at <http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/users/lcp/papers/Auth/lics.pdf>.19George C. Necula and Peter Lee. 1997.  ÒProof-Carrying Code,Ó pp. 106-119 in 
Proceed-ings of the 24th Annual ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming
Languages (POPL). ACM Press, New York, January.20Frederick P. Brooks. 1975.  The Mythical Man-Month. Addison-Wesley, Boston, Mass.
Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.43INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCHthat although fixes are tested, the number of operational configurations ismuch larger than the number of test configurations that are possible.
Research is thus needed to find ways of testing bug fixes reliably and to
develop programming interfaces to modularize programs that cannot be
bypassed.  An additional dimension of trustworthy upgrades and bug

fixes is their installation.  If such upgrades and fixes can be developed,

their automatic online installation becomes a reasonable desire.  Today,

some operating systems and programs allow automatic download of such
modifications, but it is often the case that they cannot be installed while
the system is running.  Moreover, in light of the security concerns men-

tioned in Section 2.2.6, automatic downloads of bug fixes must be made
very highly secure.  Research will be needed to solve this problem.
21Misconfigured Systems (Configuration Management)Because existing permission and policy mechanisms are hard to un-derstand, use, and verify, many system vulnerabilities result from theirimproper administration.22  There is also a trade-off between fine-grained
access control and usability, and both needs are growing.  For example,

an entire group of people may be given access privileges when only one
person in that group should have them.  Or, a local system administrator
may install a modem on the system he or she administers with the intent
of obtaining access from home, but this also provides intruders with an
unauthorized access point.The ability to formulate security policies at the appropriate level, toensure that policies are consistent across all levels and to state these poli-
cies crisply and clearly (e.g., what language is used to express the policy,
what mechanisms are used to enforce it, and what is to be done if it is
violated) would be helpful.  In addition, it will be necessary to develop

methods of generating formal descriptions of actual, existing security

policies in place and to compare them with desired security policies.  Thus,

better tools for formulating and specifying security policies and for check-
ing system configurations quickly against prespecified configurations
should be developed.  Better tools for system and network operators to

detect added and unauthorized functionality (e.g., the addition of a Tro-
jan horse) are also necessary.21Advances in this area would also have substantial benefit in reducing the workload ofsystem administrators, who today must spend considerable time keeping up with the sheer
volume of security patches and assessing the costs and benefits of installing them.22CSTB, NRC, 1991, Computers at Risk; CSTB, NRC, 1999, Trust in Cyberspace.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMAuditing FunctionalityValidation sets are used to ensure that a piece of hardware (e.g., achip) has the functionality that its design calls for.  However, these sets

typically test for planned functionalityÑthat is, can the hardware prop-erly perform some specified function? They do not test for unauthorized
functionality that might have been improperly inserted, perhaps by some-
one seeking to corrupt a production or distribution chain.  Similar prob-

lems are found in the development of software, especially software sys-
tems with many components that are developed by multiple parties.
Research is needed for developing tools to ensure that all of the called-for
functionality is present and that no additional functionality is present.
Research is needed to develop tools that can detect added unauthorized
functionality.Managing Trade-offs Between Functionality and SecurityAs a general rule, more secure systems are harder to use and havefewer features.23  Conversely, features
Ñsuch as executable content andremote administrationÑcan introduce unintended vulnerabilities even asthey bring operational benefits.  (For example, newer word processors

allow the embedding of macros into word processing files, a fact that
results in a new class of vulnerabilities for users of those programs as well
as added convenience.)One good example of the trade-off between security and usability isthe difficulty of establishing an encrypted communications channel using
a popular encryption program. One study found that a majority of test-
population individuals experienced in the use of e-mail were unable to
sign and encrypt a message using PGP 5.0.   In a security context, these

usability issues go beyond the user-interface design techniques appropri-
ate to most other types of software.24A second example is the buffer overflow problem.25  Over half of the23CSTB, NRC,  1991, 
Computers at Risk, pp. 159-160.
24For example, from the userÕs perspective, security is secondary to the primary goal ofusing the software for some practical purpose.  Traditional user-interface design techniques

presume that users are motivated to use software for their primary purposes.  More discus-sion of this and other relevant issues can be found in Alma Whitten and J.D. Tygar. 1999.ÒWhy Johnny CanÕt Encrypt: A Usability Evaluation of PGP 5.0,Ó Proceedings of the 9thUSENIX Security Symposium, August.25In a buffer overflow, memory is overwritten by an application and control is trans-ferred to rogue code.   Type-safe languages allow memory accesses only to specifically

authorized locations.  For example, programs written in type-safe languages cannot read or
write to memory locations that are associated with other programs.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.45INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCHsystem and network security vulnerabilities documented by the Com-
puter Emergency Response Team (CERT) of the Software Engineering
Institute at Carnegie Mellon University throughout CERT
Õs existence in-volve buffer overflows.  These can exploited by an adversary to gain

control over a target system.  Some ways of preventing buffer overflows

are known, but they involve degradations in performance.  For example,

it is possible for processors to support a programmer-usable capability to
designate certain areas of memory as ÒcodeÓ (that cannot be overwritten)
versus ÒdataÓ (that can be overwritten).  If this designation is made, buffer
overflows cannot result in the transfer of control to rogue code.  On the

other hand, the extra hardware needed to implement this capability has
the effect of slowing down memory access by nontrivial amounts.  Java

and similar type-safe languages are also more resistant to buffer over-
flows than are other languages, but there is overhead in undertaking the
check of parameter ranges needed to prevent overflows.More research is required for performing essential trade-offs betweena rich feature set or performance and resistance to attack.  Transparent

security would be more acceptable to users and hence would be em-
ployed more frequently.  New authentication mechanisms (or implemen-

tations) that combine higher security with lower inconvenience are also
needed.Security MetricsMany quantitative aspects of security are not well understood.  For
example, even if a given security measure is installedÑand installed prop-erly (something that cannot be assumed in general)Ñthere is no way ofknowing the degree to which system security has increased.  Threat mod-

els are often characterized by actuarial data and probability distributions
in which the adverse effects of vulnerabilities are prioritized on the basis
of how likely they are to occur; but such models are of little use in coun-
tering deliberate terrorist attacks that seek to exploit nominally low-prob-
ability vulnerabilities.  Notions such as calculating the return on a secu-

rity investmentÑcommon in other areas in which security is an issueÑarenot well understood either, thus making quantitative risk management a
very difficult enterprise indeed.26 Research is needed for developing
meaningful security metrics.26Information on the economic impact of computer security is available online at<http://www.nist.gov/director/prog-ofc/report02-1.pdf>.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMIntelligence GatheringGiven the rate at which information technology changes, it is likelythat new vulnerabilities and new types of attack will emerge rapidly.
Because insight into the nature of possible attacks is likely to result in
additional options for defense, it is highly desirable to keep abreast of
new vulnerabilities and to understand the potential consequences if such
vulnerabilities were to be exploited.Field Studies of SecurityTraditional criteria for secure systems, as specified in the ÒOrangeBook,Ó27 have not been successes.  They do not capture current needs or
models of computation.28  Worse yet, they have largely failed in the mar-
ketplace; very few customers actually bought Orange Book-rated sys-
tems, even when they were available.29  Understanding why previous
attempts to build secure systems and networks have failed in the market-
place, or in defending against outside attack, would help to guide future
research efforts.  (Further, human and organizational factors are key ele-

ments of such analysis, as previously described, and the understanding
from such study is likely to be based at least as much on economics,
sociology, and anthropology as on technology.30)3.2SYSTEMS FOR EMERGENCY RESPONSE
Technologies for command, control, communications, and intelligence(C3I) have major importance in the response phase of a disaster.  In gen-

eral, the IT infrastructure for emergency responders must be robust in the27The ÒOrange BookÓ is the nickname for 
Trusted Computer System Evaluation CriteriaÑcriteria that were intended to guide commercial system production generally and therebyimprove the security of systems in use.  See U.S. Department of Defense. 1985.  
TrustedComputer System Evaluation Criteria. Department of Defense 5200.28-STD, ÒOrange Book.ÓNational Computer Security Center, Fort Meade, Md., December.28CSTB, NRC, 1999, Realizing the Potential of C4I
, pp. 144-152;  CSTB, NRC, 1991, 
Comput-ers at Risk; CSTB, NRC, 1999, Trust in Cyberspace.29For example, commercial needs for computer security focused largely on data integ-rity, while military needs for security focused on confidentiality, as noted in David Clark
and David Wilson, 1987, ÒA Comparison of Commercial and Military Computer SecurityPolicies,Ó in 
Proceedings of the 1987 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, IEEE, Oakland,Calif.   Another key failing of the Orange Book approach to security included its omission

of networking concerns. For more discussion, see CSTB, NRC, 1999, Trust in Cyberspace.30See, for example, Donald Mackenzie. 2001. Mechanizing Proof: Computing, Risk, and Trust.MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.47INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCHface of damage and even potential terrorist attack.31  Although the inci-
dent management process has been well studied,32 the IT requirements
for such management do not appear to have been thoroughly conceived,
even though in a disaster it is essential that IT systems provide for the
capability to deliver information, interagency communication and coordi-
nation, and communication with those affected both within and beyond
the immediate disaster area.  In a disaster, equipment must be deployed

immediately to provide for appropriate communication to those respond-
ing to the situation, and it must be deployed to the multiple agencies in
the private and public sectors that are affected, and to and between those
directly affected by the incident.33The committee believes that research in a number of areas, describedbelow, can advance the state of the art for C3I systems for emergency
response (and provide collateral benefits for the responses to more com-
mon natural disasters as well).3.2.1Intra- and Interoperability
The C3I systems of emergency-response agencies must support bothintra-agency and interagency communications.  But many disasters

(whether natural or attack-related) reveal technological shortcomings in a
given agencyÕs C3I systems as vital communications are lost or neverheard.  And, although the public rhetoric of every emergency-response

agency acknowledges the need for cooperation with other agencies, al-
most every actual disaster reveals shortcomings in the extent and nature
of interagency cooperation.Perhaps the most basic requirement for an agencyÕs C3I systems isthat they reliably support communications among the personnel of that
agency.  The C3I systems of most emergency responders today are based

on analog radio technology.  Although digital and analog communica-
31Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council(NRC).  1999.  
Information Technology Research for Crisis Management. National Academy
Press, Washington, D.C., p. 39 (hereafter cited as CSTB, NRC, 1999, Information TechnologyResearch for Crisis Management).32Hank Christen, Paul Maniscalco, Alan Vickery, and Frances Winslow. 2001. ÒAn Over-view of Incident Management.Ó Perspectives on Preparedness
, No. 4, September. Availableonline at <http://ksgnotes1.harvard.edu/BCSIA/Library.nsf/pubs/POP4>.  Accessed No-
vember 14, 2002.33Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council(NRC).  1996.  
Computing and Communications in the Extreme: Research for Crisis Managementand Other Applications.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., p.  14 (hereafter cited as
CSTB, NRC, 1996, Computing and Communications in the Extreme).Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMtions systems have advantages and disadvantages (Box 3.4), the disad-vantages of analog communications for emergency responders are con-
siderable in the context of large-scale disasters or incidents.For most routine work, the mostly-analog systems deployed todayfunction adequately to keep personnel in contact with one another.  And,

because routine work is mostly what response agencies do, the motiva-
tion for acquiring new systems is low.  Even when new procurements are

considered, the needs highest on an agencyÕs list of priorities are mostlikely to be those that focus on enhancing its ability to do its everyday
work more effectively.Nevertheless, disasters increase the demand for communicationsamong emergency responders dramatically, and the capacity limitations
of analog systems become more apparent.   In addition, large-scale disas-
ters may affect telecommunications facilities.  For example, antennas sup-

porting the communications systems of the Fire Department of New York,
the New York Police Department, and the Emergency Medical System
(EMS) were based on the roof of Building 1 of the World Trade Center,
which collapsed soon after the strike.34Inadequacies in the deployed base of C3I systems for emergency re-sponders cannot be fixed merely by adding more channels.  Though emer-

gency planning often results in the allocation of additional channels, these
channels ease the problem only temporarily.  In addition, extra channels

require more bandwidth, and hence a broader radio spectrum dedicated
to public service communication, even though radio spectrum is a limited
resource.  More efficient use of spectrum can be obtained by using digital

communications systems, which offer additional advantages as well (Box
3.4), such as greater noise immunity and higher security against eaves-
dropping (especially with encryption).   However, one major impediment

to the acquisition of such systems is inadequate funding.  Funding needs

are further exacerbated by the difficulty of acquiring new digital systems
that preserve backwards compatibility with existing legacy analog sys-
tems.  (In New York City, the Fire Department relied on radios that were

at least 8 years old and in some cases 15 years old, and a senior Fire
Department official reported that Òthere [are] problems with the radios atvirtually every high-rise fire.Ó35)34Ronald Simon and Sheldon Teperman. 2001. ÒLessons for Disaster Management.Ó  Criti-
cal Care, Vol. 5:318-320. Available online at <http://www.disasterrelief.org/Disasters/
011115wtclessons/>.35Jim Dwyer, Kevin Flynn, and Ford Fessenden. 2002. Ò9/11 Exposed Deadly Flaws inRescue Plan.Ó New York Times, July 7.  Available online at <http://www.nytimes.com/
Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.49INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCHBOX 3.4A Comparison of Digital and Analog Wireless
Communications TechnologiesAdvantages of Digital Communications1¥Digital communications provide higher fidelity and lower susceptibility tointerference and static compared with analog communications.¥Digital communications are more inherently secure than analog communi-cations are, and more easily encrypted as well.¥Channels (frequencies) can be shared between users, thus increasing thenumber of supportable users per channel.¥Because channels can be shared, multiple users can speak simultaneouslyon a single frequency, thus increasing the amount of information that can be ex-changed.Advantages of Analog Communications¥Analog communications devices are easier to make interoperable because itis only necessary to match the frequencies of communicating wireless sets, whereas
digital systems require the additional step of matching their communications proto-cols.¥Problems in analog communications devices are often easier to diagnose,and communications problems in analog systems are often easier to work aroundthan are those in digital systems.¥The number of technicians and users trained in the use of analog systems islarger.¥Analog communications offer better graceful degradation than that offeredby digital systems in the presence of noise as signal-to-noise ratios drop, and they
offer better warning to users (through the tone of the communications carried) whenthey are near the margins of usability.¥Low-frequency transmissions, which are better suited for analog communi-cations than for digital communications, are less subject to line-of-sight restrictionsand thus have a higher likelihood of penetrating most walls and bypassing debris.1Viktor Mayer-Schınberger. 2002. Emergency Communications: The Quest for Interoper-ability in the United States and Europe. BCSIA Discussion Paper 2002-7. John F. Kennedy Schoolof Government, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass., March.2002/07/07/nyregion/07EMER.html?pagewanted=1>.  Also according to this article, the
New York Fire Department had replaced at least some of its analog radios in early 2001with digital technology better able to transmit into buildings; but after a few months, these
new radios were pulled from service because several firefighters said they had been unableto communicate in emergencies.   It is not clear whether or not a full 
Òhead-to-headÓ sys-
tematic comparison between the analog and digital systems was ever undertaken.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMInteroperability is a broad and complex subject rather than a binaryattribute of systems, and it is important to distinguish between inter-
operability at the operational and technical levels.36  Operational inter-
operability refers to the ability of different operating agencies (e.g., police,
fire, rescue, utilities) to provide information services to and accept infor-
mation services from other agencies and to use these services in support
of their operational goals.  Thus, the dimensions of operational inter-

operability go beyond IT systems to include people and procedures, inter-
acting on an end-to-end basis.  By contrast, technical interoperability re-

fers to the ability of IT systems to exchange information or services directly
and satisfactorily between them and/or their users.  Technical interoper-

ability involves the ability to exchange relevant bitstreams of information
and to interpret the exchanged bits according to consistent definitionsÑmerely providing information in digital form does not necessarily mean
that it can be readily shared between IT systems.Furthermore, numerous computational and database facilities mustbe established to provide complete and real-time information37 to diverse
constituencies whose information and communication requirements, se-
curity needs, and authorizations all differ.  These facilities must be estab-
lished quickly in disaster situations, as minutes and even seconds matter
in the urgent, early stages of an incident.38  Furthermore, tight security isessential, especially if the incident is the result of a terrorist attack, be-
cause an active adversary might try to subvert the communications or
destroy data integrity.39  In addition, an atmosphere of crisis and emer-
gency provides opportunities for hostile elements to overcome security
measures that are normally operative under nonemergency circum-
stances.  Thus, another research area is how to build systems that permit

security exceptions to be declared without introducing new vulnerabili-
ties on a large scale.4036An extended discussion of interoperability, though in a military context, is provided inCSTB, NRC, 1999,  Realizing the Potential of C4I.37CSTB, NRC, 1999,  Information Technology Research for Crisis Management, p. 29.
38CSTB, NRC, 1999,  Information Technology Research for Crisis Management, p. 83; CSTB,
NRC, 1996, Computing and Communications in the Extreme, p. 12.
39CSTB, NRC, 1996,  Computing and Communications in the Extreme, p. 24.40For example, in a crisis, emergency responders may need to identify all of the individu-als working at a specific company location, and tax records might well be one source ofdata to construct such a list.  However, while names and home addresses may be relevant,

income is almost certainly not relevant.  Technology that enables controlled release under
exceptional circumstances and a means to discern when an Òexception stateÓ exists would
be helpful for such scenarios, although implementations that simply weaken access control
policies in an emergency are highly vulnerable to improper compromise through socialInformation Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.51INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCHEfforts to coordinate communications are complicated by the fact thatemergency response to a large-scale incident has many dimensions, in-
cluding direct Òon-the-groundÓ action and response, management of the
incident response team, operations, logistics, planning, and even admin-
istration and finance.  Moreover, response teams are likely to include

personnel from local, county, state, and federal levels.41Poor interoperability among responding agencies is a well-knownproblem (see, for example, Box 3.5)Ñand one that is as much social andorganizational as it is technical.42  The fundamental technical issue is that
different agencies have different systems, different frequencies and wave-
forms, different protocols, different databases, and different equipment.43(Box 3.6 addresses some of the impediments to interoperability.)  More-

over, existing interoperability solutions are ad hoc and do not scale well.
44The nature of agenciesÕ missions and the political climates in which they
traditionally operate make it even harder for them to change their com-
munication methods.  Thus, it is unlikely that agencies will ever be

strongly motivated to deploy interoperable IT systems.  Efforts to solve

problems of interagency cooperation by fiat are likely to fail to achieve
their goal unless they address interagency rivalries and political infight-
ing about control and autonomy.  Efforts to achieve interoperability some-

how must work within this reality of organizational resistance (as dis-
cussed further in Section 3.6.3).45For practical purposes, these comments suggest that when large,multiagency responses are called for, the individual Òcome-as-you-areÓcommunications systems will eventually have to be transitioned to an
interoperable structure that supports all agencies involvedÑandtransitioned with minimal disruption of function during that transfer.46This complex problem has technological and social dimensionsÑthe tech-engineering (see Section 3.6.1).   By contrast, there are fewer risks of abuse (but also less
flexibility) in implementations that are based on a formal declaration of emergency or a
particular threat condition rather than on a conversation persuading an operator that such asituation exists.  For more discussion, see Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
(CSTB), National Research Council (NRC), 2002, Information Technology Research, Innovation,and E-Government, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C. (hereafter cited as CSTB,NRC, 2002, Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-Government).41CSTB, NRC, 1999, Information Technology Research for Crisis Management, p. 7.
42See for example, Viktor Mayer-Schınberger, 2002, Emergency Communications: The Questfor Interoperability in the United States and Europe, BCSIA Discussion Paper 2002-7, John F.Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass., March.43CSTB, NRC, 1999,  Information Technology Research for Crisis Management, p. 26.44CSTB, NRC, 1996,  Computing and Communications in the Extreme, p. 119.
45CSTB, NRC, 1999,  Information Technology Research for Crisis Management, p. 27.46CSTB, NRC, 1999, Information Technology Research for Crisis Management, p. 26.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMBOX 3.5  Examples of Interoperability Difficulties Among
Emergency RespondersColumbine High SchoolIn April 1999, two 16-year-old students entered Columbine High School inLittleton, Colorado, and started a shooting spree that left 15 people dead and dozensof others wounded.1  Within minutes of the first shootings, local police, paramedics,
and firefighters arrived at the scene. Over the next several hours, they were joined byalmost 1,000 law-enforcement personnel and emergency responders.   These re-
sponders included police forces from 6 sheriffÕs offices and 20 area police depart-ments, 46 ambulances and 2 helicopters from 12 fire and emergency medical serviceagencies, as well as personnel from a number of state and federal agencies.  Howev-
er, there was no communication system that would permit the different agencies to
communicate with one another, and thus coordination became a serious problem.Agencies used their own radio systems, which were incompatible with other sys-tems.  With more and more agencies arriving on the scene, even the few pragmatic

ways of communication that had been established, such as sharing radios, deteriorat-ed rapidly. Cellular phones offered no alternative, as hundreds of journalists rushedto their phones and overloaded the phone network. Within the first hour of the oper-
ation, the Jefferson County dispatch center lost access to the local command postbecause of jammed radio links. Steve Davis, public information officer of the Jeffer-son County SheriffÕs Office, later commented that Ò[r]adios and cell[ular] phones andeverything else were absolutely useless, as they were so overwhelmed with theamount of traffic in the air.Ó2nologies of different responders must not interfere with one anotherÕsoperation, and the systems into which these technologies are integrated
must be designed so that they complement the users rather than distract
them from their missions.47One important area of research is in defining low-level communica-tion protocols and developing generic technology that can facilitate inter-
connection and interoperation of diverse information resources.48  For
example, software-programmable waveforms can (in principle) allow a
single radio to interoperate with a variety of wireless communications
protocols; research in this area has gone forward, but further research is
needed.49  A second example is an architecture for communications, per-
47CSTB, NRC, 1999, Information Technology Research for Crisis Management, pp. 50, 84;Computing and Communications in the Extreme, p. 33.48CSTB, NRC,  1999,  
Information Technology Research for Crisis Management, p. 85.49Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council. 1997.The Evolution of Untethered Communications. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.53INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCHhaps for selected mission areas, that translates agency-specific informa-tion into formats and semantics compatible with a global system.50  More
generally, ÒtranslationÓ technology can be developed to facilitate inter-
operable communications among emergency responders (e.g., technol-
ogy that facilitates interoperability between disparate communications or
database systems).Note also that new technical approaches are not the only option forhelping to facilitate interoperable crisis communications.  For example, it

is likely that some portion of the public networks would survive any
disaster; emergency-response agencies could use that portion to facilitateWorld Trade CenterOn the morning of September 11, 2001, a few minutes after the South Tower ofthe World Trade Center had collapsed, police helicopters inspecting the North Tow-
er reported that Òabout 15 floors down from the top, it looks like itÕs glowing redÓ and
that collapse was Òinevitable.Ó  A few seconds later, another pilot reported, 
ÒI donÕtthink this has too much longer to go. I would evacuate all people within the area of
that second building.Ó  Transmitted 21 minutes before the North Tower fell, these
messages were relayed to police officers, most of whom managed to escape.  How-
ever, most firefighters in the North Tower never heard those warnings, nor did they
hear earlier orders to get out, and the New York Times estimated that at least 121firefighters were in the tower when it collapsed.   The Fire Department radio system
had proven unreliable that morning, and it was not linked to the police radio system.
Moreover, the police and fire commanders on the scene had only minimal interac-tions to coordinate strategy or to share information about building conditions.SOURCE (Columbine): Adapted from Viktor Mayer-Schınberger. 2002.  Emergency Com-munications: The Quest for Interoperability in the United States and Europe. BCSIA DiscussionPaper 2002-7. John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass.,
March. (World Trade Center): Adapted from Jim Dwyer, Kevin Flynn, and Ford Fessenden. 2002.
Ò9/11 Exposed Deadly Flaws in Rescue Plan.Ó New York Times, July 7.  Available online at
<http://www.nytimes.com/2002/07/07/nyregion/07EMER.html?pagewanted=1>.1The description and analysis of the Columbine High School incident is based on two JohnF. Kennedy School of Government cases: ÒThe Shootings at Columbine High School: Respondingto a New Kind of Terrorism,Ó Case No. C16-01-1612.0, and 
ÒThe Shootings at Columbine HighSchool: Responding to a New Kind of Terrorism Sequel,Ó Case No. C16-01-1612.1.
2Id, at 16.50CSTB, NRC,  1996, 
Computing and Communications in the Extreme, p. 17; CSTB, NRC,1999, Information Technology Research for Crisis Management.  An additional discussion of
mission slices and working the semantic interoperability problem appears in CSTB, NRC,1999, Realizing the Potential of C4I.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMBOX 3.6Why Interoperability Is Difficult
Interoperability is difficult in an emergency-responder context for many rea-sons.  Among them are the following:
¥A lack of common operating frequencies.  For historical reasons, various
public service agencies, from law enforcement to firefighters to emergency medical
services have traditionally used different frequency bands for their radio communi-cations.1 Thus, different agencies using different radio systems have generally resort-ed to sharing or carrying radios from other agencies to facilitate interoperabilityÑanobviously clumsy solution.¥Inadequacies of analog radio technology used for emergency commmunica-tions.  Today
Õs emergency communications are largely based on analog technology.Though analog technologies have some advantages for emergency responders, suchas greater robustness in the presence of clutter and freedom from line-of-sight restric-tions (see Box 3.4), they are generally unable to handle the enormous traffic volume
that characterizes severe incidents.¥Independence of the procuring agencies.  As a general rule, response agen-
cies acquire IT systems independently, with little coordination of objectives or
requirements, whereas optimizing overall system performance requires a full under-standing of the trade-offs entailed by different choices.   Individual agencies, espe-
cially those that seldom interact with other units, are strongly motivated to solve their
own pressing problems, even if doing so makes it harder for them to interact withother units.¥Inability to anticipate all relevant scenarios for use.  It is difficult to anticipate
in detail how information systems will be usedÑa difficulty that is multiplied in anuncertain environment.  For example, the responders to a large-scale terrorist attackare likely to include agencies that have not worked together in the past.   Achieving

flexibility in such a situation depends heavily on building in a sufficient degree ofinteroperability, and yet if a given scenario has not been anticipated, the would-beresponders may have no particular idea about who they will need to work with.¥Inclusion of legacy systems.  Legacy systems are in-place systems that are
relatively old and were not designed to be easily integrated with current and futureinformation systems, but which remain absolutely essential to the functioning of an
organization.  Furthermore, they often represent significant investment, so replacing
them with new, more interoperable systems is not a near-term option.  Today, theselegacy systems include the vast installed base of conventional analog radio equip-
ment used by most emergency-response agencies.SOURCES: For the first bullet item above, Viktor Mayer-Schınberger, 2002,  EmergencyCommunications: The Quest for Interoperability in the United States and Europe, BCSIA Discus-sion Paper 2002-7, John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Mass., March; for second item, Box 3.4 in this report; for third through fifth items, Computer
Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council,  1999,
 Realizing the Poten-
tial of C4I,  National Academy Press, Washington D.C.
1The Federal Communications Commission allocates 13 discrete portions of spectrum forpublic safety operations but does not specify the types of public safety agencies that are required
to use each portion; see Public Safety Wireless Network,1999, Spectrum Issues and AnalysisReport.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.55INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCHinteroperability if there were mechanisms for giving them first priorityfor such use.  A second option would be to allocate dedicated spectrum

bands for emergency responders and to require by law that they use those
frequencies.  (This option is likely to be undesirable under most circum-

stances, because for routine work a high degree of interoperability is not
required, and sharing frequencies might well interfere with such work.)
A third option would be to mandate frequency and waveform standards
for emergency responders so that they are interoperable.  These policy

options are not mutually exclusive, and all might benefit from technolo-
gies described above.3.2.2Emergency Deployment of Communications Capacity
In an emergency, extraordinary demands on communications capac-ity emerge.  A disaster (or an attack on the communications of emergency

responders in conjunction with a physical attack) is likely to destroy some
but not all of the communications infrastructure in a given area, leaving
some residual capability.  Meanwhile, the disaster provokes greater de-

mands for communication from the general public.  The result is often a

denial-of-service condition for all, including emergency communications
services.  The absence of telephone dial tone in a disaster area is common

because of increased demands.51  Even under high-traffic but nonemer-
gency situations, cell-phone networks are sometimes unable to handle the
volume of users in a given cell because of statistical fluctuations in call
volume, leaving some users without the ability to connect to the network.
Nor is the Internet immune to such problemsÑcongestion of sharedInternet links, including both last-mile and aggregated feeder links, can
cause greatly slowed traffic to occur on facilities that are still operational

in a disaster area.  Note also that today, the Internet provides modes of

communicationÑe-mail and Web-based information servicesÑthat aredifferent from that provided by voice communications.Given the vastly increased demands for wireless communications that
accompany any disaster, efficient spectrum management is essential.  One

important issue here is the fact that emergency bands need to be kept
clear of nonemergency transmissions.  However, certain types of

nonstandardized but sometimes-deployed higher-speed DSL (digital sub-
scriber line) telecommunications equipment are known to radiate in these
bands at unacceptable levels of power, and such equipment can interfere51CSTB, NRC, 1996,  Computing and Communications in the Extreme, p. 17.
Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMwith all emergency transmissions and receptions within 50 yards of theoffending telephone lines.52In addition, it may be possible to improve the use of available spec-trum in a disaster area through the use of processing and portable hard-
ware (network equipment or antennas carried by truck into area) that
would nominally exceed cost constraints for general deployment.  Such

equipment ranges from truck-portable cellular stations to antennas us-
able for receiving and rebroadcasting degraded emergency-band commu-
nications.  Vector signal processing of signals from multiple antennas

deployed rapidly and ubiquitously can increase available spectrum by an
order of magnitude or more.  Fast reconnection to high-performance

equipment can also greatly increase the amount of information flow to
and from affected areas.Research is needed on using residual (and likely saturated) capacitymore effectively, deploying additional (ÒsurgeÓ) capacity,53 and perform-
ing the trade-offs among different alternatives.  One problem in this area

is the management of traffic congestion and the development of priority
overrides for emergency usage (and prevention of the abuse of such au-
thority).54   For example, the capacity of DSL links could be significantly
increased through coordination across neighboring telephone lines (band-
width increases of an order of magnitude are sometimes possible).  Under

normal circumstances, signals transmitted by other users result in cross-52The specific type of equipment is known as Òsingle-carrier VDSL (very high data ratedigital subscriber line).Ó  It is sold by several vendors, despite some local exchange carriers
reporting that it interferes with the reception of any amateur radio receiver (which is thesame type used in emergencies) within at least 30 meters of an aerial telephone line.  At

least one local exchange carrier is known to have deployed it in a VDSL trial in Phoenix,Arizona, despite its violation of the radio interference requirements.   (John Cioffi, StanfordUniversity, personal communication, July 9, 2002.)53CSTB, NRC, 1999, Information Technology Research for Crisis Management, p. 83.
54CSTB, NRC, 1999, Information Technology Research for Crisis Management, pp. 39, 52;
CSTB, NRC, 1996, Computing and Communications in the Extreme, p. 20.  In addition, the
White HouseÕs National Communications System (NCS) office has moved to implement awireless priority service that facilitates emergency-recovery operations for the governmentand local emergency-service providers.  This service will be implemented in phases, with

an immediate solution available in early 2002 in selected metropolitan areas and a nation-wide solution (yet to be developed) scheduled for late 2003.  Further work after 2003 will
concentrate on the development and implementation of Òthird-generationÓ technologies
that enable high-speed wireless data services.  See Convergence Working Group. 2002.
Report on the Impact of Network Convergence on NS/EP Telecommunications: Findings and Rec-ommendations. February.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.57INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCHtalk that limits available bandwidth, but in an emergency those interestscould be reprioritized.55A second problem is that optimization algorithms for communica-tions traffic that are appropriate in normal times may have to be altered
during emergencies.  For example, the destruction of physical facilities

such as repeaters and the massive presence of debris could result in an
impaired environment for radio transmissions.  The rapid deployment of
processors optimized to find weak signals in a suddenly noisier environ-
ment could do much to facilitate emergency communications.Research is also needed to develop self-adaptive networks that canreconfigure themselves in response to damages and changes in demand,
and that can degrade gracefully.56  For example, in a congested environ-
ment, programmed fallback to less data-intensive applications (e.g., voice
rather than video, text messaging rather than voice) may provide a mini-
mal communications facility.  Even today, many cellular networks allow

the passing of text messages.  Also, both public and private elements of

communications infrastructure could be tapped to provide connectivity
in a crisis, as happened in New York City on September 11.
573.2.3Security of Rapidly Deployed Ad Hoc Networks
The management of communications networks poses unique prob-lems in the crowded emergency disaster zone.  Security must be estab-

lished rapidly from the outset, as terrorists might try to infiltrate as emer-
gency agencies responded.58  It is also necessary to determine a means for
temporarily suspending peopleÕs access to facilities, communications, anddata without impeding the ability of those with legitimate need to use
them.  But this suspension process has to be done rapidly, given that

minutes and seconds matter in severe emergencies. Note also that large
deployments may well pose security problems that are more severe than
those posed by smaller deployments.55Actions that disadvantage commercial consumers in times of emergency have someprecedent.  Of particular relevance is the Civil Reserve Air Fleet program of the DOD,
under which priority use of commercial airliners is given to the Defense Department in
times of national emergency.  (Because ordinary airliners lack the strong floors needed to
support heavy military equipment, the floors are strengthened at government expense, andthe government pays the incremental fuel costs of carrying that excess weight.)56CSTB, NRC, 1999,  Information Technology Research for Crisis Management, p. 39.
57CSTB, NRC, 1999,  Information Technology Research for Crisis Management,  p. 39.
58CSTB, NRC, 1996, Computing and Communications in the Extreme, p. 24. Embedded, Every-where (CSTB, NRC, 2001) also discusses security issues associated with ad hoc networks,
though in the context of sensor networks rather than communications networks for humanbeings.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMResearch is therefore needed on the special security needs of wirelessnetworks that are deployed rapidly and in an ad hoc manner.  (For ex-

ample, ad hoc networks are not likely to have a single system administra-
tor who can take responsibility for allocating user IDs.)3.2.4Information Management and Decision-Support Tools
Emergency responders have multiple information needs that technol-ogy can support.59  For example, a multimedia terminal for a firefighter
could have many uses: 60
 accessing maps and planning routes to a fire,
examining building blueprints for tactical planning, accessing databases
locating local fire hydrants and nearby fire hazards such as chemical
plants, communicating with and displaying the locations of other fire and
rescue teams, and providing a location signal to a central headquarters so
that a firefighting team can be tracked for broader operational planning.
Note that only some of this data can be pre-stored on the terminal, espe-
cially because some data may have to be updated during an operation, so
real-time access to appropriate data sources is necessary.  Moreover, these

different applications require different data rates and entail different
trade-offs between latency and freedom from transmission errors.  Voice

communications, for example, must have low latency (i.e., be real time)
but can tolerate noisy signals, whereas waiting a few seconds to receive a
map or blueprint will generally be tolerable, though errors may make it
unusable.  Some applications, such as voice conversation, require sym-

metrical bandwidth; others, such as data access and location signaling,
are primarily one-way (the former toward the mobile device, the latter
away from it).Another issue arises because disasters create huge volumes of infor-mation to be handled.  A large volume of voice and data traffic will be

transmitted and received on handheld radios, phones, digital devices,
and portable computers.  Large amounts of additional information will be

available from various sources including the World Wide Web, building
blueprints, and interviews with eyewitnesses.  However, sorting out reli-
able and useful information from this vast array of sources is inevitably
difficult, and many crisis responders have adopted a rule of thumb about
such information: one-third of the information is accurate, one-third is59This discussion is taken from CSTB, NRC, 1996, Computing and Communications in theExtreme, p. 59.60Randy H. Katz. 1995. ÒAdaptation and Mobility in Wireless Information Systems.ÓUnpublished paper, available online at <http://daedalus.cs.berkeley.edu>. August 18.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.59INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCHwrong, and one-third might be either right or wrong.61  Such inaccuracies
further compound the difficulties of integrating such data.Thus, emergency-response managers need tools that can draw oninformation from diverse and unanticipated sources to assist them in
evaluating, filtering, and integrating information and in making decisions
based on incomplete knowledge of conditions, capabilities, and needs.62Such tools would interpret information about the quality and reliability of
varied inputs and assist the user in taking these variations into account.
These tools would differ from, but could build upon, traditional decision-
support tools such as knowledge-based systems, which operate using
rules associated with previously examined problems. Because many of
the problems raised by crisis management are not known ahead of time,
more general techniques are needed. These might include the develop-
ment of new representations of the quality of inputs (such as metadata
about those inputs regarding qualities such as reliability and uncertainty
in the data), data fusion, models of information representation and inte-
gration (e.g., integrating pre-existing disaster response plans with deci-
sion-support tools), rapidly reconfigurable knowledge-based systems, and
new techniques for filtering and presenting information to users and for
quickly prioritizing tasks.  Section 3.3 addresses some of these issues in a

broader context.3.2.5Communications with the Public During an Emergency
In a crisis, channels to provide information to the public are clearlyneeded.  Radio, television, and often the Web provide crisis information

today, but such information is usually generic and not necessarily helpful
to people in specific areas or with specific needs.  Information tailored to

specific individuals or locations through location-based services (and per-
haps simple response systems to ascertain the location of the injured and
to identify critical time-urgent needs) could be put to more effective use.Research is needed to identify appropriate mechanismsÑnew tech-nologies such as Òcall by locationÓ and zoned alert broadcasts
Ñfor tailor-ing information to specific locations or individuals.63  To enable effective
interaction with individual users, ubiquitous and low-cost access is re-61CSTB, NRC, 1999,  Information Technology Research for Crisis Management, Appendix B.62CSTB, NRC, 1996,  Computing and Communications in the Extreme, National Academy
Press, Washington, D.C., p. 104; CSTB, NRC, 1999, Information Technology Research for CrisisManagement, pp. 32-33.
63CSTB, NRC, 1999, Information Technology Research for Crisis Management, p. 35.
Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMquired.64  In addition, such systems should be highly robust against spoof-
ing (entry by an intruder masquerading as a trusted party) so that only
authorized parties can use the systems to send out information.For example, the current cell-phone system does not directly supportthese functions, but it might be possible to modify and exploit it to pro-
vide Òreverse 911Ó service,
65 that is, a one-way channel to people affected
by the crisis that provides a flow of relevant information and guidance.
Such mechanisms would probably have to be locally sufficient.  That is,

the disaster might spare the local cell siteÑor a temporary cell site couldbe deployed along with wireless alternatives66Ñbut access to central ser-vices might not be possible.Finally, providing information to those located outside the immedi-ate emergency area provides important psychological comfort and helps
to mitigate a disasterÕs consequences.  (For example, in the immediate
aftermath of the September 11 attacks, ÒIÕm aliveÓ Internet bulletin boards
sprang up spontaneously.)  Research is needed for establishing more ef-

fective means of achieving this objectiveÑespecially in updating the sta-tus of affected peopleÑwhile compromising the local communicationsinfrastructure to a minimal degree.3.2.6Emergency Sensor Deployment
During an emergency, responders need information about physicalon-the-ground conditions that is sufficiently fine-grained and accurate to
be useful.  However, existing sensor networks may be disrupted or de-

stroyed to some extentÑand it is important to be able to recognize anattack on a sensor network and to monitor the state of the networkÕshealth so that emergency responders have an idea of the extent to which
they can continue relying on the information provided by the network.
When the surviving sensor capability cannot provide adequate informa-
tion, the deployment of additional sensors is likely to be necessary.  De-

pending on the nature of the emergency, sensor capacity would be needed
to identify and track the spread of nuclear, chemical, or biological con-
taminants, characterize and track vehicular traffic, locate survivors (e.g.,
through heat emanations, sounds, or smells), and find pathways through
debris and rubble.  Developing robust sensors for these capabilities is one

major challenge; developing architectural concepts for how to deploy
them and integrate the resulting information is another.6764CSTB, NRC, 1999, Information Technology Research for Crisis Management, p. 40.65CSTB, NRC, 1999, Information Technology Research for Crisis Management, p. 35.
66CSTB, NRC, 1996, Computing and Communications in the Extreme, p. 18.
67CSTB, NRC, 2001, Embedded, Everywhere.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.61INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH3.2.7Precise Location Identification
When extensive physical damage to a structure or an area occurs,determining the location of physical structures and of people is a major
problem.  One reason is that many reference points for observers on the

ground or in the structure may become unavailable: debris, airborne con-
taminants such as smoke and dust, and perhaps simply the lack of illumi-
nation can reduce visibility, and street signs may disappear.  Also, the

physical environment changes to some extent as a result of physical dam-
age: fires destroy rooms in buildings, one floor collapses into another, a
crater exists where there used to be three buildings.Thus, technology must be available to help establish reference pointswhen existing ones are destroyed or inadequate.  In an open physical

environment, location finders based on the Global Positioning System
(GPS) serve a useful role, but airborne contaminants, equipment damage,
and line-of-sight restrictions could adversely affect the reliability of GPS,
and research is needed on ways to determine location in a disaster envi-
ronment.  Embedded location sensors and sensor networks, either al-

ready in place or deployed in response to an incident, are likely to be
valuable information sources.68Responders and victims also require rapid access to accurate loca-tional databases.  One such source is pre-existing building blueprints and

diagrams.69  Where these do not exist, or where the structures themselves
have suffered significant physical damage, on-the-spot mapping will in-
evitably be needed.  Thus, research is needed to develop digital floor

plans and maps of other physical infrastructure.70  The resulting data
could be stored in geospatial information systems (GIS), which would
allow responders to focus on the high-probability locations of missing
people (such as lunchrooms), and avoid dangerous searches of low-prob-
ability locations (such as storage areas).71  Research is needed in wearable
computers for search-and-rescue operations72 so that responders could
update the GIS in real time as they discover victims and encounter infra-68CSTB, NRC, 1996, Computing and Communications in the Extreme, pp. 24, 25; CSTB, NRC,2001,  Embedded, Everywhere.69J. Hightower and G. Boriello. 2001.  ÒLocation Systems for Ubiquitous Computing.ÓIEEE Computer, Vol. 33 (8).70As one example, consider that a firm that installs fiber-optic cables in a cityÕs sewers iscapable of mapping those sewers as well using a sewer-crawling robot that lays cable and
tracks its position.71CSTB, NRC, 1996, Computing and Communications in the Extreme, p. 14.
72CSTB, NRC, 1999, Information Technology Research for Crisis Management, p. 38.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMstructural damage.  Another research area is in 
Òmap antsÓ73Ñdistrib-uted, self-organizing robots deployed in a disaster area to sense move-
ment or body heat, for instance.  It may also be possible to develop tech-

nology to generate the data for accurate maps of a debris-strewn disaster
location.Finally, keeping track of emergency respondersÕ positions within a
disaster area is an essential element of managing emergency response.
Technology (similar to E-911 for cell phones) to monitor the progress of
these individuals automatically is not yet available on a broad scale. 3.2.8Mapping the Physical Aspects of the
Telecommunications InfrastructureAs noted in Section 2.2.2, the telecommunications infrastructure is forthe most part densely connected; hence physical attack is unlikely to dis-
rupt it extensively for long periods of time.  However, the physical infra-

structure of telecommunications (and the Internet) does not appear to be
well understood (that is, immediate knowledge of where various circuits
are located is in many cases available only in a disaggregated form dis-
tributed throughout a myriad of company databases), and there may well
exist critical nodes whose destruction would have disproportionate im-
pact.  (On the other hand, knowing where these critical nodes are is diffi-
cult for both network operators and terrorists.)  Thus, an important prior-

ity is to develop tools to facilitate the physical mapping of network
topology, and to begin that mapping with the tools that are available
today.  This is particularly important for the many converged networks

over which both voice and data are carried.3.2.9Characterizing the Functionality of Regional Networks for
Emergency RespondersIn order to develop mechanisms for coordinating emergency-responseactivities, it is necessary to understand what the various communications
and computer networks of emergency responders in a given region are
supposed to do.  For example, managers from different agencies often

speak different ÒlanguagesÓ in describing their needs, capabilities, and
operational priorities; a common conceptual framework for these pur-
poses would be enormously helpful for the coordination of planning ac-73A study in progress by the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board on theintersections between geospatial information and information technology discusses theseself-organizing robots.  See <http://www.cstb.org> for more information on this study.
Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.63INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCHtivities, yet one is not available.74 Sharing of information among the vari-
ous providers of critical infrastructure and emergency-response agencies,
even about common tasks and processes, has been a rather uncommon
activity in the past.An additional and challenging problem is that severe emergenciesoften change what different agencies are expected to do and what priori-
ties their duties have.  For example, existing plans are often overridden by

circumstances (e.g.,  in the aftermath of the September 11 attacks, phone

services to the financial district in Wall Street were given priority; this
eventuality had not been anticipated in prior emergency planning).  More-

over, even if existing plans do not require alteration, emergency agencies
must know and be able to execute on what those plans contain.  (For

example, the notebook containing personnel assignments in a certain type
of emergency must be available and easily found.)  For this reason, drills

and exercises are necessary, and they must involve enough personnel that
in a real emergency, some people with drill experience will be participat-
ing in actual response operations.3.3INFORMATION FUSION
As discussed below, information fusion promises to play a centralrole in the future prevention, detection, attribution, and remediation of
terrorist acts.  Information fusion is defined as the acquisition of data

from many sources, the integration of these data into usable and acces-
sible forms, and their interpretation.  Such integrated data can be particu-

larly valuable for decision makers in law enforcement, the intelligence
community, emergency-response units, and other organizations combat-
ing terrorism.  Information fusion gains power and relevance for the

counterterrorist mission because computer technology enables large vol-
umes of information to be processed in short times.  (Box 3.7 provides

elaborated scenarios for ways in which information-fusion techniques
could be useful.)¥Prevention.  Security checkpoints have become more important, and
more tedious, than ever at airports, public buildings, sporting venues,
and national borders.   The efficiency and effectiveness of checkpoints

could be significantly improved by creating information-fusion tools to74Hank Christen, Paul Maniscalco, Alan Vickery, and Frances Winslow. 2001. ÒAn Over-view of Incident Management.Ó Perspectives on Preparedness, No. 4, September. Availableonline at <http://ksgnotes1.harvard.edu/BCSIA/Library.nsf/pubs/POP4>.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMBOX 3.7Scenarios for Automated Evidence Combination
Intelligence AnalysisA video monitoring program detects an unknown person speaking at a meetingwith a known terrorist in an Arabic television broadcast.  This information is brought
to the attention of the intelligence analyst who set up the program to scan TV for
videoclips that mention individuals known to associate with a particular terroristgroup.  The analyst decides to find out as much as possible about this new unknown
person.  First, a check is run on video archives using face detection/recognition

software to see if this personÕs face had appeared before but was missed.  Second, the
recording of the personÕs speech from the videoclip is used to match against storedarchives of conversations.  Third, the person
Õs name, mentioned by someone in thevideoclip, is used to search information resources that are both internal (across intel-ligence agencies) and external (such as the Web and multilingual news archives).The search is focused on text that mentions this name in the context of terrorism or in
connection with any of the activities of the known terrorist.  The material that is
found is summarized in a variety of ways to aid analysis, such as in a time line withgeographic locations.The result of this search indicates that the unknown person works for an aidorganization that operates in a number of countries, and that the person has recentlyvisited the United States.  A request for appropriate legal authority results in a target-

ed search of the hotel, air travel, car rental, and telephone transactions associatedwith this trip. This search reveals connections to other people that the FBI has hadunder surveillance in the Washington, D.C., area, including through court-approved
wiretaps.  The automatic analysis of phone calls between the unknown person and
those already under surveillance also indicates an unusual pattern of language in-cluding phrases like Òwedding partyÓ and 
Òspecial deliveryÓ in Arabic.  These phras-
es are subsequently linked to overseas intelligence intercepts.  On the basis of this
information, the analyst concludes that there may be something being planned for aspecific time period and thus initiates a number of additional automatic monitoring
and alerting tools focused on these people and these language patterns.Airport Security ScreeningAt airport security checkpoints, every carry-on bag is x-rayed, and some per-centage (say, 15 percent) of these bags receives a manual examination searching foritems that could be used as weapons.  Though this is similar to search procedures in
operation today, this scenario also entails checkpoint operators supported by a net-
work of computers in this airport that captures image, sound, x-ray, and other sensorinformation; analyzes these data using computer perception software; shares the dataacross a national computer network that links every airport in the United States;
assists human security agents; can be instructed to monitor for certain people orevents as needed; and learns from experience what is normal and abnormal withineach of the nationÕs airports.First, the x-ray machines that capture images of each bag are connected to acomputer network.  As each bag goes through the machine, a computer vision sys-
tem analyzes it to attempt to detect suspicious items, such as sharp objects and guns,
and alerts the operator if anything is detected, highlighting it on the x-ray screen.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.65INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCHThis computer vision system is not infallible, but then neither is the human baggagescreener, and the two working together notice different things, so that together they
are more effective than either alone (if they make the same number of errors, butindependently, their combined error rate is halved).Second, as the manual checks are performed on 15 percent of the bags, thecomputer is informed about which bags are checked and whether anything wasfound.  This information provides training data to the computer, which is tied back to
the x-ray image of the bag, enabling the vision system over time to improve its ability
to detect suspicious items from the x-rays.  Standard machine-learning algorithms are
used for this purpose, not unlike those used in face recognition.  Of course, the
human operator will learn on the job in this way as well, but there is one major
difference: the human operator may inspect hundreds or a few thousand bags in aweek, whereas the computer network is capturing data from every security station inevery airport around the world.  Thus, the computer has thousands of times more

training experience to learn from in a single day than any human operator couldaccumulate in a lifetime, leading it to much more refined capabilities.Because of these extensive training experiences, the computer network is ableto learn things that a single operator never could.  For example, it will learn which
new models of suitcases, briefcases, and purses have become common, and it willtherefore be able to spot bags that may be custom-built by a terrorist who has de-
signed luggage for a special purpose.  It will learn what are typical false alarms raised
by each model as it goes through security (e.g., the metal clasp on a particular pursemight often be mistaken as a blade by those unfamiliar with that luggage model).
The computer system advises the security operator about which 15 percent of thebags should be inspected, decreasing the chance that the operator misses an item ora person who should not go unnoticed.  Note that the human operator is still in

charge but is greatly aided by the vast experience base gained by the self-improvingnetwork of computer sensors and image analyzers.Third, the computer network can detect patterns involving multiple people en-tering through multiple security stations, or at multiple times.  If there are several
people taking the same flight, each of whom has ÒaccidentallyÓ brought a pocket
knife, this would be detected by the system, even though the individual operators at
the different security posts would likely be unaware of this global pattern.  Global
patterns could also be detected instantly across multiple airports (e.g., single passen-gers boarding with similar ÒaccidentalÓ pocketknives in Boston, San Francisco,
Washington, D.C., and New York City).Fourth, the security checkpoint operator will be informed by the system ofevents that occurred more globally throughout the airport and in airports with con-
necting flights, as captured by security cameras and other sensors throughout theairport.  For example, if two people arrived at the airport together (as indicated by the
cameras elsewhere in the airport) but get in different lines going through security, the
operator might be informed of this somewhat unusual behavior.  While no single
clue such as this is clear-cut evidence of a dangerous situation, the security stationoperators are more effective because the network of computer sensors and analysis
provides them a more global and more informed picture of what is going on in theairport, enabling them to focus their attention on the most significant risks.Finally, the information garnered, learned, and transmitted across this networkof airport monitoring systems is used to help train individual security operators andto analyze how past security breaches were successful.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMsupport the checkpoint operator in real time.  For example, future airport-
security stations could integrate data received from multiple airports to
provide a more comprehensive view of each passengerÕs luggage andactivities on connecting flights.  The stations could use data-mining meth-

ods to learn which luggage items most warrant hand-inspection, and they
could capture data from a variety of biometric sensors to help verify the
identities of individuals and to search for known suspects.¥Detection and attribution.  Intelligence agencies are routinely in-
volved in information fusion as they attempt to track suspected terrorists
and their activities.  One of their primary problems is that of managing a

flood of data.  There are well-known examples in which planned terrorist

activity went undetected despite the fact that evidence was available to
spot it, because the evidence was just one needle in a huge haystack.
Future intelligence and law-enforcement activities could therefore benefit
enormously from advances in the automated interpretation of text, im-
age, video, sensor, and other kinds of unstructured data.  Automated

interpretation would enable the computer to sort efficiently through mas-
sive quantities of data to bring the relevant evidence (likely combined
from various sources) to the attention of an analyst.¥Remediation (response).  Early response to biological attacks couldbe supported by collecting and analyzing real-time data, such as ambu-
lance calls, admissions to hospital emergency rooms and veterinary of-
fices, or purchases of nonprescription drugs in grocery stores to identify
spreading disease.  Prototype systems are already under development

(Box 3.8).  If anomalous patterns emerge that may signify an outbreak of

some new pathogen, system administrators can quickly alert health offi-
cials.Many other opportunities exist for such computer-aided evidence-based decision making.  For example, the monitoring of activity on com-

puter networks might flag potential attempts to break through a firewall;
or, sensor networks attached to public buildings might flag patterns of
activity within the building that suggest suspicious behavior.  In such

cases, an unaided decision maker might have difficulty detecting subtle
patterns, because the data are voluminous and derive from a variety of
sources.As a general proposition, the development of tools that provide hu-man analysts with assistance in doing their jobs has a higher payoff (at
least in the short to medium term) than do tools that perform most or all
of the analystÕs job.  The former approach places a greater emphasis on
using technology to quickly sift large volumes of data in order to flag
potentially interesting items for human attention, whereas the latter ap-Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.67INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCHBOX 3.8Examples of Information Fusion for Detection of
Bioterrorism Attacks¥The Biomedical Security InstituteÕs Real-time Outbreak and Disease Surveil-lance System monitors about 1,200 patient visits per day in 17 western Pennsylvaniahospitals and recognizes patterns of infectious disease.1  The system looks for sud-
den and frequent outbreaks of cases involving flu-like symptoms, respiratory illness-
es, diarrhea, and paralysis that might indicate a bioterror attack.  A sudden peak in a
certain type of symptom may be the result of a biological agent.  Emergency rooms
and hospitals provide patient information such as symptoms, age, gender, address,
and test results directly to the system.2  Public health doctors are automatically noti-
fied if a pattern develops, and they in turn notify the proper authorities.¥The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention supports a number of en-hanced surveillance projects (ESPs) that monitor certain hospital emergency depart-ments to establish baseline rates of various clinical syndromes.3  Anomaly detection
models identify significant departures from these baseline rates that are called to the
attention of state and local health departments for confirmation and appropriate fol-low-up. ESP has been tested at the 1999 World Trade Organization Ministerial inSeattle, the 2000 Republican and Democratic National Conventions held in Phila-
delphia and Los Angeles, respectively, and the Super Bowl/Gasparilla Festival inTampa, Florida.   A similar effort is the Lightweight Epidemiology Advanced Detec-
tion and Emergency Response System (LEADERS), which provides a set of tools orig-
inally developed for the military to provide real-time analysis of medical data enteredat health care delivery points (e.g., hospitals).  These data are examined for spatial
correlations so that areas of potential disease outbreak can be rapidly identified.¥A system in Washington, D.C., called ESSENCE II (ESSENCE stands for Elec-tronic Surveillance System for Early Notification of Community-based Epidemics) isan operational prototype for the National Capital Region that integrates information
on nonmedical information such as employee absenteeism and over-the-counterdrug sales with information available from doctorsÕ visits, diagnostic laboratories,
hospital emergency rooms, 911 and poison control calls, and so on.  These data are
acquired on a near-real-time basis, and are examined to search for temporal and/orspatial anomalies that might indicate an early warning of a bioterrorist attack.  Non-medical information is valuable in this context because it is likely to reflect changes
in public health status before affected individuals seek medical care on a scale largeenough to register a possible attack.41Bruce Gerson.  2002.  
ÒPresident Bush Praises Carnegie Mellon, Pitt Collaboration toFight Bioterrorism.Ó Carnegie Mellon News.  February 13. Available online at  <http://www.cmu.
edu/cmnews/extra/020213_gbush.html>.2James OÕToole et al.  2002.  
ÒBush Here Today to Highlight Spending on Terrorism.ÓPittsburgh Post-Gazette, February 5. Available online at <http://www.post-gazette.com/region-state/20020205visit0205p2.asp>.3See <http://ndms.umbc.edu/conference2001/2001con20/Treadwe.htm>.4For more information on ESSENCE II, see the Web site at <http://www.nyam.org/events/syndromicconference/agenda.shtml>.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMproach relies on computers themselves to make high-level inferences inthe absence of human involvement and judgment.A final dimension of information fusion is nontechnical.  That is,
disparate institutional missions may well impede the sharing of informa-
tion.  Underlying successful information-fusion efforts is a 
desire to share
informationÑand it is impossible to fuse information belonging to twoagencies if those two agencies do not communicate with each other.  Es-

tablishing the desire to communicate among all levels at which relevant
information could be shared might have a larger impact than the fusion
that may occur due to advances in technology.  For example, hospitals

generally see little benefit and many risks in sharing patient information
with other hospitals, even if it may facilitate the care of some patients that
use both facilities or improve epidemiologic monitoring.   (Note also that
achieving a desire for different facilities or agencies to communicate with
each other may take more than moral persuasion.  This point is addressed

in greater detail in Sections  3.6.3 and 3.6.4.)
3.3.1Data Mining
Data mining is a technology for analyzing historical and currentonline data to support informed decision making.  It has grown quickly in

importance in the commercial world over the past decade, because of the
increasing volume of online data, advances in statistical machine-learn-
ing algorithms for automatically analyzing these data, and improved net-
working that makes it feasible to integrate data from disparate sources.The technical core of data mining is the ability to automatically learngeneral patterns from a large volume of specific examples.  For example,

given a set of known fraudulent and nonfraudulent credit-card transac-
tions or insurance claims, the computer system may learn general pat-
terns that can be used to flag future cases of possible fraud.  Other appli-

cations are in assessing mortality risk for medical patients (by learning
from historical patient data) and in predicting which individuals are most
likely to make certain purchases (by analyzing other individualsÕ past
purchasing data).  Decision-tree learning, neural-network learning, Baye-

sian-network learning, and logistic-regression-and-support vector ma-
chines are among the most widely used statistical machine-learning algo-
rithms.  Dozens of companies now offer commercial implementations,

which are integrated into database and data-warehousing facilities.The majority of these commercial data-mining applications involvewell-structured data.  However, current commercially available technol-

ogy does not work well with data that are a combination of text, image,
video, and sensor information (that is, data in ÒnonstructuredÓ formats).
Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.69INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCHMoreover, it is largely unable to incorporate the knowledge of humanexperts into the data-mining process.  Despite the significant value of

current machine-learning algorithms, there is also a need to develop more
accurate learning algorithms for many classes of problems.New research is needed to develop data-mining algorithms capableof learning from data in both structured and nonstructured formats.  And,

whereas current commercial systems are very data-intensive, research is
needed on methods for learning when data are scarce (e.g., when there
are only a few known examples of some kinds of terrorist activity) by
incorporating the knowledge of human experts alongside the statistical
analysis of the data.  Another research area is that of better mixed-initia-

tive methods that allow the user to visualize the data and direct the data
analysis.3.3.2Data Interoperability
An inherent problem of information fusion is that of data interoper-abilityÑthe difficulty of merging data from multiple databases, multiplesources, and multiple media.  Often such sources will be distributed over

different jurisdictions or organizations, each with different data defini-
tions.  New research is needed for normalizing and combining data col-

lected from multiple sources, such as the combination of different sets of
time-series data (e.g., with different sampling rates, clocks, and time
zones), or collected with different data schemas (e.g., one personnel data-
base may use the variable ÒJobTitle,Ó while another uses 
ÒEmployeeTypeÓ).  Note that data interoperability is also an essential element of
organizational and operational interoperability.3.3.3Natural Language Technologies
In the past decade, the area of language technologies has developed awide variety of tools to deal with very large volumes of text and speech.
The most obvious commercial examples are the Web search engines and
speech recognition systems that incorporate technology developed with
funding from the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
and the National Science Foundation (NSF).  Other important technolo-

gies include information extraction (e.g., extracting the names of people,
places, or organizations mentioned within a document), cross-lingual re-
trieval (e.g., does an e-mail message written in Arabic involve discussion
of a chemical weapon?), machine translation, summarization, categoriza-
tion, filtering (monitoring streams of data), and link detection (finding
connections).  Most of these approaches are based on statistical models of

language and machine-learning algorithms.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMA great deal of online information, in the form of text such as e-mail,news articles, memos, and the Web, is of potential importance for intelli-
gence applications.  Research is needed on methods for accurately ex-

tracting from text certain structured information, such as descriptions of
events (e.g., the date, type of event, actors, and roles.)  Research is needed

to handle multiple languages, including automatic translation, cross-lin-
gual information retrieval, and rapid acquisition of new languages.  Other

important areas of future research are link detection (related to the nor-
malization problem mentioned above) and advanced question answer-
ing.3.3.4Image and Video Processing
The technologies for image and video processing tend to be domain-specific and often combine information from multiple modes.  For ex-

ample, several companies are beginning to offer image-recognition soft-
ware for face recognition and automatic classification of medical and other

types of images.  Commercially available video indexing-and-retrieval

software improves effectiveness by combining techniques of segmenta-
tion, face detection, face recognition, key frame extraction, speech recog-
nition, text-caption extraction, and closed-caption indexing.  This is a

good example of information fusion in which multiple representations of
content are combined to reduce the effect of errors coming from any given
source.The major limitation of present language and image technologies is inaccuracy and performance: despite significant progress, these need to be
considerably improved.  This is particularly important for counterterrorist

systems where the data may be very noisy (i.e., surrounded by irrelevant
information) and sparse.Work is needed on improved algorithms for image interpretation andspeech recognition.  Many of these research issues are specific to prob-

lems arising in a particular mediumÑfor example, recent progress onface recognition has come primarily from understanding how to extract
relevant image features before applying machine-learning methods,
though this approach may not be applicable to machine learning in other
contexts.  However, new research is also needed on perception based on

mixed media, such as speech recognition based on sound combined with
lip motion.3.3.5Evidence Combination
Many of the techniques used to combine information from multiplesources, as in video indexing or metasearch engines, are ad hoc.  Current
Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.71INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCHresearch on more principled methods for reasoning under uncertaintyneeds to be extended and tested extensively in more demanding applica-
tions.  This is a key technical problem, with widespread implications for

many of the applications mentioned aboveÑfor example, how to com-bine evidence from hospital admissions and from nonprescription drug
purchases to detect a possible bioterrorist attack, how to combine evi-
dence from face recognition and voice print to estimate the likely identity
of a person, how to combine evidence from multiple sensors in a building
to detect anomalous activity, and how to undertake more effective per-
sonnel screening.3.3.6Interaction and Visualization
All technologies developed for information access and analysis relyon human involvement to specify information problems and to make
sense of the retrieved data. Research on human-computer interaction in
the areas of query formulation and visualization has the potential for
significantly improving the quality and efficiency of intelligence applica-
tions.  In the area of query formulation, some topics of interest include

support for natural-language queries, query triage (deciding which infor-
mation resource is needed based on the form of the query), and person-
alization based on the context of previous searches and the current task. A
variety of visualization techniques have been developed for large-scale
scientific applications, but more research is need on techniques that are
effective for visualizing huge amounts of dynamic information derived
from unstructured data about people, places and events.  Such research is

potentially valuable because it takes advantage of the human ability to
recognize patterns more easily than automated techniques can.3.4PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY
The essential rationale underlying a science-based approach to coun-tering terrorism is that, absent measures to reduce the intrusiveness and
burdens of a counterterrorism regime on individuals, these burdens will
become so high that they will be intolerable to the American people over
the long run.  As pressure mounts for the government to collect and

process more information, it becomes increasingly important to address
the question of how to minimize the negative impacts on privacy and
data confidentiality that may arise with applications of information fu-
sion.It is axiomatic that information that is not collected can never beabused.  For example, consider the possible collection of an individual
ÕsHIV status.  If the individual has concerns that his or her privacy interests
Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMmight be compromised by the improper disclosure of HIV status to anemployer, then the most effective way to protect such information is not
to collect information on HIV status (e.g., by not recording it in medical
records or not requiring an HIV test).  However, it is also true that infor-

mation that is not collected can never be used.   Thus, if no one ever

collects information about the individualÕs HIV status, that personÕs medi-cal treatment may be adversely affected.This dilemma is magnified in a counterterrorism intelligence context.Because terrorists are not clearly identified with any entity (such as a
nation-state) whose behavior can be easily studied or analyzed, their indi-
vidual profiles of behavior and communication are necessarily the focus
of an intelligence investigation.  Most importantly, it is often not known

in advance what specific information must be sought in order to recog-
nize a suspicious pattern, especially as circumstances change.  From the

perspective of intelligence analysis, the collection rule must be Òcollecteverything in case something might be useful.Ó  Such a stance generates
obvious conflicts with the strongest pro-privacy rule ÒDonÕt collect any-thing unless you know you need it.ÓData mining and information fusion have major privacy implications,and increased efforts by commercial and government entities to correlate
data with a specific person negatively impact privacy and data confiden-
tiality.  There is no clear and easy way of resolving this tension.  Never-

theless, research can help to ameliorate this tension in several ways:¥At a minimum, policy makers need accurate information about thetrade-offs between privacy and confidentiality on the one hand and ana-
lytical power for counterterrorist purposes on the other under different
circumstances of data disclosure.  For example, under what circumstances

and at what state in an analytical effort are specific identities necessary?
What is the impact of increasing less-personalized information?  Research

is needed to answer such questions.¥Research is needed to mitigate negative aspects of data mining,including research on data-mining algorithms that discover general trends
in the data without requiring full disclosure of individual data records.
For example, some algorithms work by posing statistical queries to each
of a set of databases rather than by gathering every data record into a
centralized repository.  Others collect aggregate data without requiring

full disclosure of individual data records.7575As a simple example, say that a public health agency is interested in the overall inci-dence of a particular kind of disease being treated at hospitals in a certain area.  One

method of obtaining this information is for the agency to ask each hospital for the numberInformation Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.73INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH¥Research is needed to develop architectures for data storage thatprotect privacy without compromising analysis.  For example, arrange-

ments could be made to use totally separate and distributed data reposi-
tories.  Using such an approach to information access, an intelligence

agency could send a request to other government agencies and Òcontent-providersÓ asking them if there were any connections between certain
individuals. Without revealing the details of the connections, the pres-
ence of connections could be made known and then specific legal action
could be taken to acquire the data.Note that institutional concerns about confidentiality can be as strongas individual concerns about privacy.  For example, asking hospitals to

pass along personally identified patient information to parties not tradi-
tionally entitled to such information may well engender institutional re-
sistance that may well not be surmountable by fiat (see the discussion in
Section 3.6.3).For many applications such as badges and access tokens, detailedpersonal information is not necessary; the only requirements are that the
token is recognizable as valid and that it has been issued to the person
presenting it.  It does not even have to have an individual
Õs name on it. Onthe other hand, a sufficient aggregation of non-personally-identified in-
formation can often be used to identify a person uniquely.  Identifying

someone as a man of Chinese extraction who has a doctorate in physics,
enjoys swing dancing, has an adopted 7-year-old daughter, and lives in
upper Northwest Washington, D.C., is probably sufficient to specify a
unique individual, even though no particular name is associated with any
of these pieces of information.  Thus, the mere fact that information is

disconnected from personal identifiers is no assurance that an individual
cannot be identified if data were aggregated.76of cases of that disease and to total them.  However, if for some reason a hospital has an
incentive to keep that number secret, such a request for data raises privacy concerns.  An
alternative approach is to ask each hospital to report the sum of the number of cases plussome random number.  The agency totals the sums and then asks each hospital to report the

random number it used.  To obtain the true incidence, it then subtracts out from the total all
of the random numbers submitted.  In reporting this way, no hospital compromises the true
number of cases at that hospital.76It is sometimes surprising how little non-named information is necessary to aggregatein order to re-create an individualÕs identity.  For example, a large number of people can beidentified simply by aggregating their date of birth and zip code.  See Computer Science

and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council. 2000. IT Research for FederalStatistics. National Academy Press, Washington D.C.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMAnother conflict between privacy and intelligence analysis arises be-cause data can be linked.  Assuming that various pieces of data have been

collected somewhere, intelligence analysis relies on the ability to link data
in order to reveal interesting and perhaps significant patterns.  Indeed,

the very definition of a Òpattern of behaviorÓ is one in which data associ-ated with a given individual are grouped so that a trip to Location A can
be seen in the context of Transaction B and a phone call with Person C.  It

is exactly such linkage that gives rise to privacy concerns.  Thus, actions

taken to increase the interoperability of databases so that meaningful
linkages can be created will inevitably raise privacy concerns.What technical or procedural protections can be developed to guardagainst inappropriate privacy-compromising linkages but do not also
cripple the legitimate search for terrorists?  Research in this area is vital.

One approach calls for linkages to be uncovered in the relevant comput-
ers but not to be revealed except under special circumstances (e.g., when
some reasonable cause for suspicion exists77).  For example, the most
recent version of ESSENCE (Box 3.8) uses data that can be rendered anony-
mous on a sliding scale of anonymity.78  During normal operation (i.e.,
when nothing has been detected), sufficiently anonymous data are pro-
vided.  Once evidence of an attack is encountered, data that are less anony-

mous and more identifiable, but also more useful for further analysis, are
automatically transmitted.  Thus, routine compromises of privacy are not

entailed, but when a potential threat is uncovered, less privacy is pro-
vided in order to support an appropriate public health response.  Another

area of research is on decentralized surveillance tools and systems that
can provide analysts with information about data trends and clustering,
rather than the data values themselves.  Such systems promise access to

far more data with fewer privacy concerns.A second approach for protecting privacy calls for audits of accessesto information and generators of linkages to deter those who might do so77The question of what set of facts and circumstances constitutes reasonable cause be-longs to the realm of policy and law rather than to technology or social science. An analo-
gous situation exists with the privacy of medical records.  While it is possible for unautho-
rized parties to hack their way past security systems that guard medical records, the largestand most significant disclosures of medical records to third parties occur because policy
and law exist to allow such disclosures in a perfectly legal manner.  See
 Computer Scienceand Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  1997.  
For the Record: ProtectingElectronic Heath Information.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
78Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council. 2000.Summary of a Workshop on Information Technology Research for Federal Statistics. National Acad-
emy Press, Washington, D.C., p. 36.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.75INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCHinappropriately and to punish those who actually do.  In this scenario, an
individual uses authorized access to a computer system to obtain sensi-
tive information or develops a sensitive linkage and then uses it for some
inappropriate purpose.  Research is needed to investigate the feasibility

of technologies that can mitigate the damage done when ÒinsidersÓ use
technological means to obtain such information inappropriately and also
increase the likelihood that the individual abusing his or her access will
be caught. Effective organizational policies, practices, and processes to
counter such abuses are also an important area of research.A third approachÑentirely based in policyÑis to take steps that re-duce the harm suffered by individuals whose privacy is compromised
inappropriately.  That is, many (though by no means not all) concerns

about privacy arise from the fear that improperly disclosed information
might be used to an individualÕs economic or legal detriment.  Thus, a
concern about privacy with respect to records of HIV status may be partly
rooted in a fear that improper disclosure might result in the loss of health
insurance or the denial of a job opportunity in the future; a concern about
the privacy of oneÕs financial records may be rooted in a fear that onecould become a ÒmarkÓ for criminals or the subject of unwarranted tax
audits.  Laws and regulations prohibiting the use of information obtained

through inappropriate disclosures and providing victims with reasonable
recourse should such disclosures occur could serve to ease public con-
cerns about privacy.  (Such laws and regulations are likely to be relevant

also to individuals with inaccurate data associated with them, e.g., an
inaccurate report of HIV status on a medical record.)3.5OTHER IMPORTANT TECHNOLOGY AREAS
A number of other areas of IT are important for counterterrorismpurposes.  While the committee believes that the research areas described

in Sections 3.1 through 3.4 should have the highest priority in any com-
prehensive IT research program for counterterrorist purposes, the mate-
rial below is intended to indicate why these areas are important and to
sketch out how the research might be done.3.5.1Robotics
Robots are useful in the areas of military operations, hostile environ-ments, and toxic-waste management.  They can serve in high-tech arenas
such as space exploration or in home environmentsÑ as personal assis-
tants for the elderly.  Autonomous vehicles in particular include robotic

cars, tanks, aircraft, helicopters, land rovers, and ÒsnakesÓ that crawl up
and down rough surfaces.  The area of robotics has made substantial
Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMadvances in recent years, especially when combined with technologiessuch as mobile wireless, virtual reality, and intelligent or behavior-based
software.As an extension of small devices and sensors, robots serve two pur-poses.  First, robots currently exist to assist or replace emergency workers

or military personnel in dangerous situations.  For example, bomb squads

use robots to inspect, open, and destroy or detonate suspicious packages;
tethered or wireless robots, with receivers and transmitters, could re-
spond to commands to disarm bombs.A second purpose for robots could be as sensing devices to detectmotion and airborne chemicals.  But unlike stationary sensors, robots

have the ability to move.  For example, a 
Òsearch-and-rescueÓ robot could
crawl into crevices that are inaccessible or dangerous for humans (e.g.,
gas-filled pockets), provide surveillance via a mounted camera or micro-
phone, and communicate a situational assessment with a wireless trans-
mitter.  The use of such robots presents challenges such as their being fit

into an existing organizational and information hierarchy and being used
by workers who might not be familiar with technology.Though the field of robotics has existed in some form for many years,practically useful robots are only beginning to emerge.  For example, the

robots used today for search and rescue are little more than remote-con-
trolled vehicles.  Much more research has to be done on making them

function more autonomously, with more robust control and behavior cir-
cuits.  In addition, the management of teams of robots poses important

research problems with respect to multiagent learning, planning, and ex-
ecution in the face of uncertainty and potential opponents.Robots combine complex mechanical, perceptual, computer, and tele-communications systems.  More work on all of these areas
Ñand on theproblems of integrationÑneeds to be done.  Robot arms and manipula-
tors are still a major source of weakness.  Robotics is a canonical example
of a research area that cuts across disciplines.  With research problems in

pattern recognition, planning, object manipulation (especially at a fine
level), machine emotions, mechanical compliance, control theory, and
methods for human-robot interaction, robotics draws on expertise from
and poses challenges in computer science, mechanical engineering, and
electrical engineering, as well as the social sciences.3.5.2Sensors
Sensors are relevant in preventing certain kinds of attack (e.g., threat-warning sensors that detect smuggled nuclear materials), detecting certain
kinds of attack (e.g., incident-response sensors that indicate the presenceInformation Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.77INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCHof deadly but odorless chemical agents), and mitigating the consequencesof an attack (e.g., sensors that indicate whether an individual has been
exposed to a biological agent).  (For more discussion of particular sensor-

specific challenges related to counterterrorism, see the parent report,
Making the Nation Safer.79 The networking of sensors will also be neces-
sary for broad coverage to be achieved; this area also presents research
challenges.80)Sensors can be deployed in various environments to gather data: onrooftops to detect airborne chemicals, in hallways to detect movement,
and within physical infrastructure such as buildings and bridges to detect
metal fatigue and points of failure.  These devices could be integrated into

objects or systems that are likely to last for long periods of time and must
function under constraints such as limited power source, need for ad-
equate heat dissipation, and limitations on bandwidth and memory.
Moreover, because they protect a civilian rather than a military popula-
tion (civilian populations are much less tolerant of false positives and
much more vulnerable to false negatives), sensors for counterterrorist
purposes must place a very high premium on overall accuracy (i.e., low
false positive and low false negative rates).81   Characteristics such as
operation against the widest possible number of agents and wide area
coverage are also important.In addition to the challenges related to emergency sensor deploymentdescribed in Section 3.2.6, these areas pose difficult research challenges.
Sensors are most effective when individual sensors are linked and coordi-
nated in a distributed sensor network.  Such a network allows informa-

tion to be collected, shared, and processed via a Òdigital nervous systemÓfor situational assessment and personnel monitoring.  Perhaps the most

important research problem for sensor networks is their self-configur-
abilityÑsensor networks must be able to configure themselves (i.e., inter-connect available elements into an ensemble that will perform the re-
quired functions at the desired performance level) and adapt to their
environments automatically (respond to changes in the environment or in
system resources).  This is not to deny the problems faced in particular

sensor modalities (e.g., the automatic recognition of dangerous objects in
an x-ray of carry-on luggage), but it nevertheless remains a key challenge79National Research Council. 2002. Making the Nation Safer: The Role of Science and Technol-ogy in Countering Terrorism.  National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., pp. 320-324.80CSTB, NRC, 2001, Embedded, Everywhere.81In general, for any given test, as the criteria for a positive result are increased, the rateof false positives decreases while the rate of false negatives increases.  The only way to
decrease both simultaneously is to devise a better test.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMto undertake sensor networking and to integrate into a single threat pic-ture sensor readings from a large number of sensors (this is important
because of the need for monitoring large areas) each of which are of low
accuracy.3.5.3Simulation and Modeling
Models are mathematical representations of a system, entity, phe-nomenon, or process, while simulation is a method for implementing a
model over time.82  Modeling and simulation can play important roles
throughout crisis-management activities.  Specifically, emergency re-

sponders in a crisis must take actions to mitigate imminent loss of life
and/or property.  Thus, the ability to make predictions about how events

might unfold (e.g., how a plume of chemical or biological agents might
disperse in the next few hours, how a fire might spread to adjoining areas,
how long a building might remain standing) is important to emergency
responders.  Simulations can also be useful for testing alternative opera-

tional choices.While traditional simulation models have been applied to severestorms, earthquakes, and atmospheric dispersion of toxic substances, their
primary focus has been scientific research rather than real-time crisis re-
sponse.  One difference between scientific simulations and crisis simula-

tions is that the presentation of results for scientific purposes is not al-
ways compatible with the needs of emergency responders.  For example,

plume models of a chemical spill or release of radioactive material typi-
cally produce maps showing dispersion in parts per million as a function
of time, whereas an emergency responder needs an automatic translation
of the concentration of materials into easily interpretable categories such
as ÒSafe,Ó ÒHazardous but not life threatening,Ó or 
ÒLife threateningÓ so
that appropriate action can be taken quickly.Research in simulation and modeling is needed in several areas ifthese are to become useful tools for emergency responders:¥Developing ad hoc models.  In many situations, a particular terrorist
scenario will not have been anticipated.  Thus, it would be helpful to have

tools to facilitate the creation of ad hoc situation-specific models rapidly
(i.e., on a time scale of hours or days).  This would include both the data-82The discussion in this section is adapted largely from CSTB, NRC, 1996, Computing andCommunications in the Extreme, and CSTB, NRC, 1999, 
Information Technology Research forCrisis Management.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.79INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCHgathering needed for input to the model and the construction of the modelitself.   Such tools would likely incorporate significant amounts of subject-

matter expertise.  The performance of such models could not be expected

to match that of models developed under leisurely conditions, but they
might provide rough guidance that could be very useful to emergency
responders.  (As with other issues relating to the use of technology, how

people actually use such tools matters a great deal.  Thus, understanding
the actual utility of hastily constructed models as a function of the prac-
tice and experience of the users involved is also an essential component of
this research.)¥Increasing the timeliness of modeling results.  Because of the time pres-
sures facing emergency responders, timely results are critical.  One ele-

ment is fast processing capabilities.  Another element, easy to overlook, is

the timeliness of data that can be inserted into a model.  To be useful for

emergency responders, data must be entered on a near-real-time basis
(e.g., a model could be linked to weather sensor data), a task that becomes
impossible if large efforts at data preprocessing or formatting are neces-
sary before a simulation can be run.¥Obtaining adequate computational power.  Because many simulations
require large amounts of computing power, techniques are needed that
enable the rapid requisitioning of computers engaged in scientific re-
search and other activities to serve simulation needs in a crisis.  Such

techniques will require both new administrative arrangements and fur-
ther advances in the flexibility, affordability, and ease of use of these
resources.¥Rapid rescaling of models.   Different emergency responders may
need predictions at different time and distance scales.  For example, the

mayor of a city might require information on whether to order an evacu-
ation in response to a successful attack on a nuclear plant and thus would
need information on what might happen at the plant on a time scale of 24
hours.   On the other hand, a firefighter at the plant may need to know

what might happen in the next hour.  The ability to run simulations at

varying scales of resolution is important for both the mayor and the
firefighter, and the needs of each drive the trade-offs between the accu-
racy of a prediction and the speed of the response. Thus, research is
needed to develop the capability for rescaling models rapidly in response
to requests from crisis managers.¥Making initial damage estimates.   Rapid assessment of the extent anddistribution of damage in the wake of any large incident is difficult be-
cause acquiring and synthesizing damage reports take considerable time.
However, initial damage estimates are essential for directing response
efforts.  For example, the destruction of a dam could release a tidal wave
Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMof water that would destroy some houses and spare others.  A model that
provided initial damage estimates would have to account for building
stock (structure type, age, and so on), critical facilities, and lifelines, as
well as geological information and demographics, in order to predict the
number of casualties and the need for shelter and hospitals.  Note also

that such models would have direct relevance to the insurance industry
and might help guide the development of criteria and pricing for terror-
ism insurance policies.¥Improving model interoperability.  As a rule, models are developedand used in isolation.  Integrating models into information systems for

emergency responders would enable more accurate and timely predic-
tions to be made.  For example, emergency responders at the Murrah

Building in Oklahoma City in 1995 used computer-aided design (CAD)
software to map the areas to be searched and to correlate estimated loca-
tions of victims (based on where their offices had been located before the
blast) with the actual scene.  More useful would have been the coupling of

the CAD data into a structural model that could perform finite-element
analysis to predict the loads on various parts of the damaged building,
thus indicating where shoring was necessary to prop up damaged struc-
tures and reduce the danger to survivors and rescuers from further col-
lapses.3.6PEOPLE AND ORGANIZATIONS
The craft of espionage distinguishes between the initial penetration ofan organization and an ongoing exploitation that continues to yield use-
ful information or access.  Technology (e.g., a worm, rogue code, a bug, a
planted microchip) is often essential to the ongoing exploitation, but it is
almost always social methods (e.g., bribing a low-level worker) that allow
the initial penetration which facilitates the introduction of that technol-
ogy.  For example, a bug planted in a room will reveal conversations there

for a long time, but it is a failure of people and organizations that allows
an enemy agent to plant the bug in the first place.  In the immediate

aftermath of World War II, Soviet spies in the United States used a one-
time pad encryption system, an encryption approach that is provably
unbreakable.  Nevertheless, U.S. cryptanalysts broke the Soviet code
Ñbecause the Soviets began to reuse some of the key pads.8383Key pads are simply lists of random numbers, so there was no particular reason whythe Soviets were forced to reuse them.  Their reuse was a human error that violated the
essential premise underlying the security of one-time pad encryption systems.  (See NSA
Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.81INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCHThis lesson generalizes to any study that involves the weaknesses andvulnerabilities of any system.  That is, technology is always used in some
social and organizational context, and human error and human culpabil-
ity are central in understanding how the system might fail.  Thus, design

and deployment are system issues, and since human, social, and organi-
zational behavior are part of the system, they must be part of the research
and design efforts.   The technology cannot be examined in isolation of the

ways in which it is deployed.Technology is aimed at helping people, organizations, and society toaccomplish their goals.  Technology is essential to modern everyday life,

and technology is essential to thwarting would-be terrorists and crimi-
nals.  At the same time, if deployed poorly, the technology can actually

make problems worse.  If it is poorly designed, it will lead to numerous

errors, usually blamed on the unwitting users of the system, but almost
invariably traceable to poor design from a human or organizational point
of view.  Whatever the reason, human error can be extremely costly in

time, money, and lives.  Research findings from the behavioral and social

sciences can aid in the design of solutions that are effective while being
minimally obtrusive.  Good design can dramatically reduce the incidence

of errorÑas the experience in commercial aviation shows.3.6.1Principles of Human-Centered Design
Both technology and the people around it make errors.  It is simply
not possible to have zero false positives and zero false negatives simulta-
neously, especially in a world filled with uncertainty, ambiguity, and
noise.  Most importantly, deliberate adversaries seek to cause and exploit

false alarms.  As a result, the design of a system involving both technol-

ogy and people must assume some percentage of false positives and false
negatives.  The design of a system must provide multiple levels of de-

fense, accommodate continual feedback, and allow systematic attempts to
improve.  In most cases, most errors should be taken as useful feedback

and used to improve system performance rather than as signs of failure
that require punishment and blame.The best systems will look for incipient failuresÑproblems that aredetected before they do damageÑas important measures of operation.Venona papers online at <http://www.nsa.gov/docs/venona/monographs/monograph-2.html>.) More generally, the use of one-time pad systems is cumbersome and difficult and
does not scale easily to large numbers of users, so they are disfavored for many applica-tions.  These disadvantages are all human factors and illustrate well the trade-off between
security and ease of use.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMThe time to take corrective action is when incipient errors reach an unde-sirable state but before they turn into serious issues.  It is only natural to

ignore these early warnings because, of course, no damage has yet been
done.  But it was exactly this ignoring of early-warning trouble signs that

led directly to the disaster with the O-rings on the Space Shuttle Chal-lenger.84In general, systems must be designed from a holistic, systems-ori-ented point of view rather than by focusing on the technology.  Indeed,

understanding the human and organizational interactions is important
well before technical requirements are established.  Then, as the system is

being designed, the experts on technology and human behavior jointly
devise possible systems and develop rapid prototypes that allow quick
and efficient testing of the ideas.  Attention to the human requirements

early in the design stage coupled with iterative design techniques saves
time in the end by minimizing the end testing requirements and reducing
the likelihood of major revisions late in the development process.Consider the phenomenon of Òhuman error.Ó  Experience demon-
strates that often what is blamed on Òhuman errorÓ is in fact design error.
A focus on the technology in isolation of the manner in which it is de-
ployed invariably leads to problems.   It is common in the development of

automated systems to automate whatever can be done, leaving the rest to
the human operators. This often means that the human is Òout of theloop,Ó with little responsibility, until matters reach the point at which the
automatic systems can no longer cope. Then the human is suddenly and
unexpectedly faced with an emergency, and because at this point every-
thing is under human control, any failure is labeled Òhuman error.ÓBy contrast, when systems are designed with a full understanding ofthe powersÑand weaknessesÑof human operators, the incidence of hu-man error is greatly diminished.  People must be given meaningful tasks.

They must always be engaged (i.e., Òin the loopÓ), and their talents shouldbe employed for high-level guidance, not for entering detailed sequences
that require high accuracy.  Machines are good at accurate, repetitive

actions.  People are not.
Human-centered design is a well-explored field with several societ-ies, professional journals, and much academic research as well as applica-
tions, especially in aviation safety and computer systems.85  The follow-
ing subsections address some basic principles of human-centered design.84See R.P. Feynman. 1986.  ÒPersonal Observations on Reliability of Shuttle,Ó in App. F,
Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident.  Available online
at <http://science.ksc.nasa.gov/shuttle/missions/51-l/docs/rogers-commission/Appen-dix-F.txt>.  Accessed November 18, 2002.
85See, for example, Jef Raskin, 2000, The Human Interface, Addison-Wesley, Boston.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.83INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCHDefend in Depth and Try to Avoid Common-Mode FailuresMany of todayÕs systems have a single point of defense.  If problems
arise there, if there is some error, there is no second line to fall back on.86A notable exception is aviation safety, which builds multiple systems so
that failure at one point does not break the system.A key difficulty in such a design philosophy is the existence of com-mon-mode failures.  The accident literature is filled with examples of

common-mode failure, in which redundant safety systems all failed at the
same time.  For example, in the September 11 attack on the World Trade

Center, the medical response was hindered by the fact that the cityÕsOffice of Emergency Management (OEM), responsible for coordinating
all aspects of a disaster response, was housed in Building 7 of the World
Trade Center, one of the buildings that collapsed several hours after the
airplane strikes.This is not to say that common-mode failures are usually ignored indesign.  But they can often be difficult to detect and eliminate.  The 
Òre-dundantÓ communications lines cited in Section 2.2.2 are a potential com-
mon-mode failure, and yet as the discussion of Section 3.2.8 emphasizes,
redundant links that are in fact not redundant are often not easy to iden-
tify.  A more complex example of a hidden common-mode failure oc-

curred in a commercial airliner that lost oil pressure in all three engines
simultaneously.  The two engines on the wing were quite different from

the engine in the tail, and they had been serviced by different technicians.
However, it turned out that each engine required an O-ring seal, and due
to a complex chain of events, the O-ring was left off the part that was
serviced on all three engines.  Thus, in this case, the O-ring was the com-

mon-mode failure, though on the surface the simultaneous failure did not
appear to be a common-mode failure.87Account for the Difference Between
Work as Practiced and Work as PrescribedIn the study of work practices, it is commonplace to observe the dis-tinction between work as practiced and work as prescribed.  When people

describe their work, they can provide clear and coherent statements about86P.A. Hancock and S.G. Hart. 2002. ÒDefeating Terrorism: What Can Human Factors/Ergonomics Offer?Ó Ergonomics in Design, Vol. 10 (1): 6-16.
87National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB). 1984. Aircraft Accident ReportÑEasternAir Lines, Inc., Lockheed L-1011, N334EA, Miami International Airport, Miami, Florida, May 5,1983. Report No. NTSB/AAR-84/04. National Transportation Safety Board, Washington,
D.C.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMthe procedures they follow.  But observation of these same people doing
actual work shows that they are inconsistent with the descriptions they
provided. Why? Because Òthat was a special case.Ó   In fact, it turns out
that special cases are the norm, and the descriptions are of the prototypi-
cal case that seldom actually happens.  Additionally, these descriptions of

procedure are for nonemergency circumstances.  During emergencies,

established procedures will prove even more inadequate than they are
under putatively normal circumstances.A common approach to improving safety and security is to tightenprocedures and to require redundant checking.  But tighter procedures to

improve security address work Òas prescribed.Ó  In practice, the technol-
ogy and procedures that are added to make operations safer and more
secure quite often get in the way of getting the work done.  Security

technology and procedures can introduce so many problems into getting
the job done that people learn to circumvent them.  Because people are

inherently helpful and well motivated to do their work, they develop
workarounds to bypass security, not because they are not well trained or
motivated, but precisely because they are well trained and motivated.  In
many cases, they could not accomplish their tasks without violating pro-
cedures.  This is especially true in crises, where normal routines break

down and workarounds are essential. Consider, for example, advice that is often given about passwords.
People are advised to use passwords that are long and obscure and to
change them frequently so that if one is compromised, it does not remain
compromised for long.  The result is that people write down their pass-

words on yellow Post-it notes and paste them on their terminals, where
they are easy for unauthorized users to see.Biometrics provides another example.  Widely accepted as a stronger
authentication mechanism than passwords, even biometrics cannot be the
entire solution.  Biometric mechanisms must sometimes be bypassed for

entirely legitimate reasons.  ÒI burned my hand and itÕs all bandaged up,so I canÕt use the fingerprint machine.  Can you let me in just this once?
ÓÒI just had a cataract operation and I have to wear an eye patch, so how doI do an iris scan?Ó Any opening for legitimately bypassing normal proce-dures opens the door for illegitimate bypasses.  Even if technology cannot

be fooled (and it almost always can be), the people behind the technology
can be fooled.Sometimes problems occur because the pressures on individuals dif-fer from the stated goals of the organization.  When people are asked to

follow arduous security requirements while at the same time maintaining
efficient and productive work schedules, there can be conflicts.  Workers

must choose which is of greatest importance.  Quite often it is the work

schedule that is given priority, and although this is not unreasonable, itInformation Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.85INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCHoccurs at the cost of security.  The proper goal is to design systems and
procedures in which these are not in conflict.In short, there is a terrible trade-off:  the very things that make secu-
rity more secure are often those that make our lives more difficult, or in
some cases, impossible.  When human and organizational factors are not

taken into account in system design and development, the measures in-
tended to increase security may reduce it because dedicated, concerned
workers will thwart such measures in order to get their jobs done.  Realis-

tic security is cognizant of human and organizational behavior.Plan for People Who Want to Be HelpfulCrooks, thieves, criminals, and terrorists are experts at exploiting thewillingness of people to be helpfulÑa process usually known as Òsocialengineering.Ó  These adversaries use people to help them understand
how to use the onerous technology, and they use people by taking advan-
tage of situations that cause breakdowns in normal procedures.  In short,
they help human error to occur.For example, badges are often required for entry into a secure facility.However, entry can usually be obtained in the following manner: Walk
up to the door carrying an armload of computers, parts, and dangling
cords.  Ask someone to hold the door open, and thank them.  Carry the

junk over to an empty cubicle, look for the password and log-in name that
will be on a Post-it note somewhere, and log in.  If you cannot log in, ask

someone for help.  As one guide for hackers puts it,
 ÒJust shout, ÔDoesanyone remember the password for this terminal?Õ . . . you would be
surprised how many people will tell you.Ó88A firefighter who needed to know the security code to get in a securebuilding through the back door might call the management office of the
building and say:Hey, this is Lt. John Hennessy from Firehouse 17.  This is a Code 73
emergency.  There are people screaming behind the doors, the building
is going to collapseÑwhatÕs the security code? Hurry, IÕm losing mysignal.  Hello? Hello?  Better hurry.  [Sounds of screaming and other

loud noises in background.] A terrorist who needed to know the security code to enter a secure
building through the back door would call and say:88ÒThe Complete Social Engineering FAQ.Ó Available online at <http://morehouse.org/
hin/blckcrwl/hack/soceng.txt>.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMHey, this is Lt. John Hennessy from Firehouse 17.  This is a Code 73
emergency.  There are people screaming behind the doors, the building

is going to collapseÑwhatÕs the security code? Hurry, IÕm losing mysignal.  Hello? Hello?  Better hurry.  [Sounds of screaming and other
loud noises in background.] Times of stress and emergency, when security is perhaps of most
importance, are exactly the times when the strains are the greatest and the
need for normally nonauthorized people (such as firefighters, police, res-
cue and health personnel) to gain access is acute.  And this is when it is

easiest for a terrorist to get in, using the same mechanisms.Countering social engineering by an adversary is an importantcounterterrorist technique.  But whatever the counter, the solution must

not be based on extinguishing the tendencies of people to be helpful.  The

reason is that helpful people often play a key role in getting any work
done at allÑand thus the research challenge is to develop effective tech-niques for countering social engineering that do not require wholesale
attacks on tendencies to be helpful.Understand Bystander ApathyAs more people are involved in checking a task, it is possible forsafety to decrease.  This is called the 
Òbystander apathyÓ problem, named
after studies of a New York City crime in which numerous people wit-
nessed an incident but no one helped and no one reported it.  Laboratory
studies showed that the greater the number of people watching, the lower
the likelihood that anyone would helpÑthe major reason being that eachindividual assumes that if an incident is serious, someone else out of all
those watching will be doing something, so the fact that nobody is doing
anything means that it must not be a real issue.  After all, in New York,

anything might be happening: it might be a movie shoot.  Similarly, if I

am asked to check the meter readings of a technician, and I know that the
immediate supervisor has already checked them and that someone else
will check my report, I donÕt take the check all that seriously: after all,how could a mistake get through with so many people involved?  I donÕthave to worry.  But what if everyone feels that way?
The commercial aviation community has done an excellent job offighting this tendency with its program of crew resource management
(CRM).  In CRM, the pilot not flying is required to be an active critic of the

actions taken by the pilot who is flying.  And the pilot flying is supposed
to thank the other for the criticism, even when it is incorrect.  Obviously,

getting this process in place was difficult, for it involved major changes in
the culture, especially when one pilot was junior, the other very senior.
But the result has been increased safety in the cockpit.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.87INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCHAccount for Cognitive and Perceptual BiasesThe research literature in cognitive and social psychology clearly dem-onstrates that most people are particularly bad at understanding low-
probability events.  This might be the 
Òone-in-a-millionÓ problem.  An
airplane pilot might well decide that the situation of three different oil
pressure indicators all reading zero oil pressure is likely fallacious, be-
cause it is a Òone-in-a-millionÓ chance that all three engines would fail at
the same time.  However, since there are roughly 10 million commercial

flights a year in the United States, one-in-a-million means that 10 flights a
year will suffer from this problem.On the other hand, salient events are overestimated in frequency.Thus, aviation is considered more dangerous than automobile driving by
many people, despite the data that show just the opposite.  What about

terrorist acts?  These are truly unlikely, deadly though each may be, but if

airline passengers overreact, they are apt to attack and possibly seriously
injure an innocent passenger who meets some of their preconceptions of a
terrorist.  Indeed, each successful encounter between passengers and po-

tential harrowers increases the likelihood of a future false encounter.The Òboy who cried wolfÓ is a third perceptual bias
Ñpotential threatsare often ignored because of a history of false alarms.  An effective crimi-
nal or terrorist approach is to trigger an alarm system repeatedly so that
the security personnel, in frustration over the repeated false alarms, either
disable or ignore itÑwhich is when the terrorist sneaks in.Probe and Test the System IndependentlyThe terms Òred teamÓ and 
Òtiger teamÓ refer to efforts undertaken by
an organization to test its security from an operational perspective using
teams that simulate what a determined attacker might do.  Tiger teams

develop expertise relevant to their intended targets, conduct reconnais-
sance to search for security weaknesses, and then launch attacks that
exploit those weaknesses.  Under most circumstances, the attack is not

intended to be disruptive but rather to indicate what damage could have
been done.  Properly conducted tiger-team testing has the following char-

acteristics:¥It is conducted on an unscheduled basis without the knowledge ofthe installation being probed, so that a realistic security posture can be
tested.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISM¥It does not function under unrealistic constraints about what it canor cannot do, so its attack can realistically simulate what a real attacker
might do.¥It reports its results to individuals who are not directly responsiblefor an installationÕs security posture so that negative results cannot besuppressed.¥It probes and tests the fundamental assumptions on which securityplanning is based and seeks to violate them in order to create unexpected
attacks.Why are tiger teams a Òpeople and organizationÓ issue?  The essential
reason is that an attacker has the opportunity to attack any vulnerable
point in a systemÕs defenses, whether that point of vulnerability is theresult of an unknown software bug, a misconfigured access control list, a
password taped to a terminal, lax guards at the entrance to a building, or
a system operator trying to be helpful.Over the years, tiger teams have been an essential aspect of any secu-rity program, and tiger-team tests are essential for several reasons:¥Recognized vulnerabilities are not always corrected, and knownfixes are frequently found not to have been applied as a result of poor
configuration management.¥Security features are often turned off in an effort to improve opera-tional efficiency.  Such actions may improve operational efficiency, but at

the potentially high cost of compromising security, sometimes with the
primary damage occurring in some distant part of the system.¥Some security measures rely on procedural measures and thusdepend on proper training and ongoing vigilance on the part of com-
manders and system managers.¥Security flaws that are not apparent to the defender undergoing aninspection may be uncovered by a committed attacker (as they would be
uncovered in an actual attack).89In order to maximize the impact of these tests, reports should bedisseminated widely.  The release of such information may cause embar-

rassment of certain parties or identify paths through which adversaries
may attack, but especially in the case of vulnerabilities uncovered for
which fixes are available, the benefits of releasing such informationÑallowing others to learn from it and motivating fixes to be installedÑgenerally outweigh these costs.
  Furthermore, actions can be taken to mini-
89CSTB, NRC, 1999, Realizing the Potential of C4I
, p. 147.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.89INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCHmize the possibility that adversaries might be able to obtain or use suchinformation.  For example, passing the information to the tested installa-

tion using nonelectronic means would eliminate the possibility that an
adversary monitoring electronic channels could obtain it.  Delaying the

public release of such information for a period of time could allow the
vulnerable party to fix the problems identified.Finally, tiger-team testing launched without the knowledge of theattacked systems also allows estimates to be made of the frequency of
attacks.  Specifically, the fraction of tiger-team attacks that are detected is

a reasonable estimate of the fraction of adversary attacks that are made.
Thus, the frequency of adversary attacks can be estimated from the num-
ber of adversary attacks that are detected.3.6.2Organizational Practices in IT-Enabled
Companies and AgenciesAn organizationÕs practices play an important role in countering ex-ternal threats.  The discussion below is not meant in any way to be ex-

haustive but rather to motivate examination of yet another nontechno-
logical dimension of security.Outsourcing of Product Development and SupportFor entirely understandable reasons, many companies outsource ITwork to parties whose interests may not be fully aligned with their own.
Companies outsource for many reasons, ranging from the availability of
skilled human resources that are not indigenous to them to the often-
lower cost of doing so (especially when the parties doing the outsourced
work have access to cheaper sources of labor).The practice of outsourcing has security implications.  On the one
hand, outsourced work represents a potential vulnerability to the com-
pany that uses such work, unless that company has the expertise to audit
and inspect the work for security flaws.  By assumption, a company that

outsources work has less control over how the work is done, and the
possibility of deliberately introduced security vulnerabilities in out-
sourced work must be taken seriously.  On the other hand, one reason for

outsourcing work is that those doing the work may have greater expertise
than the company hiring themÑand if security is a special expertise of theformer, its capabilities for maintaining security may be greater than that ofthe latter.Outsourcing is not in and of itself a practice that leads to insecure ITsystems and networks.  Nevertheless, prudence dictates that a company

understand the potential risks and benefits of outsourcing from a securityInformation Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMperspective.  If it does outsource work, a company should undertake
careful and informed inspection of the work on system components that
provide critical functionality.Personnel ScreeningBehavioral and psychological profiles of typical outside ÒhackersÓhave been available for a long time, providing insight into their motiva-
tions and techniques.  However, similar information about persons likely

to present an insider threat is not available today.  One challenge to as-

sembling such information is the fact that insider adversaries can be char-
acterized in many different ways.  For example, the behavior of the in-

sider will likely vary depending on a wide variety of factors, including
whether the person is unwitting, incompetent, coerced, vengeful, and so
on.  Such factors imply that simply relying on externally observable traits

and behaviors in order to identify potential insiders may not prove use-
ful, and so integration with background information on individual em-
ployees may be necessary to identify potential risks from insiders.  Note

also that all screening techniques run the risk of incorrectly labeling prob-
lematic behavior acceptable or of determining benign behavioral patterns
to be indicative of inappropriate behavior or intent.Managing Personnel in a Security-Oriented EnvironmentManaging employees in a security-oriented environment is complex.The practices that characterize the handling of classified information of-
ten impede the sharing of information among people.  Long-term compli-

ance with security procedures is often difficult to obtain, as employees
develop ways to circumvent these procedures in order to achieve greater
efficiency or effectiveness.  Personnel matters that are routine in nonsecure

environments become difficult.  For example, from a security perspective,

termination of the access privileges of employees found to be improperly
hired or retained must happen without warning them of such termina-
tion.   On the other hand, due process may prevent rapid action from

being taken.  The temptations are strong to relax the requirements of due
process for security, but not observing due process often has detrimental
effects on organizational morale and esprit de corps,90 not to mention the
possibility that almost any pretext will suffice for some individual super-
visors to eliminate workers they do not personally like.90Illustrations of the conflict between applying due process and managing the require-ments of security can be found in the cases of Wen Ho Lee and Felix Bloch.  In investigating

the alleged passing of nuclear weapons design information to the PeopleÕs Republic ofInformation Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.91INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCHMany issues arise when an employee is merely under suspicion forwrongdoing or malicious intentÑbefore action is taken to rescind accessprivileges, the company may run a significant risk of suffering significant
damage.  This suggests that under these circumstances, the work of the

employee must be monitored and controlled, but at the same time the
requirements of due process must be observed.3.6.3Dealing with Organizational Resistance
to Interagency CooperationAn effective response to a serious terrorist incident will inevitablyrequire the multiple emergency-response agencies to cooperate.  Section

3.2.1 describes technical barriers to effective cooperation, but technologi-
cal limitations by no means explain why agencies might fail to cooperate
effectively.Specifically, it is necessary to note that the character and traditions ofagencies have a profound impact on their ability and willingness to coop-
erate.   Different agencies exhibit many differences in internal cultures

(e.g., in philosophies of staff reward and punishment, in traditions among
disciplines in research and implementation, in ethical criteria of staff in
terms of private versus public interest, in performance criteria between
public and profit-making enterprises, and in degree of participatory deci-
sion making).  Turf battles and jurisdictional warfare between agencies

with overlapping responsibilities are also common, with each agency hav-
ing its own beliefs about what is best for the citizenry.For the public record, the rhetoric of every emergency-responseagency acknowledges the need for cooperation with other agencies.  But

the reality in practice is often quite different from the rhetoric, and in
practice almost every disaster (whether natural or attack-related) reveals
shortcomings in the extent and nature of interagency cooperation.China, Lee was charged on multiple counts of mishandling material containing restricteddata with the intent to injure the United States and with the intent to secure an advantage toa foreign nation.  After being charged, Lee was held in custody under conditions described
by the cognizant federal judge as draconian, because it was believed that his pretrial release
would pose a grave threat to the nationÕs security.  The case ended with the dismissal of all
but one charge of mishandling classified information and with the judgeÕs apology for theconduct of the government in the prosecution of this case.  Felix Bloch was a Foreign

Service officer in the State Department, investigated in 1989 by the FBI for spying for theSoviet Union.  Bloch was eventually fired and stripped of his pension in 1990 on grounds
that he lied to FBI investigators, but he was never charged.  It is alleged that Robert Hanssen

gave information to the Soviets revealing that Bloch was under suspicion, which mightaccount for the fact that sufficient grounds for charging Bloch were never found.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMFor example, the emergency response to the September 11, 2001, at-tacks on the World Trade Center revealed a number of cultural barriers to
cooperation in the New York City Police and Fire Departments:91¥Police helicopters, with the ability to provide firefighters close-upinformation on the progress of the fire in the upper parts of the buildings
as well as some aerial rescue capability of those gathered on the roofs,
were never used for those purposes.  An on-site Fire Department chief

tried to request police helicopters for such roles but was unable to reach
the police dispatcher for the helicopters either by phone or radio.  Fur-

thermore, the Fire Department had established its command post in the
building lobbies, while the police had established their command post
three blocks away, and the police did not report to the Fire Department
commanders on-site.  Said one senior Fire Department official, 
ÒThey [thepolice] report to nobody and they go and do whatever they want.Ó¥The Police and Fire Departments have a formal agreement (in placesince 1993) to share police helicopters during high-rise fires and to prac-
tice together.  However, neither agency has any records of joint drills,

although some less formal Òfamiliarization flightsÓ may have been con-
ducted for the Fire Department a year or so before September 11.¥While most states and the federal government have forged agree-ments among emergency-response agencies that specify in advance who
will be in overall charge of a crisis response, New York City has no such
agreement, which left its Police and Fire Departments with no guidance
about how to proceed with overall command arrangements on September
11.¥Police fault firefighters and firefighters fault police for unwilling-ness to cooperate.  Some police believe that sharing command with the

Fire Department is difficult because firefighters lack paramilitary disci-
pline characteristic of the police force, while some firefighters thought
that the police felt they could and should do everything.¥In the aftermath, senior Fire Department and Police Departmentofficials disagreed over the extent to which the departments were able to
coordinate.  A senior Fire Department official said that 
Òthere is no ques-tion there were communications problems [between the Fire Department
and the Police Department] at this catastrophic incident,Ó while a senior
Police Department official said, ÒI was not made aware that day that wewere having any difficulty coordinating.Ó91See Jim Dwyer, Kevin Flynn, and Ford Fessenden. 2002. Ò9/11 Exposed Deadly Flawsin Rescue Plan.Ó New York Times, July 7.  Available online at <http://www.nytimes.com/
2002/07/07/nyregion/07EMER.html?pagewanted=1>.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.93INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCHCultural barriers separating the CIA and the FBI have also been re-vealed in the postmortems that have been conducted since September 11.
In particular, the essential mission of the CIA is one of intelligence collec-
tion and analysis, while the essential mission of the FBI has been directed
toward law enforcement.  As a broad generalization, these missions differ

in that intelligence is more focused on anticipating and predicting bad
events, while law enforcement is more focused on prosecutions and hold-
ing perpetrators of dangerous events accountable to a criminal justice
system.  To illustrate, intelligence analysts place a high value on protect-

ing sources and methods for gathering intelligence so that they will be
able to continue obtaining information from those channels, while law-
enforcement officials place a high value on the ability to use information
in open court to gain convictions.  (The fact that the FBI and CIA also

operate under very different legal regimes governing their domestic ac-
tivities is also quite relevant, but beyond the scope of this report.  Suffice

it to say that these different legal regimes impose explicit behavioral con-
straints and serve to shape the environment in which the cultural atti-
tudes within each agency develop.)Desires of agencies to preserve their autonomy also contribute to anactive (if subterranean) resistance to interoperability.  Personnel of one

agency without the capability of communicating with another agency are
not easily directed by that other agency.  Furthermore, an agency may

have a fear (often justified) that communications overheard by another
agency will lead to criticism and second-guessing about actions that it
took in the heat of an emergency.There are no easy answers for bridging cultural gulfs between agen-cies that do not interact very much during normal operations.  Different

agencies with different histories, different missions, and different day-to-
day work would be expected to develop different policies, procedures,
and philosophies about what is or is not appropriate under a given set of
circumstances.For the most part and under most circumstances, an agencyÕs cultureserves it well.  But in crisis, interagency differences impede interagency

cooperation, and they cannot be overcome by fiat at the scene of the crisis.
For example, a policy directive requiring that agencies adopt and use
common communications protocols does not necessarily require emer-
gency responders from different agencies to actually interact with one
another while an emergency response is occurring.3.6.4Principles into Practice
Putting these principles into practice requires that the human require-ments be considered equally with technical and security requirements.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMThe most secure and reliable systems will be those developed with behav-ioral scientists from the user interface community who use an iterative
design-test-design implementation strategy.The major point is to recognize that security and reliability are sys-tems problems: the needs and standard working practices of the people
involved are as important as the technical requirements.  The very virtues

of people are often turned against them when intruders seek to broach
security: the willingness to help others in distress is perhaps the weakest
link of all in any defensive system, but it would be preferable to design
security systems that detract minimally from this valuable human at-
tribute.  Many failures are due to security requirements that are unreason-

able from the point of view of human cognition (e.g., asking for frequent
memorization of long, complex passwords) or that severely impact the
ability to get the required work done because they conflict with the orga-
nizational structures and requirements.  It is therefore essential that the

needs of the individuals, the workgroups, and the organization all be
taken into account.  Conscientious workers will do whatever is necessary
to get the work done, often at the cost of compromising security.  But

through proper design, it should be possible to design systems that are
both more efficient and more secure.To achieve effective interagency cooperation in crisis, many thingsmust happen prior to the occurrence of crisis, taking into account the
realities of organizational resistance to interoperability.  Such cooperation

is likely to require:¥Strong, sustained leadership.  When a strong leader places a high
priority on interagency cooperation, is willing to expend resources and
political capital in support of such cooperation, and can sustain that ex-
penditure over a time long enough so that the agencies in question cannot
ÒoutwaitÓ his or her efforts, organizational change that moves in the di-
rection of that priority is more likely.¥Activities that promote interagency understanding and cooperation.  One
example of such activities is the temporary detailing of personnel from
one agency to another (e.g., firefighters and police officers or FBI and CIA
analysts on temporary duty at each otherÕs agencies).  Prior exposure to
one anotherÕs operational culture generally helps to reduce frictions thatare caused by lack of familiarity during a crisis.  Of course, to be genuniely

helpful, this practice must be carried out on a sufficiently large scale that
the personnel so exposed are likely to be those participating in a response
to a crisis.  Another useful activity is joint exercises that simulate crisis

response.  As a rule, exercises that involve most or all of the agencies

likely to be responding in a disasterÑand that use the IT infrastructurethat they are expected to useÑare an essential preparation for effectiveInformation Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.95INVESTING IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCHinteragency cooperation.92  Exercises help to identify and solve some
social, organizational, and technical problems, and they help to reveal the
rivalries and infighting between agencies whose resolution is important
to real progress in this area.  To the extent that the agencies and personnel

involved in an exercise are the same as those involved in the response to
a real incident, exercises can help the response to be less ad hoc and more
systematic.  Other, less formal activities can also be conducted to improve

interagency understanding.  For example, personnel from one agency can

be detailed to work in another agency in emergency-response situations.
As a part of pre-service and in-service training, personnel from one agency

can be posted to other agencies for short periods to develop contacts and
to understand the operating procedures of those other agencies.¥Budgets that support interagency cooperation.  For many agencies,
battles of the budget are as important as their day-to-day operational
responsibilities.  This is not inappropriate, as adequate budget resources

are a prerequisite for an agencyÕs success.  Thus, it is simply unrealistic to
demand cooperation from agencies without providing budget resources
that are dedicated to that end.  Note that budget resources support opera-

tions (e.g., personnel and training matters) and the procurement of sys-
tems, and both are relevant to interagency cooperation.3.6.5Implications for Research
The discussion in the previous sections has two purposes.  One is to
describe the operational milieu into which technology is deployedÑawarning that human beings are an essential part of any operational sys-
tem and that system design must incorporate sophisticated knowledge of
human and organizational issues as well as technical knowledge.  A sec-

ond purpose is to develop a rationale for research into human and organi-
zational issues relating to technology in a counterterrorism context.Research in this area will be more applied than basic.  The social
sciences (used broadly to include psychology, anthropology, sociology,
organizational behavior, human factors, and so on) have developed a
significant base of knowledge that is relevant to the deployment of IT-
based systems.  But in practice, social scientists with the relevant domain
expertise often lack applied skills and the requisite technical IT knowl-92Despite the creation of New York CityÕs Office of Emergency Management in 1996 andexpenditures of nearly $25 million to coordinate emergency response, the city had not
conducted an emergency exercise between 1996 and September 11, 2001, at the World TradeCenterÑwhich had been bombed in 1993Ñthat included the Fire Department, the police,and the Port AuthorityÕs emergency staff.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMedge.  Similarly, information technologists often lack the appropriate do-
main knowledge and often use a system development process that makes
it difficult to incorporate human and organizational considerations.This point suggests that research is relevant in at least four differentareas.1.The formulation of system development methods that are more amenableto the incorporation of domain knowledge and social science expertise.  The
Òspiral developmentÓ methodology for software development is an ex-
ample of how user inputs and concerns can be used to drive the develop-
ment process, but the method is hard to generalize to incorporate knowl-
edge about the organizational context of use.2.The translation of social science research findings into guidelines andmethods that are readily applied by the technical community. The results of this
research effort might very well be software toolboxes as well as a ÒHand-book of Applied Social ScienceÓ or a ÒCognitive Engineering HandbookÓcontaining useful principles for system development and design derived
from the social science research base.3.The development of reliable security measures that do not interfere withwhat legitimate workers must do.  These methods must minimize loads on
human memory and attention and task interference while providing the
appropriate levels of security in the face of adversaries who use sophisti-
cated technologies as well as social engineering techniques to penetrate
the security.4.Understanding of the IT issues related to the disparate organizationalcultures of agencies that will be fused under the Department of Homeland Secu-
rity.  This is a complex task, with difficult technical issues interspersed
with complex procedural, permissions, and organizational issues requir-
ing a mix of technical and social skills to manage.  Operationally, the

question is how to allow for the sharing of communication and data
among different organizations that have different needs to know, differ-
ing requirements, and different cultural and organizational structures, in
a way that enhances the desired goals while maintaining the required
security.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.974What Can Be Done Now?Developing a significantly less vulnerable information infrastructureis an important long-term goal for the United States.  This long-term goal
must focus on the creation of new technologies and paradigms for en-
hancing security and reducing the impact of security breaches.  In the

short term, the committee believes that the vulnerabilities in the commu-
nications and computing infrastructure of the first-responder network
should receive focused attention.  Efforts should concentrate on harden-

ing first respondersÕ communications capability as well as those portions
of their computing systems devoted to coordination and control of an
emergency response.  The committee believes that existing technology

can be used to achieve many of the needed improvements in both the
telecommunications and computing infrastructures of first responders.
Unfortunately, the expertise to achieve a more secure system often does
not reside within the host organizationsÑthis may be the case, for ex-
ample, in local and state government.  These facts lead to two short-term

recommendations.Short-Term Recommendation 1:  The nation should develop a pro-
gram that focuses on the communications and computing needs of emer-
gency responders.   Such a program would have two essential func-

tions:¥Ensuring that authoritative current-knowledge expertise and support re-garding information technology are available to emergency-response agencies
prior to and during emergencies, including terrorist attacks.  One implementa-
Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMtion option is to situate the mechanism administratively in existing gov-ernment or private organizationsÑfor example, the National Institute ofStandards and Technology, the Department of Homeland Security, the
Department of Defense, the Computer Emergency Response Team of the
Software Engineering Institute at Carnegie Mellon University.  A second

option is to create a national body to coordinate the private sector and
local, state, and federal authorities.1   In the short term, a practical option
for providing emergency operational support would be to exploit IT ex-
pertise in the private sector, much as the armed services draw on the
private sector (National Guard and reserve forces) to augment active-
duty forces during emergencies.  Such a strategy, however, must provide

adequate security vetting for private-sector individuals serving in this
emergency role and must also be a complement to a more enduring
mechanism for providing ongoing IT expertise and assistance to emer-
gency-response agencies.¥Upgrading the capabilities of the command, control, communications,and intelligence (C3I) systems of emergency-response agencies through the use ofexisting technologies and perhaps minor enhancements to them.  One key ele-
ment of such upgrading should be a transition from legacy analog C3I
systems to digital systems.  Of course, in the short term, this transition can

only be started, but it is clear that it will be necessary over the long term to
achieve effective communications capabilities.  In addition, maintaining

effective communications capability in the wake of a terrorist attack is a
high priority, and some possible options for implementing this recom-
mendation include a separate emergency-response communications net-
work that is deployed in the immediate aftermath of a disaster and the
use of the public network to support virtual private networks, with prior-
ity given to traffic from emergency responders.  (Table 4.1 describes some

illustrative advantages and disadvantages of each approach.)  Given the

fact that emergency-response agencies are largely state and local, there is
no federal agency that has the responsibility and authority over state and
local responding agencies needed to carry out this recommendation.
Thus, it is likely that a program of this nature would have to rely on
incentives (probably financial) to persuade state and local responders to
participate and to acquire new interoperable C3I systems.1CSTB has a pending full-scale project on information and network security R&D thatwill address federal funding and structure in much greater detail than is possible in thisreport.  See the Web site <http://www.cstb.org> for more information on this subject.
Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.99WHAT CAN BE DONE NOW? TABLE 4.1A Comparison of Separate Emergency Networks with
Reliance on Surviving Residual CapacityEmergencyIllustrativeIllustrative
NetworkAdvantageDisadvantage
Separate network deployedProvides high-confidenceWould not be the system
after an emergencyassurance of knownregularly used by personnel;
bandwidth availability.without continuous updates
and training, they may not
be able to use it properly inemergency settings.Deployment of networkmay take too long.Residual public-networkAssures immediateNot possible to assure the
capacity plus priority foravailability of someavailability of adequate
emergency respondersbandwidth because somebandwidth for emergency
part of the public networkresponders because
is likely to survive anyavailability depends on the
disaster.amount of surviving public
network.Short-Term Recommendation 2: The nation should promote the useof best practices in information and network security in all relevant
public agencies and private organizations.  Nearly all organizations,whether in government or the private sector, could do much better with
respect to information and network security than they do today, simply
by exploiting what is already known about that subject today, as dis-
cussed at length in Cybersecurity Today and Tomorrow: Pay Now or Pay
Later.2  Users of IT, vendors in the IT sector, and makers of public policy
can all take security-enhancing actions.Users of IT in individual organizations are where the Òrubber meetsthe roadÓÑthey are the people who must actually make the neededchanges work.  Only changes in operational practice and deployed tech-

nology in individual organizations can have an impact on security, and2Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council(NRC).  2002.  
Cybersecurity Today and Tomorrow: Pay Now or Pay Later.  National AcademyPress, Washington, D.C. (hereafter cited as CSTB, NRC, 2002, Cybersecurity Today and To-morrow).   The discussion in that volume is based on extensive elaboration and analysis
contained in various CSTB reports. including Computers at Risk (1991), Trust in Cyberspace(1999), and Realizing the Potential for C4I (1999), among others.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMthe parties responsible for taking action range from chief technical (oreven executive) officers to system administrators.  Individual organiza-

tions can and should:¥Establish and provide adequate resources to an internal entity withresponsibility for providing direct defensive operational support to sys-tem administrators throughout the organization . . . .  To serve as the
focal point for operational change, such an entity must have the author-
ityÑas well as a person in chargeÑto force corrective action.¥Ensure that adequate information-security tools are available, thateveryone is properly trained in their use, and that enough time is avail-
able to use them properly.  Then hold all personnel accountable for their
information system security practices . . . .¥Conduct frequent, unannounced red-team [tiger-team] penetrationtesting of deployed systems and report the results to responsible man-agement . . . .¥Promptly fix problems and vulnerabilities that are known or that arediscovered to exist . . . .¥Mandate the organization-wide use of currently available network/configuration management tools, and demand better tools from vendors
. . . .¥Mandate the use of strong authentication mechanisms to protect sen-sitive or critical information and systems . . . .
¥Use defense in depth.  In particular, design systems under the as-
sumption that they will be connected to a compromised network or anetwork that is under attack, and practice operating these systems un-
der this assumption.¥Define a fallback plan for more secure operation when under attackand rehearse it regularly.  Complement that plan with a disaster-recov-

ery program.3Vendors of IT systems and services have key roles to play in improv-ing the security functionality of their products.  Such vendors should:
¥Drastically improve the user interface to security, which is [virtually]incomprehensible in nearly all of todayÕs systems . . . .  Users and ad-
ministrators must be able to easily see the current security state of theirsystems; this means that the state must be expressible in simple terms.
¥Develop tools to monitor systems automatically for consistency withdefined secure configurations, and enforce these configurations. . . .  Ex-
tensive automation is essential to reduce the amount of human labor3CSTB, NRC, 2002, Cybersecurity Today and Tomorrow, p. 13.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.101WHAT CAN BE DONE NOW?that goes into security.  The tools must promptly and automatically re-
spond to changes that result from new attacks.
¥Provide well-engineered schemes for user authentication based onhardware tokens . . . .  These systems should be both more secure and
more convenient for users than are current password systems.
¥Develop a few simple and clear blueprints for secure operation thatusers can follow, since most organizations lack the expertise to do thisproperly on their own.  For example, systems should be shipped with

security features turned on, so that a conscious effort is needed to dis-able them, and with default identifications and passwords turned off, sothat a conscious effort is needed to select them . . . .
¥. . . [c]onduct more rigorous testing of software and systems for secu-rity flaws, doing so before releasing products rather than use customersas implicit beta testers to . . . [uncover] security flaws . . . .4  Changing
this mind-set is one necessary element of an improved . . . posture [forinformation and network security].5In addition, vendors should provide individual consumers with easy-to-use, default-on security tools and features to secure home computers
and networks.  Because home computers can play a significant role in

attacks against cyber infrastructure, actions securing this diffuse infra-
structure could help to reduce the potential threat it poses.Makers of public policy have an important role in securing criticalgovernment IT systems and networks.  The Office of Management and

Budget (OMB) has sought to promote government information and net-
work security in the past, but despite its actions, the state of information
and network security in government agencies remains highly inadequate.
In this regard, the administration and Congress can position the federal
government as a leader in technology use and practice by requiring agen-
cies to adhere to the practices recommended above and to report on their
progress in implementing those measures.6  Such a step would also help
to grow the market for security technology, training, and other services.4ÒNote that security-specific testing of software goes beyond looking at flaws that emergein the course of ordinary usage in an Internet-connected production environment.  For
example, security-specific testing may involve very sophisticated attacks that are not widely
known in the broader Internet hacker community.Ó5CSTB, NRC, 2002, Cybersecurity Today and Tomorrow, pp. 13-14.6This concept has been implicit in a series of laws, beginning with the Computer SecurityAct of 1987, and administrative guidance (e.g., from OMB and more recently from theFederal Chief Information Officers Council).  Although it has been an elusive goal, move-
ments toward e-government have provided practical, legal, and administrative impetus.
For more discussion, see Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Re-search Council. 2002.  Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-Government. Na-tional Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMBOX 4.1A Comparison of Fire Safety with Information and
Network SecurityTodayÕs fire codes seek to provide a certain level of safety against fire in build-ings, and there is broad acceptance of the idea that compliance with fire codesresults in buildings that are safer against fire than those that are not compliant.  Fire

codes are also developed and enforced by government regulation.  A reasonable
question is, Why canÕt the same kind of regulation be used to improve informationand network security?Fire safety and information and network security are very different in certainkey dimensions:¥Intentionality.  Most fires are accidental, and hence the fire code is not
primarily concerned with the deliberate bypassing of fire safety measures.  Arson

presents a very different problem (fortunately rare compared to the accidents thataccount for the majority of fires), and if arson were the primary problem in fire safety,fire codes would look very different indeedÑand would likely be much less effective
at making buildings safer than they are in todayÕs environment.  However, in the area
of information and network security, most system penetrations are deliberate, and soinformation and network security is much more like protecting against arson than
protecting against accidental fires.¥Monoculture versus diversity.  A building code seeks to standardize the con-
struction of buildings in ways that improve fire resistance.  But standardization re-

garding safety measures in buildings is useful only when the threats to buildings (inthis case, the threat of fires in each of the buildings in question) are independent anduncorrelated.  That is, the ways in which fires can start are highly varied, and so

measures that are ineffective against one type of fire may well be useful againstanother type.  In the case of information and network security for a largely homoge-neous environment, the threat is highly correlatedÑan attacker who develops tech-
niques for penetrating the security measures of one system knows how to penetratethe security measures of many.¥The rate of change in the underlying technologies.  Buildings have existed
for many years, and fire has been known to be a threat for a long time.  Buildings take
As for the private sector, there is today no clear locus of responsibilitywithin government to undertake the ÒpromotionÓ of security across the
private sector, because neither information and network security in the
private sector nor IT products and services are subject today to direct
government regulation.7  This will not necessarily always be true, but for
7In this context, Òdirect regulationÓ is taken to mean government-issued mandates aboutwhat the private sector must do with respect to cybersecurity.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.103WHAT CAN BE DONE NOW?a long time to design and construct, and the techniques for designing and construct-ing them are relatively stable.  By contrast, information technology changes rapidly.Thus, the computer and network systems being protected change quickly, their vul-
nerabilities change quickly, and the threat changes quickly.¥Visibility of damage.  As a rule, fires create visible damage.  But the damage
to a computer system or a network may be entirely invisible; indeed, a system that
fails to operate normally is only one possible result of an attack on it.  A successful
attack may lay the foundation for later attacks (e.g., by installing Trojan horse pro-grams that can be subsequently activated), or it may be set to cause damage well
after the initial penetration, or enable the clandestine and unauthorized transmissionof sensitive information stored on the attacked system (e.g., password files).¥The underlying science.  The science underlying fire safety is much better
understood and developed than that underlying information and network security.For example, it is understood how to build a fire-resistant structure from first princi-ples.  One might specify the use of steel beams that lose structural integrity at a

certain temperature.  Finite-element analysis based on a sound underlying mathe-
matics enables reliable predictions to be made about structural loading.  But no such
science underlies information and network security and the development of secure
systems and networks.¥The availability of metrics.  In fire codes, it is meaningful to specify that a
building must resist burning for a certain period of time.  But there is no comparable

metric to specify how long a computer system or network must be able to resist anintruder.  More generally, there is no quantitative basis for understanding how much
security is made available by the addition of any particular feature in computer or
network design.These important differences should not be taken to mean that nothing is knownabout information and network securityÑand as discussed in the main text, there arecommon sense measures that can be taken that do improve such security.  But direct
regulation is always more difficult to impose when the benefits are uncertain and/or
difficult to articulate, and for this reason, those who wish to impose direct regulationto improve information and network security face many difficulties that warrantthought and deliberation.a number of reasons (described in Box 4.1), the realities of informationand network security make it less amenable to government regulation
than other fields such as fire or automobile or flight safety.In addition, the committee notes that the IT sector is one over whichthe federal government has little leverage.  IT sales to the government are

a small fraction of the IT sectorÕs overall revenue, and because IT purchas-ers are generally unwilling to acquire security features at the expense of
performance or ease of use, IT vendors have little incentive to include
security features at the behest of government alone.  Indeed, it is likely
Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISM8Another potentially important aspect of the governmentÕs nonregulatory role, a topicoutside the scope of this report, is the leadership role that government itself could play withrespect to information and network security.  For more discussion, see CSTB, NRC, 2002,

Cybersecurity Today and Tomorrow.9 CSTB, NRC, 2002, 
Cybersecurity Today and Tomorrow.10CSTB, NRC, 2002, Cybersecurity Today and Tomorrow.that attempts at such regulation will be fought vigorously, or may fail,because of the likely inability of a regulatory process to keep pace with
rapid changes in technology.Thus, appropriate market mechanisms could be more successful thandirect regulation in improving the security of the nationÕs IT infrastruc-ture, even though the market has largely failed to provide sufficient in-
centives for the private sector to take adequate action with respect to
information and network security.  The challenge for public policy is to

ensure that those appropriate market mechanisms develop.   How to deal

constructively with prevailing market dynamics has been an enduring
challenge for the government, which has attempted a variety of programs
aimed at stimulating supply and demand but which has yet to arrive at an
approach with significant impact.Nevertheless, the committee believes that public policy can have animportant influence on the environment in which nongovernment orga-
nizations live up to their responsibilities for security.  One critical dimen-

sion of influencing security-related change is the federal governmentÕsnonregulatory role, particularly in its undertaking of research and devel-
opment of the types described above.8   Such R&D might improve secu-
rity and interoperability, for example, and reduce the costs of implement-
ing such featuresÑthereby making it less painful for vendors to adoptthem.Other policy responses to the failure of existing incentives to causethe market to respond adequately to the security challenge are more con-
troversial.  If the market were succeeding, there would be a significant

private sector demand for more security in IT products, and various IT
vendors would emphasize their security functionality as a competitive
advantage and product differentiator, much as additional functionality
and faster performance are featured today.  But this is not the case.  Pos-

sible options to alter market dynamics in this area include:¥Increasing the exposure of software and system vendors and sys-tem operators to liability for system breaches;9Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.105WHAT CAN BE DONE NOW?¥Mandatory reporting of security breaches that could threaten criti-cal societal functions;10¥Changing accounting procedures to require sanitized summariesof information-security problems and vulnerabilities to be made public in
shareholder reports; and¥Encouraging insurance companies to grant preferential rates tocompanies whose IT operations are regarded as meeting certain security
standards of practice.Note, however, that there are disadvantages as well as advantages toany of these specific options, and a net assessment of their ultimate desir-
ability remains to be undertaken.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1065Rationalizing theFuture Research Agenda
As noted in Chapter 3, the committee believes that the IT researchareas of highest priority for counterterrorism are in three major areas:
information and network security,1 information technologies for emer-
gency response, and technologies for information fusion. Within each of
these areas, a reasonably broad agenda is appropriate, as none of them
can be characterized by the presence of a single stumbling block or im-
pediment whose removal would allow everything else to fall into place.Attention to human and organizational issues in a counterterrorismcontext is also critical.  Insight, knowledge, and tools that result from such

attention are likely to be much more relevant to systems integration than
to technology efforts devoted to proofs-of-principle or other technology
development issues.  However, that fact does not mean that there is no

role for research, especially since system development methodologies that

incorporate such tools are scarce or nonexistent.  Thus, the engagement of

social scientists (e.g., psychologists, anthropologists, sociologists, organi-
zational behavior analysts) will be important in any research program in
IT for counterterrorist purposes.Based on the discussion in Chapter 3, Box 5.1 summarizes some of the1Further discussion of a broader research agenda on information and network securitycan be found in CSTBÕs Computers at Risk (1991) and 
Trust in Cyberspace (1999).  Though
these reports were issued several years ago, their comments on a relevant research agendaremain pertinent today, reflecting the reality that the information-security field has notadvanced much in the intervening years.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.107RATIONALIZING THE FUTURE RESEARCH AGENDAtopics within these areas that the committee believes would be fruitful toresearch.  It is useful to note that progress in these areas would have

commercial applications as well in many cases.  The fruits of information
and network security research would benefit all users of information tech-
nology, though their particular relevance to providers of critical infra-
structure is obvious.  Emergency responders will be the primary benefi-

ciaries of research that focuses on their particular needs.  Progress in

information fusion has relevance across the spectrum of counterterrorism
efforts, from prevention to detection to response, and indeed to informa-
tion mining for other public and private purposes.  (A point of particular
interest is the fact that information-fusion efforts for countering bioter-
rorism have significant applicability to public health, especially with re-
spect to the early identification of ÒnaturalÓ disease outbreaks.)  Advances
in developing tools to incorporate knowledge about human and organi-
zational factors in systems integration would be relevant to the deploy-
ment of most large IT-based systems.The fact that research in these areas may have commercial relevanceraises for some questions about the necessity of government involvement.
As noted in Chapter 4, the commercial market has largely failed in pro-
moting information and network security.  In other cases, the research

program required (e.g., research addressing the needs of emergency re-
sponders) is of an applied natureÑand focused on counterterror applica-tions.  As for information fusion, it is highly likely that its applications

will have commercial applications once new technologies are developed,
but whether those new technologies would develop in the absence of
government-supported research and become broadly available is another
question entirely.Most of these technology research areas are not new.  Efforts have
long been under way in information and network security and informa-
tion fusion, though additional research is needed because the resulting
technologies are not sufficiently robust or effective, they degrade perfor-
mance or functionality too severely, or they are too hard to use or too
expensive to deploy.  Moreover, given the failure of the market to ad-

equately address security challenges, adequate government support for
R&D in information systems and network security is especially impor-
tant.  Information technologies for emergency response have not received

a great deal of attention, though efforts in other contexts (e.g., military
operations) are intimately related to progress in this area.22Military communications and civilian emergency-response communications have simi-larities and differences.  Military forces and civilian agencies share the need to deploy
emergency capacity rapidly, to interoperate, and to operate in a chaotic environment.  But
while military communications must typically work in a jamming environment or one inInformation Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMBOX 5.1Illustrative Topic Areas for Long-Term Research
Authentication, Detection, Identification¥Develop fast and scalable methods for high-confidence authentication.
¥Explore approaches that could self-monitor traffic and users to detect either
anomalous users or unusual traffic patterns.¥Develop intruder-detection methods that scale to function efficiently in large
systems.Containment¥Develop the tools and design methodologies for systems and networks that
support graceful degradation in response to an attack.¥Develop mechanisms to contain attackers and limit damage rather than
completely shutting down the system once an intrusion is detected.¥Explore how to fuse a simple, basic control system used during Òcrisis modeÓ
with a sophisticated control system used during normal operations.Recovery¥Develop schemes for backing up large systems, in real time and under Òhos-
tileÓ conditions, that can capture the most up-to-date, but correct, snapshotof the system state.¥Create new decontamination approaches for discarding as little good data
as possible and for removing active and potential infections on a system thatcannot be shut down for decontamination.Cross-cutting Issues in Information and Network Security¥Develop tools that support security-oriented systems development.
¥Find new ways to test bug fixes reliably.

¥Develop better system-administration tools for specifying security policies
and checking against prespecified system configurations.¥Create new tools to detect added and unauthorized functionality.

¥Develop authentication mechanisms that provide greater security and are
easier to use.¥Create and employ metrics to determine the improvement to system security
resulting from the installation of a security measure.¥Monitor and track emerging types of attack and explore potential conse-
quences of such attacks.¥Understand why previous attempts to build secure systems have failed and
recommend how new efforts should be structured to be more successful.C3I Systems for Emergency Response¥Understand how to transition gracefully and with minimal disruption from a
unit-specific communication system to a systemwide structure.¥Define new communication protocols and develop generic technology to
facilitate interconnection and interoperation of diverse information sources.¥Develop approaches for communication systems to handle surge capacity
and function in a saturated state.¥Develop methods to provide more capacity for emergency communication
and coordination.¥Create self-adaptive networks that can reconfigure themselves as a function
of damage and changes in demand and that can degrade gracefully.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.109RATIONALIZING THE FUTURE RESEARCH AGENDA¥Understand the special security needs of rapidly deployed wireless net-works.¥Develop decision-support tools to assist the crisis manager in making deci-sions based on incomplete information.¥Explore mechanisms to provide information tailored to specific individualsor locations through location-based services.¥Establish more effective means of communicating the status of affected peo-ple to those outside the disaster area.¥Develop robust sensors and underlying architectural concepts to track andlocate survivors as well as to identify and track the spread of contaminants.¥Create digital floor plans and maps of other physical infrastructure, and usewearable computers and Òmap antsÓ to generate maps that can be updated.
¥Develop tools to map network topology, especially of converged networksthat handle voice and data traffic.¥Begin to characterize the functionality of regional networks for emergencyresponders.Information Fusion for Counterterrorism¥Develop more effective machine-learning algorithms for data mining, in-cluding learning for different data types (text, image, audio, video).¥Develop methods for systems to learn when data are scarce.¥Create better mixed-initiative methods that allow the user to visualize thedata and direct the data analysis.¥Explore new methods to normalize and combine data from multiple sources.¥Create methods to extract structured information from text.¥Build approaches to handle multiple languages.¥Improve algorithms for image interpretation, speech recognition, and inter-pretation of other sensors (including perception based on mixed media).¥Extend, and test extensively in more demanding applications, the principle-based methods for reasoning under uncertainty.¥Develop techniques for machine-aided query formulation.¥Develop visualization techniques that are well-adapted for unstructureddata.Privacy and Confidentiality¥Understand the impact on confidentiality of different kinds of data disclosure.¥Develop data-mining algorithms that can be used without requiring full dis-closure of individual data records.Human and Organizational Factors¥Create system development methods that more easily accommodate inputsrelevant to human and organizational factors.¥Develop software toolboxes and handbooks that codify and encapsulateprinciples derived from the social sciences that are relevant to system devel-opment and design.¥Develop reliable security measures that do not interfere with legitimateworkers.¥Understand the IT issues related to the disparate organizational cultures ofagencies that will be fused under the Department of Homeland Security.NOTE: A future CSTB report on cybersecurity research will explicate research areas ingreater detail.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.110INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMAs for the funding of the research program described in this report,computer crime losses are estimated at $10 billion per year (and grow-
ing).3  Although statistics on the amount lost to cybercrime are of dubious
reliability, there is no doubt that aggregate losses are considerable.  The

committee believes that because this research program has considerable
overlap with that needed to fight cybercrime, progress in this research
program has the potential to reduce cybercrime as well.  Without rigorous

argument, the committee believes that the potential reduction in
cybercrime would likely offset a considerable portion (if not all) of the
research program described in this report (though of course the primary
beneficiaries will be society at large rather than any individual company
that today may suffer loss).  Nevertheless, the committee has not had

access to information that would allow it to determine an appropriate
level of funding for the research program described in this report.The time scale on which the fruits of efforts in these research areaswill become available ranges from short to long.  That is, each of these

areas has technologies that can be beneficially deployed on a relatively
short time scale (e.g., in a few years).  Each area also has other prospects

for research and deployment on a much longer time scale (e.g., a decade
or more) that will require the development of entirely new technologies
and capabilities.The committee is silent on the specific government agency or agen-cies that would be best suited to support the program described above,4though it notes that the recently created Department of Homeland Secu-
rity may expand the options available for government action.  Rather, the

more important policy issue is how to organize a federal infrastructure to
support this research.  In particular, the committee believes that this infra-

structure should have the following attributes.  It would:
¥Engage and support multidisciplinary, problem-oriented researchthat is useful both to civilian and military users.  (Note that this approach

contrasts strongly with the disciplinary orientation that characterizes most
academic departments and universities.)¥Develop a research program driven by a deep understanding andwhich there is a need for a low probability of intercept, these conditions do not obtain forcivilian emergency-response communications.  Also, military forces often must communi-
cate in territory without a pre-existing friendly infrastructure, while civilian agencies canpotentially take advantage of such an infrastructure.3ÒCyber Crime.Ó BusinessWeek Online, February 21, 2000.  Available online at <http://
www.businessweek.com/2000/00_08/b3669001.htm>.4See CSTB, NRC, 2002, Cybersecurity Today and Tomorrow, pp. 13-14.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.111RATIONALIZING THE FUTURE RESEARCH AGENDAassessment of IT vulnerabilities.  This will likely require access to classi-
fied information, even though most of the research should be unclassi-
fied.¥Support a substantial effort in research areas with a long time hori-zon for payoff.  Historically, such investigations have been housed most

often in academia, which can conduct research with fewer pressures for
immediate delivery on a bottom line.  (This is not to say that private

industry has no role.  Indeed, because the involvement of industry is

critical for deployment, and is likely to be essential for developing proto-
types and mounting field demonstrations, it is highly appropriate to sup-
port both academia and industry perhaps even jointly in efforts oriented
toward development.)¥Provide support extending for time scales that are long enough tomake meaningful progress on hard problems (perhaps 5-year project du-
rations) and in sufficient amounts that reasonably realistic operating en-
vironments for the technology could be constructed (perhaps $2 million
to $5 million per year per site for system-oriented research programs).¥Invest some small fraction of its budget on thinking Òoutsidethe boxÓ in consideration (and possible creation) of alternative futures
(Box 5.2).¥Be more tolerant of research directions that do not appear to prom-ise immediate applicability.  Research programs, especially in IT, are of-

tenÑeven generallyÑmore ÒmessyÓ than research managers would like.
The desire to terminate unproductive lines of inquiry is understandable,
and sometimes entirely necessary, in a constrained budget environment.
On the other hand, it is frequently very hard to distinguish between (A) a
line of inquiry that will never be productive and (B) one that may take
some time and determined effort to be productive.  While an intellectu-

ally robust research program must be expected to go down some blind
alleys occasionally, the current political environment typically punishes
such blind alleys as being of Type A, with little apparent regard for the
possibility that they might be Type B.¥Be overseen by a board or other entity with sufficient stature toattract top talent to work in the field, to provide useful feedback, and to be
an effective sounding board for that talent.¥Pay attention to the human resources needed to sustain thecounterterrorism IT research program.  This need is especially apparent

in the fields of information and network security and emergency commu-
nications.  Only a very small fraction of the nation
Õs graduating doctoralstudents in IT specialize in either of these fields, only a very few profes-
sors conduct research in these areas, only a very few universities support
research programs in these fields, and, in the judgment of the committee,Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMBOX 5.2Planning for the Future
Planning for the future is a critical dimension of any research agenda, thoughthe resources devoted to it need not be large.  System architectures and technologies

such as switched optical networks, mobile code, and open-source or multinationalcode development will have different vulnerabilities from the technologies that char-acterize most of the existing infrastructure and hence require different defense strat-
egies.  Similarly, device types such as digital appliances, wireless headphones, and
network-capable cell phones may pose new challenges.  Even today, it is hard to
interconnect systems with different security models or security semantics; unless this
problem is successfully managed, it will become increasingly difficult in the future.Furthermore, the characteristics of deployed technology that protect the nationagainst catastrophic IT-only attacks today (e.g., redundancy, system heterogeneity,
and a reliance on networks other than the Internet for critical business functions) maynot continue to protect it in the future.  For example, trends toward deregulation arepushing the nationÕs critical infrastructure providers to reduce excess capacity, eventhough this is what provides much of the redundancy so important to reduced vul-nerability.   In the limit, the market dominance of a smaller number of products leads
to system monocultures that, like their ecological and agricultural counterparts, are
highly vulnerable to certain types of attack.For these reasons, researchers and practitioners must be vigilant to changes innetwork technology, usage and reliance on IT, and decreasing diversity.  In addition,

research focused on the future is likely to have a slant that differs from the orientationof the other research efforts described in this chapter.  While the latter efforts might
be characterized as building on existing bodies of knowledge (and are in that sense
incremental), future-oriented research would have a more radical orientation: itwould, for example, try to develop alternative paradigms for secure and reliableoperation that would not necessarily be straightforward evolutions from the Internet
and information technology of today.  One such pursuit might be the design of ap-
propriate network infrastructure for deployment in 2020 that would be much moresecure than the Internet of today.  Another might be an IT infrastructure whose secu-

rity relied on engineered system diversityÑin which deployed systems were suffi-ciently similar to be interoperable, yet sufficiently diverse to essentially be resistantto large-scale attacks.only a very small fraction of the universities that do support such pro-grams can be regarded as first-rate universities.One additional attribute of this R&D infrastructure would be desir-able, though the committee has few good ideas on how to achieve it.  The

success of the nationÕs R&D enterprise in IT (as well as in other fields)rests in no small part on the ability of researchers to learn from each other
in a relatively free and open intellectual environment.  Constraining the

openness of that environment (e.g., by requiring that research be classi-
fied or by forbidding certain research from being undertaken) wouldInformation Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.113RATIONALIZING THE FUTURE RESEARCH AGENDAhave obvious negative consequences for researchers and the creation ofnew knowledge.  On the other hand, keeping counterterrorist missions in

mind, the free and open dissemination of information has potential costs
as well, because terrorists may obtain information that they can use
against us.  Historically, these competing interests have been 
ÒbalancedÓÑwith more of one in exchange for less of the other.  But the committee

believes (or at least hopes) that there are other ways of reconciling the
undeniable tension, and calls for some thought to be given to a solution to
this dilemma that does not demand such a trade-off.   If such a solution

can be found, it should be a design characteristic of the R&D infrastruc-
ture.A comment on the counterterrorist research program is that success-fully addressing the privacy and confidentiality issues that arise in
counterterrorism efforts will be critical for the deployment of many infor-
mation technologies.  This area is so important that research in the area

itself is necessary and should be a fundamental component of the work in
virtually all of the other areas described in this report.Finally, it is the belief of the committee that an R&D infrastructurewith the characteristics presented above has the best chance of delivering
successfully on the complex research problems described in this report.
The committee is not arguing for unlimited latitude to undertake research
that is driven primarily by intellectual curiosity, but rather for a program
focused on the specific national needs described in this report that can
look beyond immediate deliverables.  More detailed research agendas

should be forthcoming from the agencies responsible for implementing
the broad research program described in this report.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.115AppendixBiographies of Committeeand Staff Members
COMMITTEE ON THE ROLE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYIN RESPONDING TO TERRORISMJohn L. Hennessy, Chair, is president of Stanford University, where
he joined the faculty in 1977, was the chair of the Department of Com-
puter Science in 1994, and became dean of the School of Engineering in
1996.  He is an expert in computer architecture and is recognized for

innovation in software techniques as the codeveloper of reduced instruc-
tion set computing (RISC).  In 2001 Dr. Hennessy received the Eckert-

Mauchly Award from the Association for Computing Machinery and In-
stitute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Computer Society and
honorary doctoral degrees from the State University of New York at Stony
Brook and Villanova University, his two alma maters.  He is currently

chairman of the board at Atheros, and was a board member at Alentec
Corporation and an advisory board member at Microsoft Corporation
and Tensilica.  Over the past decade, he has served on numerous commit-

tees at the National Academies, most recently as the chair of the Com-
puter Science and Engineering Committee and the Committee on Mem-
bership during 1999-2000.  He has served on the Computer Science and

Telecommunications Board committees that produced Global Trends inComputer Technology and Their Impact on Export Control, Academic Careers
for Experimental Computer Scientists and Engineers, and 
Evolving the HighPerformance Computing and Communications Initiative to Support the NationÕs
Information Infrastructure.  He has also provided his computer expertiseand leadership skills on committees and commissions of the NationalInformation Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMScience Foundation and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency(DARPA).  He is an alumnus of CSTB and a member of Tau Beta Pi, Eta

Kappa Nu, Pi Mu Epsilon, and the National Academy of Engineering.David A. Patterson, Vice Chair, is the E.H. and M.E. Pardee Chair ofComputer Science at the University of California at Berkeley.  He has

taught computer architecture since joining the faculty in 1977 and has
been chair of the Computer Science Division of the Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science Department at Berkeley.  He is well known for

leading the design and implementation of RISC I, the first Very Large-
Scale Integration (VLSI) Reduced Instruction Set Computer, which be-
came the foundation for the architecture currently used by Fujitsu, Sun
Microsystems, and Xerox. He was also a leader of the Redundant Arrays
of Inexpensive Disks (RAID) project, which led to high-performance stor-
age systems from many companies, and the Network of Workstation
(NOW) project, which led to cluster technology used by Internet compa-
nies such as Inktomi.  He is a fellow of the Institute of Electrical and

Electronics Engineers and the Association for Computing Machinery.  He

served as chair of the Computing Research Association.  His current re-

search interests are in building novel microprocessors using Intelligent
Dynamic Random Access Memory (IRAM) for use in portable multime-
dia devices and using Recovery Oriented Computing to design available,
maintainable, and evolvable servers for Internet services.  He has con-

sulted for many companies, including Digital Equipment Corporation,
Hewlett Packard, Intel, and Sun Microsystems, and he is the coauthor of
five books.  Dr. Patterson served on the CSTB committees that produced

Computing the Future: A Broader Agenda for Computer Science and Engineer-
ing and 
Making IT Better:  Expanding Information Technology Research to
Meet SocietyÕs Needs.  He is a member of the National Academy of Engi-
neering and a current member of CSTB.Steven M. Bellovin, fellow at AT&T Research, is a renowned author-ity on securityÑin particular, Internet security.  Dr. Bellovin received a

B.A. degree from Columbia University and an M.S. and Ph.D. in com-
puter science from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.  While

a graduate student, he helped create Netnews; for this, he and the other
collaborators were awarded the 1995 USENIX Lifetime Achievement
Award.  At AT&T Laboratories, Dr. Bellovin does research in networks

and security, and why the two do not get along.  He has embraced a

number of public interest causes and weighed in (e.g., through his writ-
ings) on initiatives (e.g., in the areas of cryptography and law enforce-
ment) that appear to compromise privacy.  He is currently focusing on

cryptographic protocols and network management.  Dr. Bellovin is the

coauthor of the recent book Firewalls and Internet Security: Repelling theWily Hacker, and he is a member of the Internet Architecture Board.  He
Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.117APPENDIXhas recently been elected to the National Academy of Engineering.  He
served on the CSTB committee that produced Trust in Cyberspace and is a
member of the committee to study authentication technologies and their
implications for privacy.  That committee is addressing a range of security

(and privacy) issues, including those relating to data collection (e.g., bio-
metrics) and analysis (e.g., tracking systems), as well as a range of sys-
tems issues.W. Earl Boebert is an expert on information security, with experiencein national security and intelligence as well as commercial applications
and needs.  He is a senior scientist at Sandia National Laboratories.  He

has 30 years experience in communications and computer security, is the
holder or co-holder of 13 patents, and has participated in National Re-
search Council studies on security matters.  Prior to joining Sandia, he

was the technical founder and chief scientist of Secure Computing Corpo-
ration, where he developed the Sidewinder security server, a system that
currently protects several thousand sites.  Before that he worked 22 years
at Honeywell, rising to the position of senior research fellow.  At

Honeywell he worked on secure systems, cryptographic devices, flight
software, and a variety of real-time simulation and control systems, and
won HoneywellÕs highest award for technical achievement for his part indeveloping a very large scale radar landmass simulator.  He also devel-

oped and presented a course on systems engineering and project manage-
ment that was eventually given to more than 3,000 students in 13 coun-
tries.  He served on the CSTB committees that produced 
Computers at Risk:Safe Computing in the Information Age and 
Trust in Cyberspace, and partici-pated in Project Initiation Fund workshops on ÒCyber-AttackÓ and 
ÒIn-sider Threat.ÓDavid Borth is an expert on wireless communications, with insightinto national security as well as commercial needs.  He is corporate vice

president and director of the Communication Systems and Technologies
Laboratory of Motorola Incorporated, a part of the companyÕs researcharm, Motorola Laboratory.  Dr. Borth joined Motorola in 1980 as a mem-

ber of the Systems Research Laboratory in corporate research and devel-
opment in Schaumburg, Illinois.  As a member of that organization, he

has conducted research on digital modulation techniques, adaptive digi-
tal signal processing methods applied to communication systems, and
personal communication systems including both cellular and Personal
Communications Service systems.  He has contributed to Motorola
Õsimplementations of the GSM, TDMA (IS-54/IS-136), and CDMA (IS-95)
digital cellular systems.  In his current role, he manages a multinational

(United States, Australia, France, Japan) organization focusing on all as-
pects of communication systems, ranging from theoretical systems stud-
ies to system and subsystem analysis and implementation to integratedInformation Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMcircuit designs.  Dr. Borth received his B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in
electrical engineering from the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign.  Previously, he was a member of the technical staff of the

systems division of Watkins-Johnson Company and an assistant profes-
sor in the School of Electrical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technol-
ogy.  Dr. Borth is a member of Motorola
Õs Science Advisory Board Associ-ates and has been elected a Dan Noble Fellow, MotorolaÕs highesthonorary technical award.  He has been issued 31 patents and has

authored or coauthored chapters of 5 books in addition to 25 publications.
He received the Distinguished Alumnus Award from the University of
Illinois Electrical and Computer Engineering Alumni Association and was
elected a fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers for
his contributions to the design and development of wireless telecommu-
nication systems.  He is a registered professional engineer in the State of

Illinois and a current member of CSTB.William J. Brinkman has been vice president of Physical SciencesResearch at Bell Labs of Lucent Technologies since 1993.  He is an expert

in the area of condensed matter physics as it pertains to telecommunica-
tions and information-processing technologies.  He received his Ph.D. in

physics from the University of Missouri in 1965.  Dr. Brinkman joined Bell

Laboratories in 1966 after spending one year as a National Science Foun-
dation postdoctoral fellow at Oxford University.  He moved to Sandia

National Laboratories in 1984, but returned to Bell Laboratories in 1987 to
become executive director of the Physics Research Division.  His respon-

sibilities include the direction of research in physical sciences, optoelec-
tronic and electronic devices, fiber optics, and related areas.  He has

worked on theories of condensed matter, and his early work also in-
volved the theory of spin fluctuations in metals and other highly corre-
lated Fermi liquids.  Subsequent theoretical work on liquid crystals and

incommensurate systems are additional important contributions that he
has made to the theoretical understanding of condensed matter.  As man-

ager of an industrial research organization with a budget of $200 million.
Dr. Brinkman is strongly interested in improving technology conversion
and improving the connection between research and products.  He was

the recipient of the 1994 George E. Pake Prize.  Over the past 20 years, he
has served on numerous committees of the National Academies, cur-
rently the National Academy of Sciences 2002 Nominating Committee
and most recently the Committee on Science, Engineering, and Public
Policy.  He is a member of the National Academy of Sciences.
John M. Cioffi is an expert on communications technologies, with anemphasis on wireline contexts.  He received his BS in electrical engineer-

ing from the University of Illinois in 1978 and his Ph.D. in electrical engi-
neering from Stanford University in 1984.  He worked for Bell Laborato-
Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.119APPENDIXries from 1978 to 1984, IBM Research from 1984 to 1986, and has been anelectrical engineering professor at Stanford University since 1986.  Dr.

Cioffi founded Amati Communications Corporation in 1991 (purchased
by Texas Instruments in 1997) and was an officer/director from 1991 to
1997.  Currently he is on the boards or advisory boards of BigBand Net-

works, Coppercom, GoDigital, Ikanos, Ionospan, Ishoni, IteX, Marvell,
Kestrel, Charter Ventures, and Portview Ventures.  Dr. Cioffi
Õs specificinterests are in the area of high-performance digital transmission. He has
received various awards: member, National Academy of Engineering
(2001), IEEE Kobayashi Medal (2001), IEEE Millennium Medal (2000),
IEEE Fellow (1996), IEE JJ Tomson Medal (2000), 1999 University of Illi-
nois Outstanding Alumnus, 1991 IEEE Communications Magazine best pa-
per, 1995 American National Standards Institute T1 Outstanding Achieve-
ment Award, National Science Foundation Presidential Investigator
(1987-1992).  Dr. Cioffi has published more than 200 papers and holds

over 40 patents, most of which are widely licensed, including basic pat-
ents on DMT, VDSL, and vectored transmission.  He served on the CSTB

committee that produced Broadband: Bringing Home the Bits and is a cur-
rent member of CSTB.W. Bruce Croft is chair of the computer science department, as well asdistinguished university professor, at the University of Massachusetts,
Amherst, which he joined in 1979.  In 1992, he became the director of the

National Science Foundation State/Industry/University Collaborative
Research Center for Intelligent Information Retrieval (CIIR), which com-
bines basic research with technology transfer to a variety of government
and industry partners.  Dr. Croft received his B.Sc. (Honors) degree in

1973 and an M.Sc. in computer science in 1974 from Monash University in
Melbourne, Australia.  He earned his Ph.D. in computer science from the
University of Cambridge, England, in 1979.  His research interests are in

several areas of information retrieval, including retrieval models, Web
search engines, cross-lingual retrieval, distributed search, question an-
swering, text summarization, and text data mining. He has published
more than 120 articles on these subjects.  Dr. Croft has consulted for many

companies and government agencies.  He co-founded a search engine

startup in 1996, and his research is being used in a number of operational
systems.  He was chair of the ACM Special Interest Group on Information

Retrieval from 1987 to 1991.  He is currently editor-in-chief of the ACM
ÕsTransactions on Information Systems and an associate editor for 
InformationProcessing and Management.  He has served on numerous program com-
mittees and has been involved in the organization of many workshops
and conferences.  He was elected a fellow of ACM in 1997 and received

the Research Award from the American Society for Information Science
and Technology in 2000.  He is a member of CSTB
Õs Digital GovernmentInformation Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMcommittee, which has provided insight into government application con-texts.  He has a history of research interactions with the intelligence com-
munity, and his emphases relate to data collection and analysis.  He is a

current member of CSTB.William P. Crowell is a former deputy director and chief operatingofficer of the National Security Agency.  Prior to the NSA, he was vice

president of Atlantic Aerospace Electronics Corporation.  In 1998 he joined

Cylink and is currently president and CEO.  The company helped pioneer

the use of computer security systems within major financial and govern-
ment institutions.  He holds a bachelor
Õs degree in political science fromLouisiana State University.Jeffrey M. Jaffe has broad knowledge of systems, with emphases onnetworked/distributed systems and the associated security challenges.
He is vice president of research and advanced technologies for Lucent
Technologies Bell Laboratories.  The Advanced Technologies Group

works with LucentÕs business units in the commercial development anddeployment of new technologies, with an emphasis in networks plan-
ning, software and systems engineering.  Prior to joining Lucent, Dr. Jaffe

held a variety of research and management positions with International
Business Machines (IBM).  He joined IBM
Õs Thomas J. Watson ResearchCenter in 1979, conducting research on networking protocols. He led re-
search teams in developing networking and security software and user
interfaces.  He was later promoted to a number of executive positions,

including vice president of systems and software.  In this role, he coordi-

nated the efforts of global research teams in supporting IBMÕs currentproduct lines and developing new software and hardware systems.  Dr.

Jaffe next served as corporate vice president of technology and helped to
convert research into commercial products.  He played key roles in as-

sessing new technologies and policy enactment.  In his most recent posi-

tion with IBM, Dr. Jaffe managed all facets of IBMÕs network software andsecurity product business.  Dr. Jaffe is a fellow of the IEEE and the ACM.
The U.S. government has consulted with him on numerous policy initia-
tives with a focus on the Internet.   In 1997, President Clinton appointed

Dr. Jaffe to the advisory committee for the PresidentÕs Commission forCritical Infrastructure Protection.  Dr. Jaffe has chaired the Chief Technol-

ogy Officer Group of the Computer Systems Policy Project (CSPP), which
consists of a dozen of the top computer and telecommunications compa-
nies.  Dr. Jaffe earned a B.S. degree in mathematics, as well as M.S. and

Ph.D. degrees in computer science, from the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.  He is a current member of CSTB.
Butler W. Lampson is known for his expertise in systems and sys-tems architecture.  At present, he is a distinguished engineer at Microsoft

Corporation, where he works on problems of broad concern, such asInformation Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.121APPENDIXsecurity and information management.  Before joining Microsoft, Dr.
Lampson was a senior corporate consulting engineer at Digital Equip-
ment Corporation and a senior research fellow at the Xerox Palo Alto
Research Center.  He has worked on computer architecture, local area

networks, raster printers, page description languages, operating systems,
remote procedure call, programming languages and their semantics, pro-
gramming in the large, fault-tolerant computing, computer security, and
WYSIWYG editors.  He was one of the designers of the SDS 940 time-

sharing system, the Alto personal distributed computing system, the
Xerox 9700 laser printer, two-phase commit protocols, the Autonet LAN,
and several programming languages.  He received a Ph.D. in electrical

engineering and computer science from the University of California at
Berkeley and honorary Sc.D. degrees from the Eidgenoessische
Technische Hochschule, Zurich, and the University of Bologna.  He holds

a number of patents on networks, security, raster printing, and transac-
tion processing.  Dr. Lampson is a member of the National Academy of

Engineering.  He received the Association for Computing Machinery
ÕsSoftware Systems Award in 1984 for his work on the Alto, and the Turing
Award in 1992.  He served on the CSTB committees that produced 
Com-puters at Risk: Safe Computing in the Information Age, Evolving the High
Performance Computing and Communications Initiative to Support the NationÕsInformation Infrastructure, and Realizing the Potential of C4I: FundamentalChallenges.  He is a current member of CSTB.
Edward D. Lazowska has broad knowledge of software and distrib-uted and high-performance systems.  He holds the Bill and Melinda Gates

Chair in Computer Science in the Department of Computer Science and
Engineering at the University of Washington.  Dr. Lazowska received his
A.B. from Brown University in 1972 and his Ph.D. from the University of
Toronto in 1977.  He has been at the University of Washington since that

time.  His research concerns the design and analysis of distributed and

parallel computer systems.  Dr. Lazowska is a member of the DARPA

Information Science and Technology Group, past chair of the Computing
Research Association, past chair of the National Science Foundation Com-
puter and Information Science and Engineering advisory committee, and
a member of the Technical Advisory Board for Microsoft Research.  He

served on the CSTB committees that produced Evolving the High Perfor-mance Computing and Communications Initiative to Support the NationÕs In-formation Infrastructure and 
Looking Over the Fence at Networks: A NeighborÕsView of Networking Research.  Currently, he serves on the National Re-
search Council committee Improving Learning with Information Technology.He is a fellow of the ACM and of the IEEE and is a member of the Na-
tional Academy of Engineering and a current member of CSTB.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMDavid E. Liddle has a history of conducting and managing computersystems innovation, with an emphasis on interactive systems.  At present,

after leaving a series of research-management positions, he is a general
partner in the firm U.S. Venture Partners (USVP), a leading Silicon Valley
venture capital firm that specializes in building companies from an early
stage in digital communications/networking, e-commerce, semiconduc-
tors, technical software, and e-health.  He retired in December 1999 after 8

years as CEO of Interval Research Corporation.  During and after his

education (he received B.S. and E.E. degrees from the University of Michi-
gan and a Ph.D. in computer science from the University of Toledo, Ohio),
Dr. Liddle has spent his professional career developing technologies for
interaction and communication between people and computers in activi-
ties spanning research, development, management, and entrepreneurship.
He spent 10 years at the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center and the Xerox
Information Products Group, where he was responsible for the first com-
mercial implementation of the graphical user interface and local area net-
working.  He then founded Metaphor Computer Systems, whose technol-

ogy was adopted by IBM and the company ultimately acquired by IBM in
1991.  In 1992, Dr. Liddle cofounded Interval Research Corporation with

Paul Allen.  Since 1996, the company formed six new companies and

several joint ventures based on the research conducted at Interval.  Dr.

Liddle is a consulting professor of computer science at Stanford Univer-
sity.  He has served as a director at Sybase, Broderbund Software,

Metricom, Starwave, and Ticketmaster; he is currently a director with TheNew York Times.  He was honored as a distinguished alumnus from the
University of Michigan and is a member of the national advisory commit-
tee at the College of Engineering of that university.  He is also a member

of the advisory committee of the school of engineering at Stanford Uni-
versity.  He has been elected a senior fellow of the Royal College of Art for

his contributions to human-computer interaction.  Dr. Liddle has had a

number of interactions with national security entities on an advisory ba-
sis, providing insights into military mind sets and needs.  He is a current

member of CSTB.Tom M. Mitchell has just returned to Carnegie Mellon University
(CMU) after a 2-year leave of absence as vice president and chief scientist
for WhizBang! Labs. At CMU, he is the Fredkin Professor of Learning and
Artificial Intelligence in the School of Computer Science and founding
director of CMUÕs Center for Automated Learning and Discovery.  Dr.
Mitchell is known for his work in machine learning, data mining, and
artificial intelligence. His research ranges from developing software
agents that learn to customize to their users, to Web crawlers that learn to
extract factual information from Web sites, to computers that mine medi-
cal records to learn which future patients are at high mortality risk. He isInformation Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.123APPENDIXthe author of the widely used textbook Machine Learning.  Dr. Mitchell is a
fellow and president of the American Association for Artificial Intelli-
gence. Prior to joining the faculty of Carnegie Mellon University in 1986,
he taught at Rutgers University. He received his B.S. from the Massachu-
setts Institute of Technology and his M.S.and Ph.D. degrees in electrical
engineering from Stanford University. He has had research funded by the
Central Intelligence Agency and has consulted with the agency recently
about the application of WhizBang! technology to intelligence needs. He
is a current member of CSTB.Donald A. Norman is a user advocate.  Business Week calls him a
cantankerous visionaryÑcantankerous in his quest for excellence.  Dr.
Norman is cofounder of the Nielsen Norman Group, an executive con-
sulting firm that helps companies produce human-centered products and
services.  In this role, he serves on the advisory boards of numerous

companies.  Dr. Norman is a professor of computer science at Northwest-

ern University and professor emeritus of cognitive science and psychol-
ogy at the University of California, San Diego.  He is a former vice presi-

dent of the advanced technology group of Apple Computer and was an
executive at Hewlett Packard.  Dr. Norman is the author of 
The Psychologyof Everyday Things, Things That Make Us Smart, and, most recently, TheInvisible Computer, a book that Business Week has called the bible of post-
PC thinking.  He is a current member of CSTB.
Jeannette M. Wing is a professor of computer science at Carnegie
Mellon University.  Her current focus is on applying automated reason-

ing tools to specify and verify autonomous and embedded systems for
their fault-tolerant, security, and survivability properties.  She is the asso-

ciate dean for academic affairs for the School of Computer Science and the
associate department head for the computer science Ph.D. program.  She

received her S.B. and S.M. degrees in electrical engineering and computer
science in 1979 and her Ph.D. in computer science in 1983, all from the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.  Dr. Wing
Õs general research inter-ests are in the areas of formal methods, concurrent and distributed sys-
tems, and programming languages.  She was on the computer science

faculty at the University of Southern California (USC) and has worked at
Bell Laboratories, USC/Information Sciences Institute, and Xerox Palo
Alto Research Center.  She has also consulted for Digital Equipment Cor-
poration, the Mellon Institute (Carnegie Mellon Research Institute), Sys-
tem Development Corporation, and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory.  She

was on the National Science Foundation Scientific Advisory Board and
the Defense Advance Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Information
Science and Technology (ISAT) Group.  She is or has been on the editorial

board of seven journals.  She is a member of the ACM (fellow), the IEEE

(senior member), Sigma Xi, Phi Beta Kappa, Tau Beta Pi, and Eta KappaInformation Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMNu.  Professor Wing was elected an ACM fellow in 1998 and is a current
member of CSTB.STAFFHerbert S. Lin is senior scientist and senior staff officer at the Com-puter Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council
(NRC) of the National Academies, where he has been the study director
of major projects on public policy and information technology. These
studies include a 1996 study on national cryptography policy
(CryptographyÕs Role in Securing the Information Society), a 1991 study on the
future of computer science (Computing the Future: A Broader Agenda forComputer Science and Engineering), a 1999 study of Defense Departmentsystems for command, control, communications, computing, and intelli-
gence (Realizing the Potential of C4I: Fundamental Challenges), and a 2000study on workforce issues in high technology (Building a Workforce for theInformation Economy).  Prior to his NRC service, he was a professional staff
member and staff scientist for the House Armed Services Committee
(1986-1990), where his portfolio included defense policy and arms control
issues. He also has significant expertise in mathematics and science edu-
cation. He received his doctorate in physics from the Massachusetts Insti-
tute of Technology.  Avocationally, he is a long-time folk and swing

dancer and a poor magician. Apart from his CSTB work, a list of publica-
tions in cognitive science, science education, biophysics, arms control,
and defense policy is available on request.Steven Woo is the dissemination and program officer with the Com-
puter Science and Telecommunications Board of the National Research
Council. In this capacity, he formulates the dissemination and marketing
plan for the study projects and workshops of CSTB. This includes distri-
bution of CSTB reports in government, policy, academia, and private
sectors; outreach to promote CSTB to current and potential sponsors; and
raising awareness of CSTBÕs resources and expertise among governmentand private industry. In addition, he handles the Program Office activities
for some of the projects of CSTB.  Prior to joining CSTB, Mr. Woo was an

Internet and marketing consultant for clients ranging from Fortune 500s
to nonprofits. His background includes marketing services for the Los
Angeles Dodgers and several years of experience in systems engineering
and analysis. Mr. Woo holds a B.S. in engineering from the University of
California at Los Angeles and an M.B.A. from Georgetown University.D.C. Drake has been a senior project assistant with CSTB since Sep-
tember 1999. He is currently working on a project  on critical information
infrastructure protection and the law and also helped with the project that
produced The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.125APPENDIXHe came to Washington in January 1999 after finishing a masterÕs degreein international politics and communications at the University of Ken-
tucky. He earned a B.A. in international relations and German from
Rhodes College in 1996. He has worked for the Hanns-Seidl Foundation
in Munich, Germany, and in Washington, D.C., for the National Confer-
ence of State LegislaturesÕ International Programs Office and for the Ma-
jority Staff of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.127What Is CSTB?As a part of the National Research Council, the Computer Science andTelecommunications Board (CSTB) was established in 1986 to provide
independent advice to the federal government on technical and public
policy issues relating to computing and communications.  Composed of

leaders from industry and academia, CSTB conducts studies of critical
national issues and makes recommendations to government, industry,
and academic researchers.  CSTB also provides a neutral meeting ground
for consideration of complex issues where resolution and action may be
premature.  It convenes invitational discussions that bring together prin-

cipals from the public and private sectors, ensuring consideration of all
perspectives.  The majority of CSTB
Õs work is requested by federal agen-cies and Congress, consistent with its National Academies context.A pioneer in framing and analyzing Internet policy issues, CSTB isunique in its comprehensive scope and effective, interdisciplinary ap-
praisal of technical, economic, social, and policy issues.  Beginning with

early work in computer and communications security, cyber-assurance
and information systems trustworthiness have been a cross-cutting theme
in CSTBÕs work.  CSTB has produced several reports regarded as classics
in the field, and it continues to address these topics as they grow in
importance.To do its work, CSTB draws on some of the best minds in the country,inviting experts to participate in its projects as a public service.  Studies

are conducted by balanced committees without direct financial interests
in the topics they are addressing.  Those committees meet, confer elec-
Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future PossibilitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR COUNTERTERRORISMtronically, and build analyses through their deliberations.  Additional
expertise from around the country is tapped in a rigorous process of
review and critique, further enhancing the quality of CSTB reports.  By

engaging groups of principals, CSTB obtains the facts and insights critical
to assessing key issues.The mission of CSTB is to:¥Respond to requests from the government, nonprofit organizations,and private industry for advice on computer and telecommunications
issues and from the government for advice on computer and telecommu-
nications systems planning, utilization, and modernization;¥Monitor and promote the health of the fields of computer science
and telecommunications, with attention to issues of human resources,
information infrastructure, and societal impacts;¥Initiate and conduct studies involving computer science, computertechnology, and telecommunications as critical resources; and¥Foster interaction among the disciplines underlying computing
and telecommunications technologies and other fields, at large and within
the National Academies.As of November 2002, current CSTB activities with a cybersecuritycomponent address privacy in the information age, critical information
infrastructure protection, authentication technologies and their privacy
implications, geospatial information systems, cybersecurity research, and
building certifiable dependable systems.  Additional studies examine the
fundamentals of computer science, information technology and creativ-
ity, computing and biology, Internet navigation and the Domain Name
System, telecommunications research and development, wireless com-
munications and spectrum management, and digital archiving and pres-
ervation.  Explorations are under way in the areas of the insider threat,

dependable and safe software systems, wireless communications and
spectrum management, digital archiving and preservation, open source
software, digital democracy, the Òdigital divide,Ó manageable systems,
information technology and journalism, and women in computer science.More information about CSTB can be obtained online at <http://
www.cstb.org>.