DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/10671Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, andCreativity268 pages | 7 x 10 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-08868-8 | DOI 10.17226/10671William J. Mitchell, Alan S. Inouye, and Marjory S. Blumenthal, Editors;Committee on Information Technology and Creativity; Computer Science andTelecommunications Board; Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences;National Research CouncilBeyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee on Information Technology and CreativityComputer Science and Telecommunications BoardDivision on Engineering and Physical SciencesWilliam J. Mitchell, Alan S. Inouye, and Marjory S. Blumenthal, EditorsTHE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
Washington, D.C.
www.nap.eduBeyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS500 Fifth Street, N.W., Washington, DC 20001NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by theGoverning Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn
from the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academyof Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.  The members of the committeeresponsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with
regard for appropriate balance.Support for this project was provided by the Rockefeller Foundation.  Any
opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this mate-rial are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of thesponsor.International Standard Book Number 0-309-08868-2Library of Congress Control Number 2003103683Cover design by Jennifer M. BishopCopies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 500Fifth Street, N.W., Lockbox 285, Washington, DC 20055, (800) 624-6242 or (202)334-3313 in the Washington metropolitan area.  Internet, http://www.nap.edu.
Copyright 2003 by the National Academy of Sciences.  All rights reserved.Printed in the United States of AmericaBeyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating
society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering re-
search, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their usefor the general welfare.  Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the
Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the
federal government on scientific and technical matters.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts
is president of the National Academy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the
charter of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization ofoutstanding engineers.  It is autonomous in its administration and in the
selection of its members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the
responsibility for advising the federal government.  The National Academy of
Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting nationalneeds, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achieve-
ments of engineers.  Dr. Wm. A. Wulf is president of the National Academy of
Engineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy
of Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate profes-sions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of thepublic.  The Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National

Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to thefederal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medicalcare, research, and education.  Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the

Institute of Medicine.The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of
Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology
with the AcademyÕs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising thefederal government.  Functioning in accordance with general policies deter-
mined by the Academy, the Council has become the principal operating
agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academyof Engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and thescientific and engineering communities.  The Council is administered jointly

by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts and
Dr. Wm. A. Wulf are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the National Re-search Council.www.national-academies.orgBeyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMMITTEE ON INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVITY
WILLIAM J. MITCHELL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, ChairSTEVEN ABRAMS, IBM T.J. Watson Research CenterMICHAEL CENTURY, Rensselaer Polytechnic InstituteJAMES P. CRUTCHFIELD, Santa Fe Institute
CHRISTOPHER CSIKSZENTMIHALYI, MIT Media LaboratoryROGER DANNENBERG, Carnegie Mellon UniversityTONI DOVE, Independent Artist, New York City
N. KATHERINE HAYLES, University of California at Los AngelesJ.C. HERZ, Joystick Nation Inc.NATALIE JEREMIJENKO, Yale University
JOHN MAEDA, MIT Media LaboratoryDAVID SALESIN, University of Washington; Microsoft ResearchLILLIAN F. SCHWARTZ, Computer Artist-Inventor, Watchung, New Jersey
PHOEBE SENGERS, Cornell UniversityBARBARA STAFFORD, University of ChicagoStaffALAN S. INOUYE, Study Director and Senior Program OfficerMARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL, Director, Computer Science andTelecommunications BoardDAVID PADGHAM, Research AssociateMARGARET MARSH HUYNH, Senior Project Assistant
LAURA OST, ConsultantDAVID WALCZYK, ConsultantSUSAN MAURIZI, Senior Editor
JENNIFER M. BISHOP, Senior Project AssistantBeyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viCOMPUTER SCIENCE ANDTELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARD
DAVID D. CLARK, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, ChairERIC BENHAMOU, 3Com CorporationDAVID BORTH, Motorola Labs
JOHN M. CIOFFI, Stanford UniversityELAINE COHEN, University of UtahW. BRUCE CROFT, University of Massachusetts at Amherst
THOMAS E. DARCIE, AT&T Labs ResearchJOSEPH FARRELL, University of California at BerkeleyJOAN FEIGENBAUM, Yale University
WENDY KELLOGG, IBM T.J. Watson Research CenterBUTLER W. LAMPSON, Microsoft CorporationDAVID LIDDLE, U.S. Venture Partners
TOM M. MITCHELL, Carnegie Mellon UniversityHECTOR GARCIA MOLINA, Stanford UniversityDAVID A. PATTERSON, University of California at Berkeley
HENRY (HANK) PERRITT, Chicago-Kent College of LawDANIEL PIKE, Classic Communications Inc.ERIC SCHMIDT, Google Inc.
FRED SCHNEIDER, Cornell UniversityBURTON SMITH, Cray Inc.LEE SPROULL, New York University
WILLIAM STEAD, Vanderbilt UniversityJEANNETTE M. WING, Carnegie Mellon UniversityMARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL, DirectorHERBERT S. LIN, Senior Scientist
ALAN S. INOUYE, Senior Program OfficerJON EISENBERG, Senior Program OfficerLYNETTE I. MILLETT, Program Officer
CYNTHIA A. PATTERSON, Program OfficerSTEVEN WOO, Dissemination OfficerJANET BRISCOE, Administrative Officer
RENEE HAWKINS, Financial AssociateDAVID PADGHAM, Research AssociateKRISTEN BATCH, Research Associate
PHIL HILLIARD, Research AssociateMARGARET MARSH HUYNH, Senior Project AssistantDAVID DRAKE, Senior Project Assistant
JANICE SABUDA, Senior Project AssistantJENNIFER M. BISHOP, Senior Project AssistantBRANDYE WILLIAMS, Staff AssistantFor more information on CSTB, see its Web site at <http://www.cstb.org>,write to CSTB, National Research Council, 500 Fifth Street, N.W., Washing-
ton, DC 20001, call at (202) 334-2605, or e-mail the CSTB at cstb@nas.edu.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiomputer science has drawn from and contributed to manydisciplines and practices since it emerged as a field in the
middle of the 20th century.  Those interactions, in turn,

have contributed to the evolution of information technol-ogy:  New forms of computing and communications, and new appli-

cations, continue to develop from the creative interaction of computer
science and other fields.  Focused initially on interactions between

computer science and other forms of science and engineering, the
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB) began in
the mid-1990s to examine opportunities at the intersection of comput-
ing and the humanities and the arts.  In 1997, it organized a workshop

that illuminated the potential, as well as the practical challenges, of
mining those opportunities1 and that led, eventually, to the project
described in this report.  Ensuing discussions between CSTB staff and
people interested in the intersection of computing and the humanities
or the arts, notably Joan Shigekawa of the Rockefeller Foundation, a
participant in the 1997 workshop, culminated in a grant from the
Rockefeller Foundation to study information technology and creativ-
ity (see Box P.1 for the statement of task).This report should be read with two conditions in mind:  First, it
is, by design, a record of the project, filled with descriptions, observa-
tions, conclusions, and recommendations intended to motivate and
sustain interest and activity in the rich intersection of information
technology (IT) and the arts and design.  Second, in this book form it

cannot possibly convey the exciting possibilities at that intersection.
Instead, it presents examples and pointers to sites on the World Wide
Web and in the physical world where that intersection can be ob-
served and experienced.  We urge the reader to treat this report as a
1See Computing and the Humanities: Summary of a Roundtable Meeting, published in
1998 by the American Council of Learned Societies, one of three collaborators withCSTB in organizing the workshop.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACEviii¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥primer and guidebook and to seek out instances of IT and creativepracticesÑITCPÑdirectly.COMMITTEE COMPOSITION ANDPROCESSThe study committee convened by CSTB featured an unusuallyeclectic group of individuals (see Appendix A for biographies of com-
mittee members).  Characterizing most (or all) of them as experts on

particular subjects would only begin to suggest the talents of this
group.  Collectively, the committee had expertise and experience in

the intersections of information technology and music, the visual arts,
film, and literature and in art history, architecture, cultural studies,
and many of the technologies pertinent to ITCP.  The committee did its

work through its own deliberations and by soliciting input from a
number of other experts (see Appendix B for a list of those who briefed
the committee).  It met first in August 2000 and five times subse-

quently in plenary session.  Additional information was derived from
reviewing the published literature, monitoring selected listservs and
Web sites, and obtaining informal input at various conferences and
other convenings.  During the editorial phase of the study, facts were

checked for accuracy with either authoritative published sources or
subject experts.The diversity of this committee made it a microcosm of some ofthe communities it hopes to influence with this report.  That diversity

posed challenges in the conduct of this project that will be echoed in
attempts to learn from it:  Conversations among people with different
training and professional experience can be confounded by jargon andBOX P.1Statement of TaskA series of discussions among a cross section of the arts community andexperts in computing and communications will be organized.  These discus-

sions will crystallize new ways of conceptualizing joint opportunities and new
approaches to the arts (and/or IT [information technology]).  They will

explore what would make the most conducive environment for IT-arts
exchange on an ongoing basis, considering physical and virtual options.  They

will address possible mechanisms to sustain the discussion, such as funding
and institutional support.  Finally, they will culminate in both a coherent

description of potential futures and an agenda for action, action that bridges
the different communities as well as action most appropriate for one or
another.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACEixprejudices as well as by differing knowledge basesÑeven when thosepeople share interests.  The completion of this report attests to the

potential for technologists and artists to find common ground, not
only in undertaking creative work, but also in contemplating options
for making such work easier to undertake and more widespread.  But
finding this common ground sometimes proved to be a formidable
challenge.The productive interaction among committee members was cap-tured in some of their career developments during the course of this
project.  Chris Csikszentmihalyi, for example, left Rensselaer Poly-

technic Institute to join John Maeda at MITÕs Media Lab.  Michael
Century left McGill University for Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
Natalie Jeremijenko was hosted by Jim Crutchfield for a monthÕsprofessional visit at the Santa Fe Institute.  And John Maeda was

inspired by the project to build Òa new online Bauhaus.Ó  These and
other developments attest to the dynamism and creative energy of the
people who have been exploring the intersection of IT and creativity.Although the report refers to several companies, products, andservices by name, such reference does not constitute an endorsement
by the committee or the National Academies.  The committee did not

evaluate any product or service in sufficient detail to allow such an
endorsement.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSThe committee is particularly grateful to Joan Shigekawa of theRockefeller Foundation for initiating this study.  She approached CSTB

with a conviction that the time was right for a conversation among
people of different backgrounds about how to enhance and sustain the
intersection of information technology and creative practices.  We

appreciate her guidance and support through the study process, in-
cluding her participation in two committee meetings, occasional relay
of useful information, and continuing demonstration of interest in the
process and the eventual results.In addition, we would like to thank those individuals who pro-vided valuable inputs into the committeeÕs deliberations.  Those who
briefed the committee at one of our plenary meetings are listed in
Appendix B.  Others who provided us with important inputs include

Bill Alschuler (California Institute of the Arts), Howard Besser (New
York University), Shari Garmise (Consultant, Washington, D.C.),
Samuel Hope (National Office for Arts Accreditation),  Sharon Kangas

(Center for Arts and Culture), Anna Karlin (University of Washing-
ton), Ruth Kovacs (The Foundation Center), Joan Lippincott (Coalition
for Networked Information), and Laurens R. Schwartz (Consultant,
New York City).  We would also like to acknowledge those organiza-

tions that hosted committee meetings:  the American Institute of
¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACExGraphic Arts, New York University, Stanford University, Pixar Ani-mation Studios, and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.The committee appreciates the thoughtful comments received fromthe reviewers of this report and the efforts of the National Research
CouncilÕs report review coordinator.  The review draft stimulated a
comparatively large volume of comments, many of which provided
additional reference material, relevant anecdotes, and observations to
bolster or counter the committeeÕs earlier thinking.  The comments
were instrumental in helping the committee to sharpen and improve
this report.  In particular, Simon Penny of the University of California
at Irvine provided an unusually extensive and thoughtful set of com-
ments that served to improve the quality of this final report.Finally, the committee would like to acknowledge the staff of theNRC for their work.  Alan Inouye served as the study director with

overall staff responsibility for the conduct of the study and the devel-
opment of this final report; his effort to bring the report to completion
was exceptional and demanded far more of his time than anticipated.
Marjory Blumenthal, director of the CSTB, provided essential guid-
ance and input throughout the study process, drafted and edited a
number of sections of the final report, and was both helpful and
patient in bringing the committee process to a successful conclusion.
Margaret Marsh Huynh had primary responsibility for the adminis-
trative aspects of the project such as organizing meeting logistics; her
efforts made a particularly complicated and demanding process run
smoothly.  Consultants Laura Ost and David Walczyk generated ini-

tial drafts of several sections of the report; Ms. Ost also edited several
chapters.  Susan Maurizi edited the manuscript for publication. David

Padgham and Jennifer Bishop provided research assistance; Ms. Bishop
also created several of the original figures that appear in this report
(including the cover design).  The committee also thanks Janet Briscoe,

Janice Sabuda, and Brandye Williams of the CSTB, and Claudette K.
Baylor-Fleming and Carmela J. Chamberlain of the Space Studies Board
for their support of the committeeÕs work.William J. Mitchell, ChairCommittee on Information Technology and CreativityBeyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xihis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their diverse perspectives and technical exper-

tise, in accordance with procedures approved by the Na-
tional Research CouncilÕs Report Review Committee.  The
purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical
comments that will assist the institution in making its published re-port as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets institu-
tional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the
study charge.  The review comments and draft manuscript remain

confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process.  We

wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:Anna Bentkowska, Conway Library, Courtauld Institute of Art,Howard Besser, New York University,
Sandra Braman, University of Alabama,
Donna Cox, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Robert Denison, First Security Company,
Steve Dietz, Walker Art Center,
Kristian Halvorsen, Hewlett Packard Laboratories,
Paul Kaiser, Independent Artist, New York City,
Alan Kay, Hewlett Packard Company,
Clifford Lynch, Coalition for Networked Information,
Simon Penny, University of California at Irvine,
Bill Seaman, Rhode Island School of Design, and
Mark Tribe, Rhizome.org.Although the reviewers listed above have provided many con-structive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse
the conclusions or recommendations, nor did they see the final draft of
the report before its release.  The review of this report was overseen by

Edward Lazowska, University of Washington.  Appointed by the
Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSxiiNational Research Council, he was responsible for making certain thatan independent examination of this report was carried out in accor-
dance with institutional procedures and that all review comments
were carefully considered.  Responsibility for the final content of this

report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiiSUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS1
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY, PRODUCTIVITY,AND CREATIVITY15

Inventive and Creative Practices, 16
Domains and Benefits of Creativity, 18
The Creative Industries, 20
Interactions Among Domains of Creative Activity, 22
The Roles of Information Technology, 24
The Race for Creativity in a Networked World, 27
Roadmap for This Report, 28CREATIVE PRACTICES30
What Makes People Creative, 30
How Creative People Work, 34Individuals with Diverse Expertise and Skills, 36
Successful Collaborations, 40Architecture, 44
Movie Production, 45
Computer Games, 48Cultural Challenges in Cross-disciplinary Collaborations, 51Overcoming Preconceived Notions About Computer Scientistsand Artists and Designers, 52Minimizing Communications Clashes, 55Resources That Support Creative Practices, 57Skills Training, 57
Work Spaces, 58ADVANCING CREATIVE PRACTICES THROUGH
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY61

Strange Bedfellows?, 61
Tools Needed to Support Creative Work:  Hardware and Software, 65˘ˇˆBeyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSxivHardware and Software Tools:  A Mixed Blessing, 68Support for Flexibility, Experimentation, and Play, 74
The Internet and the Web, 75
Economic Realities, 81
Standards, 84
Selected Areas for the Development of Hardwareand Software That Would Promote Creative Work, 86Distributed Control, 87
Sensors and Actuators, 88
Video and Audio, 89
Generative Processes, 92
Reliable, Low-latency Communication over the Internet, 93
Tool Design and Human-Computer Interaction, 94
Programming Languages, 95THE INFLUENCE OF ART AND DESIGN ON COMPUTERSCIENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT96

Beyond Tools, 96The Information Arts, 96
Modeling Disciplines:  From Multidisciplinary to Transdisciplinary, 99
Implications for Computer Science, 102Promising Areas, 104Mixed Reality, 105
Computer Games, 107
Narrative Intelligence, 108
Non-utilitarian Evaluation, 111
Experimental Consumer Product Design, 112
Mobile and Ubiquitous Computing, 113Conclusion, 115VENUES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ANDCREATIVE PRACTICES118

Studio-Laboratories, 119Historical Perspective, 119
Three Classes of Modern Studio-Laboratories, 120Multifaceted New-Media Art and Design Organizations, 125Standalone Centers, 125
Hybrid Networks, 128Other Venues for Practitioners, 130Virtual-Space-based Strategies, 130
Professional Conferences, 133Public Display Venues, 136
Corporate Experiences with Information Technology andCreative Practices, 143SCHOOLS, COLLEGES, AND UNIVERSITIES151
Organizational Models for Supporting Work, 152Specialized Centers, 152
Workshops, 155
Service Units, 157˙˝˛Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSxvFostering ITCP Work Within Mainstream Departments andDisciplines, 158Computer Science, 158Examples of ITCP Work, 159
Challenges in Computer Science Departments, 162Art Practice and Design, 165
Schools of Art and Design, 167Cross-cutting Issues, 170Hiring Faculty, 170
Encouraging Multiskilled Individuals and Collaborations, 171
Designing Curricula, 173INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES AND PUBLIC POLICY176
Digital Copyright, 177
Digital Archiving and Preservation, 181
Validation and Recognition Structures, 184Publication, 188
Curatorial Web Sites, 189
Awards and Prizes, 190The Geography of Information Technology and Creative Practices, 191Information Technology Hot Spots, 192
Geographically Distributed Creativity, 194
Technology-supported Networks of Creativity, 195SUPPORTING WORK IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ANDCREATIVE PRACTICES197

Funding in the United States, 199Sources of Funds, 200Federal Funding for the ArtsÑThe National Endowments, 202Indirect Public Funding for the Arts, 204
Funding by Private Philanthropy, 205
Prizes, 210
Federal Funding for Information Technology Research, 211Funding for Infrastructure, 213
Risk Preferences and the Challenge of Supporting Emerging Areas, 216
Reexamining Funding Policies and Practices, 220Funding in the International Context, 225Public Support for the Arts, 225
Public Support for Information Technology Research, 230
Private Philanthropy, 234APPENDIXESBiographies of Committee Members and Staff237

Briefers at Committee Meetings247

The Computer Science and Telecommunications Board 251
˚˜ Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1reativity plays a crucial role in culture; creative activitiesprovide personal, social, and educational benefit; and cre-
ative inventions (Òbetter recipes, not just more cook-
ingÓ) are increasingly recognized as key drivers of eco-nomic development. But creativity takes different forms at different
times and in different places. This report argues that, at the beginning
of the 21st century, information technology (IT) is forming a powerful
alliance with creative practices in the arts and design to establish the
exciting new domain of information technology and creative prac-
ticesÑITCP. There are major benefits to be gained from encouraging,
supporting, and strategically investing in this domain.INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND
CREATIVE PRACTICES
Alliances of technology and creative practices have often emergedin the past. In the 19th century, for example, optical, chemical, and
thin-film manufacturing technologies converged with the practices of
the pictorial arts to establish the new domain of photography. Then,
photographic technology became further allied with the practices of
the performing arts, giving rise to the domain of film. The cultural and
economic consequences of these developments have been profound.
The emerging alliance of information technology with the arts and
design has, this committee believes, even greater potential.ITCP has already yielded results of astonishing variety and sig-nificant cultural and economic value. These results have taken such
forms as innovative architectural and product designs, computer ani-
mated films, computer music, computer games, Web-based texts, and¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY2¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥interactive art installations, to name just a few. They have developedfrom individual, group, and institutional activities; the processes by
which they have been produced have spanned both the commercial
and not-for-profit worlds and the formal and informal economic sec-
tors. The products of ITCP have begun to appear in many different
countries, in ways that reflect cultural, economic, and political differ-
ences.IT has now reached a stage of maturity, cost-effectiveness, anddiffusion that enables its effective engagement with many areas of the
arts and designÑnot just to enhance productivity or to allow moreefficient distribution, but to open up new creative possibilities. There
is a highly competitive race for leadership in this domain. The poten-
tial payoffs from success in the near- and long-term futures are enor-
mous:  billion-dollar industries, valuable exports, thriving communi-

ties that attract the best and the brightest, enriched cultural experiences
for individuals and communities, and opportunities for global cul-
tural visibility and influence.By definition, there is no formula for creativity. But there areeffective ways to invest in establishing conditions necessary for ITCP,
in overcoming impediments, and in providing incentives. Further-
more, there are ways to recognize and reward creative contributions
and to derive social benefit from them. In appropriate combination,
these measures can add up to powerful strategies for encouraging,
supporting, and reaping the rewards of ITCP. Development along
with implementation of such strategies is the challenge addressed by
this report.MULTILEVEL STRATEGIES FOR ITCP
ITCP can be engaged at multiple levelsÑby individual artists anddesigners who deal with IT tools, media, and themes; in the structur-
ing and management of cross-disciplinary research and production
groups working in the ITCP domain; in directing educational and
cultural institutions with interests in ITCP; at the level of regional
development strategy aimed at fostering ITCP clusters; as an aspect of
national economic and cultural policy; and in multinational collabora-
tive efforts. All of these levels are important, and there are cross-
connections among them. There is, therefore, considerable advantage
in coordinated, multilevel strategies for encouraging, supporting, and
benefiting from ITCP.¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS3PROVIDING NEW TOOLS ANDMEDIA FOR ARTISTS AND

DESIGNERSIndividual artists and designers have experimented with IT sinceits earliest incarnations. Artistic exploration of the possibilities of com-
puter graphics, for example, now extends back more than 30 years,
and 40 years for computer music. As IT has matured and been assimi-
lated into the mass market, the IT tools and media available to artists
and designers have become both more diversified and more afford-
able. There are popular, standardized tools for performing such tasks
as creating, editing, and distributing images, audio, and text; there are
variants on standard tools customized to the needs of particular artists
or designers; and there are highly specialized, purpose-built tools
used by nobody but their creators.To a software developer or an information services manager, itmight seem that the keys to ITCP are simply equipment and soft-
wareÑdeveloping and providing access to standard, commercial ITtools for artists and designers. This perspective is useful as far as it
goes, and it can provide a good way to get started with ITCP, but in
the long run it is an insufficiently rich or flexible one. We make our
tools; then our tools make us.1  Furthermore, software tools encode
numerous assumptions about the making of art and designÑpreciselythe sorts of presuppositions that truly creative practitioners will want
to challenge. And the more software tools emphasize ease of use or
familiar metaphors, the more they must depend on restrictive as-
sumptions in order to do so.  Such tools not only must be available, but

they also must be objects of critical reflection; they must be open to
adjustment and tweaking, they must support unintended and subver-
sive usesÑnot just anticipated onesÑand they must not be too resis-tant to being torn apart and reconceived. If creative practice can de-
velop the powerful spaces and tools that it needs, like the electronic
easel or electronic studio, these spaces and tools could help transform
or enlarge the metaphors, spaces, and tools (office, desktop, files) that
the rest of us have to work with.The relationship between IT professionals and artists and design-ers will be of limited value if it is conceived simply as one of software
(or hardware) producer and consumer. It should, instead, be one of
flexible and thoughtful collaboration in which the roles of software
designer and user are not rigidly distinguished. The advances made
by IT researchers may suggest new forms of art and design practice,1Inspired by Marshall McLuhan, 1954, ÒNotes on the Media as Art Forms,Ó Explora-tions 2 (April): 6-13.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY4¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥while the questions raised by artists and designers may provide newways of thinking about ITÑITCP work challenges the boundaries oftraditional disciplines. Modular, reusable and recombinable code ele-
ments may support critical reconceptualization more readily than
closed, proprietary software products. Open source development may
provide better opportunities for cross-disciplinary collaboration,
customization, and reconceptualization than tools developed and mar-
keted as protected intellectual propertyÑno matter how powerful andattractive those tools may be.PROVIDING OPPORTUNITIES TO
DEVELOP ITCP SKILLSIn general, ITCP depends on opportunities for learning acrossmultiple disciplinesÑsome mix of the arts and design plus IT conceptsand tools. The growing numbers of artists and designers becoming
skilled programmers or hardware developers, like the smaller number
of computer scientists and technologists engaging seriously with the
arts and design, demonstrates that this is feasible. But it is not easy:
Colleges and universities focus mostly on established disciplines, and
the cross-disciplinary programs that do exist vary widely in their
institutional support, effectiveness, and quality.Like other professionals, artists and designers can do more with ITif they become deeply conversant with its capabilities and limitations.
Achieving that result requires far more than training on standard
tools, and it also demands an ability to understand tools and media
criticallyÑin cultural and historical context. Such critical thinkingabout tools is much less typical of education and training in IT, a
difference that contributes to the asymmetric participation of artists
and computer scientists in ITCP. To date, it seems that artists and
designers have made greater efforts to engage IT seriously than com-
puter scientists and technologists have made to acquire deep under-
standing of creative practices in the arts and design. It is easier to find
designers who can program than programmers who can design, or
composers comfortable with signal processing than specialists in sig-
nal processing who can compose or perform at high levels of profi-
ciency. This imbalance could change, with outreach to the computer
science community and interest in ITCP among those who provide
funding and other incentives and rewards.Although motivated individuals can and do acquire complemen-tary IT and arts or design skills, significant ITCP work can also be
produced by cross-disciplinary partnerships between computer scien-
tists and artists or designers. This approach has the advantage of
requiring that fewer skills be mastered by individual team members,
and it is often essential for large projects, but there are some inherent
difficulties. Progress in collaborative ITCP requires effective dialogueBeyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS5between artists and designers and IT professionals. Differences inprofessional culture, styles, and values, as well as communication
problems, can confound effective collaboration. Yet there are strong
traditions of successful cross-disciplinary collaboration in architecture
(particularly as computer-aided design/computer-aided manufactur-
ing (CAD/CAM) technology plays an increasing role), in film produc-
tion, and in the creation of video games, and there have been some
successful pairings of artists and technologists to produce visual works,
performances, and installations.CREATING ENVIRONMENTS THAT
SUPPORT ITCP
ITCP work can be done in many different places. And the diver-sity of venues matters, since each type of venue represents different
tradeoffs and provides different combinations of opportunities, con-
straints, and comparative advantage. So an effective ITCP develop-
ment strategy is likely to be a multivenue one.ITCP venues may occupy physical or virtual spaces, be large orsmall, range from loosely organized collectives to formal programs,
and be either free-standing or connected to established institutions.
Specialized exhibitions, performance festivals, presentation and lec-
ture series, conferences, Internet forums, and display and performance
sites have all played important roles in the growth of ITCP communi-
ties. By contrast, mainstream arts and design organizationsÑmuse-ums, galleries, arts and design fairs, arts and design publishers, and so
onÑhave played a lesser role, although they have begun to embraceITCP more as the products of ITCP have played a larger cultural role
and as these products have developed in quality and interest.Much pioneering exploration of ITCP has taken place in studio-laboratories, which build on the tradition of earlier centers of cross-
disciplinary research and education in the arts, design, and new tech-
nology of the time, such as GermanyÕs Bauhaus in the pre-World WarII years, the postwar New Bauhaus in Chicago, and the Center for
Advanced Visual Studies established by Gyorgy Kepes at the Massa-
chusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in the 1960s. MITÕs MediaLaboratory has been among the largest and most visible, and it has
generated affiliates in Europe and Asia. However, the Media LabÕscombination of substantial laboratory and human resources with an
atelier style of research and education, building on a consortium of
industry funders, is difficult to replicate outside the context of a lead-
ing research university with strong industrial connections. Some uni-
versities, such as Carnegie Mellon University, have formed special
cross-disciplinary centers that undertake ITCP, and several arts schools,
such as the California Institute of the Arts and the Art Center College
of Design in Pasadena, have transformed their curricula to incorporate¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY6IT, yielding numerous focused ITCP activities. Some film schools haveshifted their emphasis from traditional to digital production and dis-
tribution technologies, and most architecture and design schools have
supplemented or supplanted drawing boards with CAD. Several uni-
versities have begun to develop cross-disciplinary study programs in
aspects of ITCP. But a key challenge, particularly in times of tight
finances, is to find effective ways to fund these programsÑand toframe them in ways that are pedagogically sound and appropriately
adaptive to the continuing evolution of ITCP.In Canada and Europe, and emerging in Asia and Australia, majorefforts are under way to develop standalone, government-backed ITCP
centers. Such centers are typically conceived of as instruments of arts
and cultural policy, rather than as equivalents of national research
laboratories. This is an arena in which the United States lags. In prin-
ciple, such centers can provide considerable flexibility and freedom of
intellectual direction. On the down side, they are vulnerable to changes
in government spending priorities, they can lose the very indepen-
dence that makes them attractive if they shift to executing contracts
from industry, and they are usually less able to draw effectively on the
laboratories and human resources of large universities.The technology required for ITCP can be expensive, and ambi-tious ITCP productions can require major funding. Given the breadth
of ITCP, some funding is available through commercial channels. It
normally requires close engagement with popular culture and mass
audiences, with all the constraints and opportunities that this implies.
This path is illustrated by the film and entertainment industriesÑthese ITCP pioneers overcame difficulty and expense and now can
produce major commercial successes. A focused example is the flour-
ishing video game industry, a direct outcome of the rise of ITCP. It
obviously would not be possible at all without the necessary IT, and its
products define a new art form that also resonates with the general
public. It has found some highly innovative ways to combine central-
ized research, development, and marketing with large-scale open-
source strategies, and it has evolved unique distribution strategies.Operating on a small scale and often producing innovative workthrough commissions from enlightened patrons is another group of
players that straddle the boundary between commerce and the arts:
Independent architectural design, product design, graphic design, and
music and video production houses now make extensive use of IT
tools and media, and they frequently have IT specialists on staff. In
some cases, this amounts to little more than straightforward use of
standard, commercial tools. But more adventurous and innovative
houses have seized the opportunity, through IT, to open up some
exciting new domains. This is particularly evident in the move of
architects into CAD/CAM design and constructionÑwith the result-ing emergence of new architectural idiomsÑand the move of graphicdesigners into work that is more interactive.Much important ITCP work occurs outside the marketplace. Inaddition to academic efforts, individual, independent artists and de-
signers, operating mostly on a small scale, are responsible for a crucialBeyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS7¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥segment of ITCP. By virtue of their independence, they are well posi-tioned to provide perspectives that challenge mainstream thinking
and to engage industry as catalytic outsiders who can instigate new
ways of thinking about products and processes. Many forms of tradi-
tional art production, such as painting and writing, are labor-intensive
and modest in their requirements for investments in technology, but
ITCP is often much more capital-intensive. This increased need for
capital presents a chronic problem for independents; they often oper-
ate on a shoestring, struggle to get access to technology and expertise,
and must make whatever technology investments they can manage
from project-by-project funding. They usually depend on some mix of
the gallery and patronage structures of the art world, arts foundation
grants, and relationships with sympathetic educational institutions
and corporations.ITCP activity in all of these venues tends to cluster geographically.Fostering such clustersÑwith a vital mix of commercial, non-profit,academic, design and production house, and independent practitioner
activityÑcan play an important role in regional economic develop-ment. There can be major direct benefits to local economies, and indi-
rect (but potentially even more important) benefits in the form of
better design and higher levels of innovation distributed over many
sectors of the economy.In addition, by its very nature, ITCP lends itself to efficient elec-tronic connection of scattered islands of activity. Writers and photog-
raphers can submit their work electronically to distant publishers,
architects can form geographically distributed design and construc-
tion teams, film studios in Hollywood can link electronically to
postproduction houses in London or animation shops in Korea, and so
on. That capability for connectivity is leading, increasingly, to multi-
national ITCP alliances and organizations. Such a capability can be
particularly important in contextsÑsuch as in developing nationsÑwhere the local culture supports some unique ITCP cluster and elec-
tronic connectivity adds value to that cluster by providing wider
access to resources and markets. It is also important in contextsÑsuchas those of Australia, New Zealand, and SingaporeÑwhere small buthighly educated populations, combined with the effects of distance,
make concentration on high-value, immaterial, information goods and
services particularly attractive.FOSTERING THE CULTURE OF
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

AND CREATIVE PRACTICES
Providing new tools and media for artists and designers, provid-ing opportunities to develop ITCP skills, and creating environments
that support ITCP are all necessary to form thriving ITCP clusters, butBeyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY8they are not in themselves sufficient. It is also essential to foster theculture of ITCPÑthe flow and exchange of ideas among those en-gaged, the development of a sense of intellectual community, the
representation of ideals and values, and the recognition and valida-
tion of outstanding work.The academic environment, in particular, is central to the future ofITCP. That is where talent is cultivated, and that is where research and
practice of various kinds can take place largely without market stric-
tures. At present, a gulf exists between computer science and the arts
and design. Although some computer scientists bridge that gulfÑandcontribute considerably to ITCPÑthat activity often happens outsidetheir department. Although some arts departments have been skepti-
cal of Ònew-mediaÓ programs, in general the arts and design on cam-
pus have welcomed ITCP more than have computer science depart-
ments. The lack of welcome from computer science departments reflects
a lack of appreciation of ITCPÕs potential to contribute to the advanceof computer science as a field, as well as concern about already tight
curricula. At the same time, arts and design departments on campuses
and arts schools have sought to internalize ITCP facilities and to
develop their own research and teaching programs in ITCP. The situa-
tion echoes earlier efforts to formalize computer science as a field,
establish a theoretical foundation for it, and provide it with some level
of autonomy from its predecessor and sister fields. But it is important
to explore the potential for constructive interaction between the arts
and design and computer science before universitiesÑand practition-ersÑconclude that Òparallel playÓ is the way to go.Building academic clusters is a nontrivial challenge. Not only arethere cultural differences among the constituent disciplines, but there
are also significant differences in expectations for funding, use of time,
use of graduate students, definitions of what is acceptable work, and
so on. Special centers, seminars, and other venues are being tried on
campuses, a kind of institutional experimentation that is vital to devel-
oping ITCP. They help to frame and sustain ITCP projects. The time is
ripe for academic experimentation with ITCP, from course content
and curricula to institutional options and incentives.Education, collaboration, funding, and professional advancementall depend on how ITCP is received. Because ITCP spans so many
activities, there is feedback from the commercial space and popular
cultureÑa powerful reinforcement on the design endÑand there ismore ambiguous feedback through academic institutions (faculty and
administrators); publications, exhibitions, performances, and prizes,
as well as those who select for them; and funders of research and the
arts.Because the field of ITCP is young and dynamic, ITCP productionis hard to evaluate. Traditional review panelsÑrepresenting funders;owners and managers of conventional display, performance, or publi-
cation outlets; and those making personnel decisions at academic
institutionsÑmay be hampered by their membersÕ ties to single disci-
plines and the absence of a time-tested consensus about what consti-Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS9tutes good work in ITCP and why. This problem is typical of newfields drawing from multiple disciplines, albeit aggravated by the
contrast between computer science and the arts and design. It is offset
somewhat by a flourishing array of conferences and other forums, in
both virtual and real space, that provide a sense of community and an
outlet as well as feedback. Effective evaluation, validation, and recog-
nition of ITCP work are essential for this domain to progress. Building
on traditions in the arts and design, prizes can be powerful for stimu-
lating and recognizing excellence in ITCP.A NEW FORM OF RESEARCHITCP can constitute an important domain of research. It is inher-ently exploratory and inherently transdisciplinary.2  Concerned at its
core with how people perceive, experience, and use information tech-
nology, ITCP has enormous potential for sparking reconceptualization

and innovation in IT. In execution, it pushes on the boundaries of both
IT and the arts and design. Computer science has always been stimu-
lated by exposure to new points of view and new problems, which are
ever-present in the arts and design. Because of the breadth of use to
which artists and designers put different forms of IT, and because they
typically are not steeped in conventional IT approaches, artistsÕ and
designersÕ perspectives on tools and applications may provide valu-
able insights into the needs of other kinds of IT users. The needs and
wants of artists and designers can suggest new ways of designing and
implementing IT. Engaging their perspectives is a logical extension of
recent trends in cross-disciplinary computer science research.Recently, for example, artists and designers have brought newconcerns to the design and implementation of sensor systems, distrib-
uted control systems and actuators, generative processes and virtual
reality, and the Internet and other networks. Their interests in perfor-
mance and in engaging the public present challenges for system
interactivity; their interests in improvisation present new opportuni-
ties for exploring human-machine interaction. Although artists and
computer scientists have long interacted in such spheres as computer
graphics and music, almost any form of IT may be adopted or adapted
for uses in the arts and design. This flexibility of purpose parallels the
plasticity of the computer itselfÑand that helps to explain why artistsÕconcerns may motivate new combinations as well as new forms of IT.It is important to recognize, however, that serious ITCP researchgoes beyond appropriation of established IT concepts and techniques
for artistic or design purposes, or use of straightforward examples¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥2In transdisciplinary ITCP work, artists and designers interact as peers with com-puter scientists, a model that is described in detail in Chapter 4.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY10drawn from the arts and design to demonstrate the potential applica-tions of new IT. It requires drawing on deep understanding of both IT
and the arts and design to formulate scientifically interesting new
questions in ITCP, and to see the subtle cultural implications of rel-
evant new science. Issues arising from the arts and design have moti-
vated challenging and important domains of computer science and
technology research, such as three-dimensional geometric modeling
and scene rendering directed at the practices and needs of designers
and animators. Sometimes arts-oriented researchers raise cultural, so-
cial, ethical, and methodological questions for computer scientists that
would not be obvious in a more narrowly focused technological con-
text. Conversely, outcomes of computer science research may chal-
lenge artists and designers to rethink their established assumptions
and practices (rethinking that includes an evolution from artifact cre-
ator to process mediator), as when architects engage the possibilities
of curved-surface modeling and associated CAD/CAM fabrication
techniques, or when photographers ponder the differences in the roles
of digital and silver-based images as cultural products and as visual
evidence. And there are areas, such as augmented reality, tangible
computing, lifelike computer animation of characters, and user-cen-
tered evaluation of computer systems, that are probably best regarded
as the joint outcomes of questions posed and investigations conducted
by computer scientists and by artists and designers. These develop-
ments suggest that the value of ITCP lies not just in the capacity of
each field to answer questions posed by the other, but also in the
opportunity for each field to gain fresh, sometimes uncomfortable,
perspectives on itself.MAKING ITCP HAPPENThe broad scope of ITCP implies that it derives funding from bothcommercial activityÑnotably in design and entertainment contextsÑand non-profit activity. The latter is where support is particularly
uncertain yet essential, since it is in non-profit contexts that much
experimentation takes place and some of the broadest public, partici-
pant access becomes possible. The hybrid nature of ITCP tends to
confound its funding. In the United States, exploratory and produc-
tive work in the arts and at the non-commercial frontiers of design is
likely to be funded by private philanthropy, while in computer science
the leading funders of basic research are government agencies, often
in support of specific agency missions. Computer science research
grants are larger (by an order of magnitude) than grants (or prizes)
typically available to artistsÑand they tend to be tied to the advancesin scientific knowledge or the specific kinds of applications of concern
to their funders.¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS11Advancing ITCP requires new approaches to funding. A first stepis recognition by both the arts and computer science patrons that
topics in ITCP are legitimate; next must come support for exploration
of the intersections between IT and the arts and design, and with that
support for new kinds of technical and social and intellectual infra-
structure for undertaking and providing access to ITCP. Those new
approaches, in turn, may require new skills and participants in fundersÕdecision-making processes. Grant program definitions should specifi-
cally embrace ITCP, but without that, progress in ITCP will depend on
grant seekersÕ ingenuity in influencing program definitions and relat-
ing their ideas to existing programs.In addition to monetary support, ITCP depends on resolving con-cerns about intellectual property rights. Not only does ITCP feature a
broad range of content and a broad range of expression, but its pro-
duction can also involve creative reuse or adaptation of previously
generated content or expression. It also requires attention to the
archiving and preservation of IT-based works, both those of a fixed
nature and those designed to change through interactivity or other
factors.The rise of ITCP and the process of contemplating its future pointto the need for better data on arts-related activities and trends. Al-
though imperfect, the data available on scientific and technical re-
search is better than that for arts activities. The lack of good data
hinders effective planning and policy making.RECOMMENDATIONS
Realizing the potential of ITCP requires actions on many frontsÑby individuals, organizations, and funders of different kinds. The
benefits will accrue broadlyÑin multiple sectors of the economy, geo-graphic regions, and disciplines. Other efforts already address the
roles of established arts institutionsÑmuseums, galleries, theaters,and so onÑin relation to IT-based art works and performances. Thisreport concentrates its recommendations on those most responsible
for nurturing the talent and the explorations that are the essence of
ITCP. The recommendations below build on discussions in the body
of the report, which explores the ecology of creative practices and the
components of the strategies through which ITCP can thrive.FOR EDUCATORS AND ACADEMICADMINISTRATORS1.Support the achievement of fluency in information technology
(IT), and the development of critical and theoretical perspectives on
IT, by arts and design students through the provision of suitable¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY12facilities, opportunities for hands-on experience with IT tools andmedia, and curricula that engage critical and theoretical issues relating
to IT and to information technology and creative practices (ITCP).2.Support educational experiences for computer science students
that provide direct experience in the arts and design, critical discus-
sion, and formation of broader cultural perspectivesÑnot merely assemi-recreational enrichment, but at a sufficiently challenging level to
raise hard questions about the social and cultural roles both of science
and technology and of the arts and design.3.Foster exploration of ITCP through incentives and experimen-
tation with a range of informal (e.g., workshops and seminars) and
formal vehicles (e.g., centers, awards)Ñin particular, by building firmlyand boldly on demonstrated local (and often small-scale) strengths
and productive relationships already in place.4.Support curricula, especially at the undergraduate level, that
provide the necessary disciplinary foundation for later specialization
in ITCP.FOR FOUNDATIONS, GOVERNMENT AGENCIES,AND OTHER FUNDERS5.Allocate funding not only to support work by specialists in
established and recognized areas of IT and of the arts and design, but
also to foster collaborations that open up new areas of ITCP.6.Structure proposal review processes to encourage not only con-
tinued development of established and recognized areas of IT and of
the arts and design, but also higher-risk, longer-horizon efforts to
develop ITCP.7.Provide program managers with more time and leeway to learn
about new fields and new kinds of grantees; encourage mobility among

grant makers, artists, designers, and computer scientists.8.Develop a new grant-making category for tool (instrument)
building, emphasizing designs that are extensible and tools that pro-
vide support for improvisation, and for providing broad access to the
resulting tools. Expand research program support for work in aspects
of distributed control, sensors and actuators, video and audio process-
ing, human-computer interaction, information retrieval, artificial in-
telligence, networking, embedded systems, generative processes, and
other technological areas that are critical to advancing ITCP, with a
particular focus on arts-and-design-inspired applications of these tech-
nologies that extend beyond conventional uses.9.Factor infrastructure and archiving and preservation needs into
grant levels because this support is essential to enable future work in
ITCP.10.Support the establishment of new prizes for excellence in ITCP
and the development of curated Web sites for its display or perfor-
mance.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS1311.To support policy decision making, underwrite a better knowl-
edge baseÑranging from the history of ITCP to the details of who isdoing what, where, when, and howÑthat parallels the knowledgebase in scientific and engineering fields.12.Underwrite research on the formation of creative clusters and
the role that ITCP can play in promoting regional development.13.Provide support for the creation and maintenance of networks
of organizations (composed of participants from academia, industry,
and cultural institutions) involved with ITCP.FOR INDUSTRY14.Seek opportunities to develop new products and services relat-
ing to the growing field of ITCP and to participate in the formation of
ITCP clusters.15.Pursue relationships with centers of ITCP activity, and seek
opportunities to engage artists and designers who can contribute to
the development of ITCP products and services.FOR THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES16.Organize a symposium series on Frontiers of Creative Practice
(paralleling the Frontiers of Science and Frontiers of Engineering se-
ries) to bring together a cross section of young artists, designers,
scientists, and technologists working within ITCP.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.15˘he benefits of information technology (IT) extend far be-yond productivity as it is usually understood and mea-
sured. Not only can the application of IT provide better
ratios of value created to effort expended in establishedprocesses for producing goods and delivering services, but it can also
reframe and redirect the expenditure of human effort, generating un-
anticipated payoffs of exceptionally high value. Information technol-
ogy can support inventive and creative practices in the arts, design,
science, engineering, education, and business, and it can enable en-
tirely new types of creative production. The scope of IT-enabled cre-
ative practices is suggested (but by no means exhausted) by a host of
coinages that have recently entered common languageÑcomputer
graphics, computer-aided design, computer music, computer games,
digital photography, digital video, digital media, new media, hypertext,
virtual environments, interaction design, and electronic publishing, to
name just a few.The benefits of such practices have economic, social, political, andcultural components. IT-enabled creative practices have the potential
to extend benefits broadly, not only to economic and cultural elites
(where they are most immediately obvious), but also to the disadvan-
taged, and not only to the developed world but also to developing
countries. And their impacts extend in two directions:  Just as the

engagement of IT helps shape the development of inventive and cre-
ative practices, so also can inventive and creative practices positively
influence the development of IT. See Box 1.1. This report explores the
complex, evolving intersections of IT with some important domains of
creative practiceÑparticularly in the arts and designÑand recom-
mends strategies for most effectively achieving the benefits of those
intersections.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY16¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥BOX 1.1The Utility of Information TechnologyA common answer to the question, What good is information technology?, is that it enhancesproductivity. Unquestionably, information technology (IT) now helps one to perform many routine tasks
with greater speed and accuracy, with fewer errors, and at lower cost. So computers and software products
are marketed as productivity tools, investments in IT are justified in terms of productivity gains, and
economists try (sometimes without success) to measure those gains. In this role, IT is a servant.An additional claim, which can be justified in certain contexts, is that IT enhances the quality of results.Laser-printed documents not only are quicker and cheaper to produce than handwritten or typewritten
ones but may also be crisper and more legible. The outputs of detailed computer simulations of systems may
be more reliable, and more useful to engineers, than the approximate, rule-of-thumb hand calculations that
were used in earlier eras. And a sophisticated optimization program may produce a better solution to an
allocation problem than manual trial and error. In this role, IT supports creative craftsmanship.A still stronger, but frequently defensible, claim is that IT enables innovationÑthe production ofoutcomes that would otherwise simply not be possible. Scientists may use computers to analyze vast
quantities of data and thereby derive new knowledge that would not be accessible by other means.
Architects may use curved-surface modeling and computer-aided design/manufacturing systems to design
and build forms that would have been infeasibleÑand probably would not even have been imaginedÑin
earlier times. And new, electronic musical instruments, which make use of advanced sensor and signal-
processing technology, may open up domains of composition and performance that could not be explored
using traditional instruments. In this role, IT becomes a partner in processes of innovation.Perhaps the strongest claim is that IT can foster practices that are creative in the most rigorous senseÑscholarly, scientific, technological, design, and artistic practices that produce valuable results in ways that
might be explained in retrospect but could not have been predicted. At this point, one might detect a whiff
of paradoxÑa variant on PlatoÕs famous Meno paradox. Unless it offers users a means to produce something
they already know they want, IT is not helpful. But if someone produces something merely by running a
program, the production process is predetermined and potentially standardized, so how can the result be
truly creative?INVENTIVE AND CREATIVE
PRACTICESCreativity is a bit like pornography; it is hard to define, but wethink we know it when we see it.1  The complexities and subtleties of
precise definition should not detain us here, but it is worth making a
few crucial distinctions.Certainly, creative intellectual production can be distinguishedfrom the performance of routine (though perhaps highly skilled) intel-1For a concise summary of attempts to define creativity within a variety of intellec-tual traditions, see Carl R. Hausman, 1998, ÒCreativity:  Conceptual and Historical
Overview,Ó pp. 453-456 in  
Encyclopedia of Aesthetics, Vol. 1, Michael Kelly, ed., OxfordUniversity Press, New York.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY, PRODUCTIVITY, AND CREATIVITY17lectual tasks, such as editing manuscripts for spelling and grammar, orapplying known techniques for deriving solutions to given math-
ematical problems. Less obviously, creativity can be distinguished
from innovation; there are plenty of software products and business
plans that are (or were) innovative, in the sense of accomplishing
something that had not been attempted before, without being particu-
larly creative. And there are many original scientific ideas that turn
out to be wrong. There is always something unexpected, compelling,
and even disturbing about genuinely creative production.2  It claims
value, and it has an edge. It challenges our assumptions, forces us to
frame issues in fresh ways, allows us to see new intellectual and
cultural possibilities, and (according to Kant, at least) establishes stan-
dards by which future work will be judged.3The implicit and explicit ambitions reflected in creative produc-tion tend to differentiate it from routine production. It often focuses on
unexpected questions rather than those that have already entered the
intellectual mainstream. It goes for high payoffs and is undeterred by
accompanying high risks. It seeks out big questions rather than oppor-
tunities to make incremental advances, and it looks for fundamental
change. It is not bothered by rule breaking, boundary crossing, and
troublemaking. And it is characteristically reflexiveÑengaged in re-flecting upon and rethinking processes, not just applying them.Creative production is not always positive and widely valued; onecan be creatively evil, and one can waste creative talents on crazy
projects that nobody cares about. But the products of creative science,
scholarship, engineering, art, and designÑeven creative basketballÑcan bring immense benefits to society, as well as providing deep
satisfaction to their originators. So respect is accorded to creative
individuals and institutions, and society is often willing to invest in
projects and programs that plausibly promise (though can never quite
guarantee) creative results.For Plato, and later for the Romantics, creativity was an ineffableattribute of certain mysteriously favored individualsÑa gift of thegods. You could cultivate and exercise it if you had it, but there wasnÕtmuch else you could do about it. TodayÕs consensus (endorsed by thisCommittee on Information Technology and Creativity) favors the view
that creativity can be developed through education and opportunity,2Hausman (ÒCreativity,Ó 1998, p. 454) puts the point more technically, as follows:
ÒNot just anything brought into being invites us to call it a creation, however.  There is a
stronger or radical and normative expectation that what is brought into being regarded
as having newness and (at least for the creator) 
value.  The newness of the outcome of
such a radical creative act is a characteristic not simply of another instance of a knownclassÑa numerical newness, such as may be attributed to a freshly stamped penny or ablade of grass that has just maturedÑbut an instance of some new kind.  It is a thing that
is one of its kind that occurs for the first time, and being thus newly intelligible, isvaluable.Ó3Immanuel Kant, 1781, Critique of Pure Reason. See <http://www.arts.cuhk.edu.hk/Philosophy/Kant/cpr>.  Note that as this report went to press, all URLS cited were
active and accessible.There is alwayssomethingunexpected,compelling,and evendisturbingabout genuinelycreativeproduction.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY18that it can be an attribute of teams and groups as well as individuals,and that its social, cultural, and technological contexts matter. The
committee tends to believe that it is possible to identify and establish
the conditions necessary for creativity, and conversely, that we risk
stifling creativity if we get those conditions wrong. Renaissance Flo-
rence clearly provided the conditions for extraordinary artistic and
scientific creativity, but it is easy to name many modern cities (we will
avoid getting ourselves into trouble by doing so) that apparently do
not.More precisely, creative practicesÑpractices of inquiry and pro-duction that seek more than routine outputs and aim instead for
innovative and creative resultsÑcan be encouraged and supported insome very concrete and specific ways. Society can try to provide the
tools, working environments, educational preparation, intellectual
property arrangements, funding, incentives, and other conditions nec-
essary to support creative practices in various fields.DOMAINS AND BENEFITS OFCREATIVITY
No intellectual domain or economic sector has a monopoly oncreativity; it manifests itself (often unpredictably) in multiple fields
and contexts. But the manifestations vary in form and character, in
associated terminology, and in the types of benefits that result.In science and mathematics, the most fundamental outcome ofcreative intellectual effort is important new knowledge. Generally,
scientists and mathematicians are clear on the difference between such
knowledge and that which results from incremental advances within
established intellectual frameworks. Ground-breaking discovery is

widely (though not universally) regarded as a product of great value
in itself, but it is also valued more pragmaticallyÑas an enabler oftechnological innovation.In engineering, and in technology-based industry, creativity yields
technological inventions. Such inventions can result in commercially
successful products, in improvements to the quality of life (as, for
example, when motion picture technology enabled a new form of
entertainment, or when an innovative new drug provides a cure for a
disease), and in the generation of income streams through intellectual
property licensing arrangements. Thus the social and economic ben-
efits are often clearly identifiable and measurable. In recent decades,
information technology has been a particular locus of technological
invention, the benefits of which need no elaboration here.4¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥4For an elaboration, see Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, NationalResearch Council, 1999, Funding a Revolution:  Government Support for Computing Re-
search, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY, PRODUCTIVITY, AND CREATIVITY19An important manifestation of economic creativity is entrepre-neurshipÑbringing together ideas, talent, and capital in innovativeways to create and make available products and services. Often, in
fields such as information technology and biotechnology, close alli-
ances emerge between the institutions of technological innovation
(e.g., research universities) and entrepreneurial activity; each one re-
quires and motivates the other. This is particularly evident in fast-
moving, high-tech economic clusters, such as the information technol-
ogy cluster in Silicon Valley or the biotechnology cluster of Cambridge,
Massachusetts.Cultural creativity manifests itself in the production of works ofart, design, and scholarship. Like contributions to scientific and
mathematical knowledge, such works are highly valued in them-
selves. Nations and cities take immense pride in their major cultural
figures, their cultural institutions, and their cultural heritage. Many
value the experience of producing as well as consuming art, design,
and scholarship. Not only high cultural practices, such as opera at the
Metropolitan in New York City, but also popular practices, such as
amateur photography, may be valued for the participant experiences
they provide.Practices of cultural creativity also provide the foundation of theso-called creative industries that seek profits from production, distri-
bution, and licensing.
5  One component of the creative industries
consists of economic activity directly related to the world of the artsÑin particular, the visual arts, the performing arts, literature and pub-
lishing, photography, crafts, libraries, museums, galleries, archives,
heritage sites, and arts festivals.  A second component consists of

activity related to electronic and other newer mediaÑnotably broad-cast, film and television, recorded music, and software and digital
media. And a third component consists of design-related activities,
such as architecture, interior and landscape design, product design,
graphics and communication design, and fashion.There are some problems with the very idea of ÒcreativeÓ indus-
tries. Creativity clearly is not confined to them, and much of what they
engage in could hardly be called creative in any sense. Sometimes, as
when they devote their efforts to churning out routine Òcontent,Ó they
even seem actively counter-creative. Still, the creative industries do
ultimately depend on talented, original artists, designers, and per-
formers to create the value that they add to and deliver, while many
artists, designers, and performers depend on the infrastructure of the
creative industries and are rewarded by their engagement with the
creative industries. The idea is problematic in some respects and there-5The U.K. Creative Industries Taskforce, in its 1998 report Creative Industries MappingDocument, defined the creative industries as Òthose industries which have their origin inindividual creativity, skill and talent and which have the potential for wealth and jobcreation through the generation and exploitation of intellectual property.Ó  See <http://
www.culture.gov.uk/creative/creative_industries.html>.It is possible toidentify andestablish theconditionsnecessary forcreativity, andconversely,we risk stiflingcreativity if weget thoseconditionswrong.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY20fore should be treated with appropriate critical caution, but it remainsa useful one. And, in any case, the name Òcreative industriesÓ has
stuck.THE CREATIVE INDUSTRIES
That the creative industries are now big business hardly needsemphasis. There have been numerous recent efforts to quantify this
intuition by measuring their economic contributions. According to an
estimate developed by SingaporeÕs governmental Workgroup on Cre-ative Industries,6 the United States led the way in the creative indus-
tries in 2001, with the creative industries accounting for 7.75 percent of
the gross domestic product (GDP), providing 5.9 percent of national
employment, and generating $88.97 billion in exports,
7 with the United
Kingdom, Australia, and Singapore also exhibiting industry sectors of
significant size (representing 5.0 percent, 3.3 percent, and 2.8 percent
of national GDP, respectively).8The United States has some important, major creative industryclusters,9 notably those of Los Angeles (with a particular emphasis on
film, television, and music), New York (with a particular emphasis on
publishing and the visual arts), San Francisco (with particular recent
emphasis on digital multimedia), and some smaller, more specialized
clusters in cities such as Boston, Austin, and Nashville. In Europe,
many creative industry clusters, such as those of London, Paris, and
Milan, have developed at long-established centers of culture. In Aus-
tralia, significant new clusters, based mostly on film, television, and
digital multimedia, have emerged in Sydney, Melbourne, and Adelaide.
A cluster oriented toward software tools and production has devel-
oped in Canada, especially in Toronto and Montr”al. The value ofsuch clusters is obvious, so it is not surprising that there has been
growing worldwide interest in the regional development strategy of¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥6Workgroup on Creative Industries, 2002, Creative Industries Development Strategy:Propelling SingaporeÕs Creative Economy, Singapore, September, p. 5.7For core copyright industries only.8These numbers represent the percentages of GDP for different years between 1997and 2001, though the fundamental point remains validÑthe creative industries repre-sent a significant segment in each nationÕs economy.  See Economic Review Committee,
Government of Singapore, 2002, ÒThe Rise of the Creative Cluster,Ó Creative IndustriesDevelopment Strategy, p. 5. Available online at <http://www.erc.gov.sg/pdf/ERC_SVS_CRE_Chapter1.pdf>.9Industry clusters are often defined as Òconcentrations of competing, collaboratingand interdependent companies and institutions which are connected by a system ofmarket and non-market linksÓ (see definition of the Department of Trade and Industry,
United Kingdom, available online at <http://www.dti.gov.uk/clusters/>).Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY, PRODUCTIVITY, AND CREATIVITY21encouraging creative industry clusters.10  In the United Kingdom, for
example, each of the ten Regional Development Agencies has focused
on the creative industries as a growth sector, and each local authority
is mandated by the Department of Culture, Media and Sport to pro-
duce a development strategy for the creative industries.11It is important to recognize that these creative clusters do not justconsist of large firms. They also encompass independent artists and
designers, numerous small businesses, cultural institutions such as
galleries and performing arts centers, and educational institutions.
Many of those involved with the creative industries may play multiple
roles; for example, artists and designers may combine independent
practice with teaching, and employees of large firms may ÒmoonlightÓwith small practices of their own.But the creative industries also have a strategic importance thatextends beyond regional economic development. In a progressively
interdependent world where culture tempers and inflames politics as
well as markets, strong creative industries are a strategic asset to a
nation; the predominance of Hollywood movies, Japanese video games,
and Swiss administration of FIFA soccer are forms of soft power that
have global, albeit subtle, effects, particularly in countries whose bulg-
ing youth populations have access to television and the Internet. Mov-
ies, music videos, fashion, and design foster aspirations in the devel-
oped and developing world. It matters that teenagers in ChinaÑorPakistanÑidolize Michael Jordan. The ability to generate a culturalagenda via the arts, design, or media is a form of deep, pervasive
influence and is as integral to global leadership as trade policy or
diplomatic relationships.12  Globally available cultural products serveas a kind of common social currency in an increasingly fractured and
fractious world. To that extent, the reach and robustness of a nationÕscreative practices can constitute a form of global leadershipÑwhilealso, of course, potentially attracting charges of cultural imperialism.
A nationÕs creative practices can also provide valuable visibility andbranding, as with Italian and Finnish design.Creative clustersencompassindependentartists anddesigners,numerous smallbusinesses,culturalinstitutions suchas galleries andperforming artscenters, andeducationalinstitutions.10See Chapter 7 for further discussion.11See Department of Culture, Media and Sport, Creative Industries Program, 2000,Creative Industries: The Regional Dimension, Report of the Regional Issues Working Group,February. Available online at <http://www.culture.gov.uk/creative/index.html>.12See Shalini Venturelli, 2001, From the Information Economy to the Creative Economy:Moving Culture to the Center of International Public Policy, Center for Arts and Culture,Washington, D.C., available online at <http://www.culturalpolicy.org/pdf/venturelli.pdf>; and Joseph S. Nye, 1999, ÒThe Challenge of Soft Power:  The Pro-
pounder of This Novel Concept Looks at Lloyd AxworthyÕs Diplomacy,Ó Time, Febru-ary 22, available online at <http://www.time.com/time/magazine/intl/article/0,9171,1107990222-21163,00.html>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY22INTERACTIONS AMONG DOMAINSOF CREATIVE ACTIVITY
For some purposes it is useful to distinguish scientific, technologi-cal, economic, and cultural creativity, as discussed above. But it is also
important to emphasize that these domains are often tightly coupled,
and that activity in one may depend on parallel activities in others.
This committee was charged and constituted to focus primarily on
creative practices in the arts and design, and their intersections with
information technology, but it recognized that the coupling to other
domains of creative practice could not be ignored.Figure 1.1 illustrates the approximate nature of that couplingÑeach broad domain of creative practice in two-way interaction with
every other. Reflecting a National Academies/Computer Science and
Telecommunications Board perspective, technological creativity is
shown at the center of the diagram, which of course could also be
redrawn to show any of the other domains at the center.Consider, for example, some important interactions of technologi-cal creativity with other domains. Scientific discovery sometimes drives
technological invention, but conversely, the pursuit of technological
innovation often suggests scientific questions and ideas. Similarly,TechnologicalCreativityEconomicCreativityScientificCreativityCulturalCreativityFIGURE 1.1  Domains of creative activity.¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY, PRODUCTIVITY, AND CREATIVITY23entrepreneurial energy may motivate engineering and product inno-vations, but such innovations may also demand creative strategies for
successfully bringing inventions to the market. And newly invented
technologies may produce bursts of artistic and design creativityÑaswith Renaissance perspective, photography, film, radio, television,
and computer graphicsÑwhile the work of artists and designers maygenerate desire for technological innovations, shape the directions of
technological investigations, and provide critical perspectives.The additional reciprocal relationships indicated by Figure 1.1 areno less worthy of note. In the creative industries, innovative entrepre-
neurs develop new ways to produce and distribute creative products,
while creative production often demands of businesses and institu-
tions (such as museums, cultural foundations, and art and design
schools) new distribution, curatorial, preservation, and other strate-
gies. There is a subtle, complex, but undoubtedly important (in some
periods, at least) relationship between the intellectual frontiers of the
creative arts and the sciences. And there are even cross-relationships
between scientific and economic innovationÑas when physics Ph.D.smoved to Wall Street and brought with them new tools and methods
for the financial industry.13Innovative design is often situated precisely at the intersection oftechnologically and culturally creative practices. On the one hand,
designers are frequently avid to exploit technological advances and to
explore their human potential. On the other, they typically have close
intellectual alliances with visual and other artists. And innovative
design can yield high economic payoffs; firms such as Apple, Sony,
Audi, and Target have differentiated themselves and in some cases
turned themselves around through innovative design. Volkswagen
remade its image, and refreshed its reputation for witty innovation,
with the revived and redesigned Beetle. Bilbao put itself on the world
map by building the highly innovative Bilbao Guggenheim MuseumÑa work that embodies many technological innovations and at the same
time is engaged with the frontiers of the visual arts. South Korea has
recently had great success with a national policy of emphasizing qual-
ity and innovation in the design of consumer products.These various interrelationships suggest the importance not onlyof specialized loci of creativity, such as highly focused research labora-
tories and individual artistÕs studios, but also of creativity clustersÑcomplexes of interconnected activity, encompassing multiple domains,
which provide opportunities and incentives for productive cross-fer-
tilization. Thus a laboratory director might seek to establish a creative,
cross-disciplinary cluster of individuals and research groups at the
scale of a small organization; a research university provost might seek
a creative cluster of departments, laboratories, and centers at the scale13See, for example, ÒPhysicists Graduate from Wall Street,Ó The Industrial Physicist,December 1999, available online at <http://www.aip.org/tip/INPHFA/vol-5/iss-6/p9.pdf>.Innovativedesign is oftensituated preciselyat theintersection oftechnologicallyand culturallycreativepractices.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY24of a campus; regional planners might try to encourage formation ofcreative industrial and institutional clusters within their jurisdictions;
and national strategists might seek to do so at even larger scales.The importance of such efforts is increasingly widely recognized,and a related research and policy literature is emerging:  Economists

explore the proposition that Òeconomic growth springs from betterrecipes, not just from more cookingÓÑthat is, from the generation andapplication of innovative and creative ideas;14 planners analyze 
Òcre-ative citiesÓ and 
Òcreative regionsÓ that attract and retain talent, and
that provide environments in which creative practices flourish;15 the
idea of a Òcreative classÓ has quickly become popular;
16 and the possi-
bility of shifting from Òthe information economyÓ to 
Òthe creativeeconomyÓ has become a hot topic among policy makers from Scotland
to Hong Kong.17THE ROLES OF INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGYFigure 1.2 shows a more specialized version of Figure 1.1, inwhich information technology replaces technological creativity at the
center. Information technology has important relationships to creative
practices in other domains. It benefits enormously from basic scientific
and mathematical advances, and in return, it provides scientists and
mathematicians with powerful new tools and methods. It provides
entrepreneurs with a stream of opportunities to develop and market
new products and services, while benefiting from the research and
development investment that the prospect of successful commercial-
ization motivates. It provides artists and designers with whole new
fields of creative practice, such as computer music and digital imag-
ing, together with tools for pursuing their practices in both new and
established fields, while benefiting from the inventive and critical
insights that artists and designers can bring to it. Increasingly, the
committee suggests, information technology constitutes the glue that
holds clusters of creative activity together.The effectiveness of information technology as glue is enhancedby its extraordinary capacity to apply the same concepts and tech-
niques across many different fields. Once content is reduced to bits, it
doesnÕt much matter whether it represents text, music, scanned im-14See Paul M. Romer, 1993, ÒEconomic Growth,Ó The Fortune Encyclopedia of Econom-ics, David R. Henderson, ed., Warner Books, New York.15See Charles Landry, 2000, The Creative City: A Toolkit for Urban Innovators, Earthscan,London.16See Richard Florida, 2002, The Rise of the Creative Class, Basic Books, New York.17See John Howkins, 2002, The Creative Economy: How People Make Money from Ideas,Penguin Books, London.¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY, PRODUCTIVITY, AND CREATIVITY25ages, three-dimensional (3D) computer-aided design (CAD) models,video, or scientific data; the same techniques, devices, and channelscan be used for storing and transporting it. Once you have a stream of
digital data, whatever the source, you can apply the same techniques
to process it. Once you have an efficient sorting algorithm, you can use
it to order vast files of scientific data or to arrange polygons (digital
objects) for hidden-surface removal in rendering a 3D scene. Once you
have a library of software objects, you can use those objects as building
blocks to quickly construct specialized software tools for use in many
different domains.Furthermore, information technology can support the formationof non-geographic clusters of creative activity. In the past, such clus-
ters depended heavily on geographic proximity for the intense face-to-
face interaction and high-volume information transfer that they re-
quired. (If you were in the movie business you wanted to be in
Hollywood, if you were in publishing you wanted to be in New York,
and so on.) Distance is not dead, and these things still matter, but
efficient digital telecommunication now supports new types of clus-
ters. Architectural projects, for example, are now routinely carried out
by geographically distributed team members who exchange CAD files
over the Internet and meet by videoconferencingÑwith the advantagethat specialized talent and expertise can be drawn from a global rather
than local pool. Long-distance electronic linkages between local clus-
ters, such as that between the film production cluster in Hollywood
and the postproduction cluster in LondonÕs Soho, are also becomingincreasingly important.BusinessPracticesInformation
TechnologyScientificPracticesCulturalPracticesFIGURE 1.2  Information technology as glue.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY26And the growing integration of digital storage and processingtechnology with networking technology and sensor technology is even
further strengthening the role of information technology as glue. In
many domains, cycles of production, distribution, and consumption
can now be end-to-end digital. For example, the production and distri-
bution of a photographic image used to entail a silver-based chemical
process for capture, half-toning followed by a mechanical process to
print large numbers of copies, and physical transportation to distrib-
ute those copies; now, capture can be accomplished by means of a
charge-coupled device (CCD) array in a digital camera, replication
becomes a matter of applying software to copy a digital file, and
distribution through the global digital network can follow instantly.18Finally, many argue that information technology is, by its verynature, a powerful amplifier of creative practices. Because software
can readily be copied and disseminated, and because there can be an
unlimited number of simultaneous users, software supports the dis-
semination, application, and creative recombination of innovations on
a massive scaleÑprovided, of course, that intellectual property ar-rangements do not unduly inhibit creative work. Much of the current
debate about intellectual property and information technology fo-
cuses on questions of how best to support, encourage, and reward
creative practices.19In summary, information technology now plays a critical role inthe formation and ongoing competitiveness of clusters of creative
activityÑboth geographic clusters and more distributed clusters heldtogether by electronic interconnection and interaction. IT is an impor-
tant driver of the expanding creative industries. And, due to several
factors, its role as glue is strengthening. First, the generalizability of
digital tools and techniques across multiple domains makes them
particularly efficient and effective in this role; they can displace
predigital tools and techniques, as in the cases of CAD displacing
drawing boards and drafting instruments and digital imaging displac-
ing silver-based photography. Second, the increasingly effective inte-
gration of diverse digital technologies is producing efficient, large-
scale, multipurpose production and distribution systems that can
effectively serve the creative industries. Third, these systems support
the formation of non-geographic clusters of creativity that can draw
on global talent pools. And finally, the amplification effects that are
inherent to information technology are likely to have strong (some-
times unexpected) multiplier effects; they may unleash waves of scien-
tific and mathematical, technological, economic, artistic, and cultural
creativity.18CCD arrays consist of tiny light sensors that encode scenes as sets of intensityvalues. The larger the array, the finer the resolution of the picture. The development ofdigital cameras has been driven, generation by generation, by the release of successively
larger CCD arrays.19See Chapter 7 for an articulation of the important role played by intellectualproperty issues in information technology and creative practices.Many argue that information technology is, by its very nature, a powerful amplifier of creative practices.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY, PRODUCTIVITY, AND CREATIVITY27THE RACE FOR CREATIVITY IN A
NETWORKED WORLDIt seems to this committee that there is an emerging, global race toestablish effective, sustainable clusters of IT-enabled creative activity
at local, regional, and national scalesÑand at even larger scales, likethat of the European Union. A number of studies and initiatives are
directed at this goal, such as the Seoul Digital Media City project
(South Korea),20 the BRIDGES International Consortium on Collabo-
ration in Art and Technology (Canada),21 the Massachusetts Museum
of Contemporary Art (United States), the KitchenÕs national art andtechnology network (United States),22 and the National Endowment
for Science, Technology and the Arts (United Kingdom).23  The re-
wards are high; such clusters are engines of economic growth, of
enhanced quality of life, and of cultural and political influenceÑthatis, of soft power. Success in launching and sustaining them depends
on capacity to attract and retain creative talent, on establishing the
conditions and incentives necessary for that talent to flourish, andÑincreasinglyÑon the effective exploitation of information technology.In the following pages, the committee focuses specifically on clus-ters of creative activity in the arts and design and their interactions
with information technology, as illustrated in Figure 1.3Ñwhich issimply a subset, but a crucial one, of Figure 1.2. The interactions
between these two domains are important not only for their mutually
beneficial effects, but also because they help to energize larger systems
of interconnected creative activity. This report provides more detailed
analyses of the conditions needed for creativity in a networked world
and recommends strategies for establishing and sustaining successful
clusters of IT-related creative activity in the arts and design. It asks the
following questions:1.How can information technology open up new domains of art
and design practice and enable new types of works?2.How can art and design raise important new questions for
information technology and help to push forward research and prod-
uct development agendas in computer science and information tech-
nology?¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥20See <http://www.dmc.seoul.kr/english/why/overview.jsp>.21See <http://www.banffcentre.ca/bnmi/bridges/>.22See <http://www.thekitchen.org>.23Additional information about the Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary Artand other initiatives is given in Chapters 7 and 8.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY283.How can successful collaborations of artists, designers, and
information technologists be established?4.How can universities, research laboratories, corporations, mu-
seums, arts groups, and other organizations best encourage and sup-
port work at the intersections of the arts, design, and information
technology?5.What are the effects on information technology and creative
practices work of institutional constraints and incentives, such as in-
tellectual property arrangements, funding policies and strategies,
archiving, preservation and access systems, and validation and recog-
nition systems?ROADMAP FOR THIS REPORT
This chapter provides an introduction to the world of informationtechnology and creative practices (ITCP) and outlines the benefits to
the economy and society from encouraging and supporting work in
this new domain. Chapter 2 explores the systemic nature of creativity
and how multiskilled individuals and collaborative groups pursue
work. Various factors, from differences in communication style and
vocabulary to evolving work environments, influence how this work
is carried out. Information technology is the focus of Chapters 3 and 4.¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥BusinessPracticesInformation
TechnologyScientificPracticesCreative Artsand DesignInformation TechnologyandCreative PracticesFIGURE 1.3  Information technology and creative practices.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY, PRODUCTIVITY, AND CREATIVITY29Chapter 3 analyzes the role of IT in supporting ITCP work and offersobservations for the future design of improved IT tools that would
provide better support of ITCP. This role for ITÑin service to otherdisciplinesÑis a well-appreciated one. Chapter 4 challenges this tradi-tional role to consider how the art and design influences of ITCP can
help to advance the discipline of computer science. Chapters 5 and 6
discuss the venues for conducting, supporting, and displaying ITCP
work. A wide range of venuesÑfrom specialized centers for ITCP tomuseums and corporationsÑis explored in Chapter 5; ITCP-relatedprograms and curricula in schools, colleges, and universities are cov-
ered in Chapter 6. Institutional and policy issues such as intellectual
property concerns, digital archiving and preservation, validation and
recognition structures, and regional planning are presented in Chap-
ter 7. In Chapter 8, the policies and practices for funding ITCP work
are described and analyzed. The discussions from the chapters are
synthesized and findings and recommendations are articulated in the
reportÕs opening ÒSummary and RecommendationsÓ chapter. Although
these findings and recommendations are directed to particular deci-
sion makers such as university administrators, officers of funding
agencies, or directors of cultural institutions, many of the ideas are
applicable to multiple decision makers, given that ITCP transcends
current institutional, disciplinary, and professional boundaries.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥eople are the engines of creative practice. To work withinthe realm of information technology and creative prac-
tices (ITCP), individuals or groups need to be fluent in
multiple disciplines. Some individuals can simultaneouslymaster multiple subject domains (modern-day Leonardo da Vincis) as
required, whereas others participate in collaborative groups of people
with complementary or synergistic expertise and skills. Each approach
presents its own set of advantages and challenges. Each approach also
benefits from resources such as training tools and suitable working
conditions. This chapter explores how human creative capabilities can
be accessed, developed, and applied to ITCP work.The first section briefly reviews what it means to be fluent in theITCP context and outlines the role that individuals and groups with
such abilities play in producing ITCP work. The second section dis-
cusses, and explores how institutions might enhance, the two basic
approaches to work in ITCP: individuals alone (e.g., an independent
artist), and collaborative groups of various types (e.g., a team develop-
ing a video game). The third section discusses key challenges that arise
in cross-disciplinary collaborations. The final section outlines resources
that can support the human capability to create meaningfully.WHAT MAKES PEOPLE CREATIVE
What makes one action ordinary and another creative? Part of theanswer is personality, although there has been surprisingly little study
of creativity by psychologists.1 Research points to a tendency for
1A survey of psychological research on creativity, intended to motivate more atten-tion, can be found in Dean Keith Simonton, 2000, ÒCreativity: Cognitive, Personal,Developmental, and Social Aspects,Ó American Psychologist 55(1): 151-158.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CREATIVE PRACTICES31creative people Òto be independent, nonconformist, unconventional,even bohemian, and . . . to have wide interests, greater openness to
new experiences, a more conspicuous behavioral and cognitive flex-
ibility, and more risk-taking boldness.Ó2 Part of the answer is behav-
ioral, including the extent to which deliberation and skill are involved.
Deliberation involves making choices about things that matter. ÒFast-ing,Ó Nobel laureate Amartya Sen has famously written, 
Òis not thesame thing as being forced to starve. Having the option of eating
makes fasting what it is: choosing not to eat when one could have
eaten.Ó3 Other factors relate to context, such as the nature of one
Õsexperiences, notably Ò(a) diversifying experiences that help weakenthe constraints imposed by conventional socialization and (b) chal-
lenging experiences that help strengthen a personÕs capacity to perse-vere in the face of obstaclesÓ4Ñboth of which are characteristic of anemergent field in general and ITCP in particular. Interestingly, a factor
in achieving diversifying and challenging experiences may be cultural
diversity; there is evidence that exposing a culture to alien influences
and experiencing marginality or even dissent are correlated with cre-
ativity.5 More generally, the start of a creative act is the escape from
one range of assumptionsÑa contextÑoften with the aid of anothercontext seemingly at odds with the first but that provides a new way
of viewing what we already thought we understood. The arts do this
for IT, and IT does this for the arts.6Creativity can be linked to tools, which have been a constantfactor in the arts as well as in science and engineering. Because ITCP is
defined with reference to a set of toolsÑITÑit calls for an understand-ing of creativity as human complements to digital capabilities: the
opportunity, knowledge, and skill to make disciplined judgments about
how and when to use or not use those capabilities. Although novices
can now enter many fields through interfacesÑprovided by softwarepackagesÑthat encapsulate and parameterize aspects of specializedtrades and crafts that previously took lifetimes to learn, learning to use
a tool does not of itself make one a skilled practitioner.There is a difference between basic functional know-how (e.g.,knowing a few words of a foreign language) and higher-level skill, or2Simonton, 2000, ÒCreativity,Ó p. 153.3Amartya Sen, 1999, Development as Freedom, Alfred A. Knopf, New York, p. 75. Thecommittee is indebted to Mansell (2001) and Garnham (1997) for their readings of Sen interms of communication and media policy. See Robin Mansell, 2001, ÒNew Media andthe Power of Networks,Ó First Dixons Public Lecture, London, October 23, available
online at <http://www.lse.ac.uk/Depts/Media/rmlecture.pdf>; and NicholasGarnham, 1997, ÒAmartya SenÕs ÔCapabilitiesÕ Approach to the Evaluation of Welfare:
Its Application to Communications,Ó Javnost-The Public 4(4): 25-34.4Simonton, 2000, ÒCreativity,Ó p. 153.5Simonton, 2000, ÒCreativity,Ó p. 155.6Allucqu‘re Rosanne Stone, in The War of Desire and Technology at the Close of theMechanical Age (MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1995), describes how technology can
provide prostheses, expanding and enhancing oneÕs interaction with the world.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY32fluency.7  Previous studies of fluency in the use of IT have distin-
guished between general intellectual capabilities; IT-specific but de-
vice-independent generic concepts; and a more contingent class of
specific, device-dependent technical skills. In Being Fluent with Infor-mation Technology,8 important generic IT conceptual capabilities areidentified, including algorithmic thinking, facility with principles of
knowledge representation, and adaptability to change.9  These con-
ceptual capabilities represent a level of understanding that goes far
beyond how to use a given software package. Relatively few artists
may pursue true IT fluency, since artists usually learn what they need
to know, appropriate the necessary technology and materials, and
make their art, but some movement in that direction appears impor-
tant for ITCP.10Early ITCP has been associated with artistsÕ frustrations with IT,
and ease of use for non-technically expert or non-fluent artists and
designers is a concern. Yet highly creative performance by artists and
designers has been associated with tools that are somewhat difficult to
use,11 especially when the alternative is ease of use achieved through
preprogrammed and therefore limiting or constraining features. Cre-
ative people always struggle against the limits of their mediumÑwood splits, musical instruments have limits to pitch and volume, and
so on. The challenges presented by IT have helped to stimulate some
kinds of art and designÑand artistsÕ responses to those challenges,
from seeking better tools to exploiting the flaws in or breaking those
available as part of their art, should help to stimulate development of
new forms of IT.Relatively few artists may pursue true IT fluency, butsome movement in that direction appears importantfor ITCP.7An emphasis on individual talent and resourcefulness is, of course, commonplacein the traditional arts. A novice musician can pick up an instrument and make sounds.Skilled musicians, though, can make bad instruments sound sweet, and they alone havethe virtuosity to ÒpossessÓ great ones.8Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council,1999, Being Fluent with Information Technology, National Academy Press, Washington,D.C.9Paul David, in a similar vein, discusses the importance of generic learning abilities,which must go beyond the acquisition of a specific repertoire of techniques, or even theability to cope with a need for constant updating of technical knowledge, to a Òcapacityto understand and anticipate change.Ó  See Paul David and Dominique Foray, 2002, 
ÒAnIntroduction to the Economy of the Knowledge Society,Ó International Social ScienceJournal (UNESCO) 171:9.10When artists try to learn skills for their art they are very well motivated. They seethe skills as a way to do an excellent job, to do exciting work (they like the results), andto distinguish themselves from other artists. They may become interested in the intrinsic
qualities of the IT, but this is more unusual. (Bill Alschuler, California Institute of theArts, 2002, personal communication.)11Of course, artists and designers do not like more difficult tools per se. Instead, thecommittee is acknowledging the usual tradeoff between flexibility and advanced fea-tures with preprogrammed solutions and ease of use. For Harold Cohen, artistsÕ tools
and instruments have to be Òdifficult enough to stimulate a sufficient level of creativeperformance, and you donÕt do that with something thatÕs easy to use.Ó  For further
discussion of this point, see Chapter 3 in Pamela McCorduck, 1990, AaronÕs Code:  Meta-Art, Artificial Intelligence, and the Work of Harold Cohen, W.H. Freeman, New York.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CREATIVE PRACTICES33When people or groups are fluent in IT and arts and designdisciplines, they may work at either of two intersections of informa-
tion technology and creative practices. The first involves the use of
computational technologies as a medium for cultural practices (i.e.,
viewing IT as providing tools in support of the arts and design fields),
stressing the continuities between IT and older technologies and the
need for a malleable cultural informatics12that remains attuned totraditional practices such as reading, singing, painting, or dancing.
The second stresses art as a form of research or knowledge production
that is interwoven with the practice of research in IT. There is a lot
happening at both intersections, and, despite their superficial differ-
ences, the intersections are synergistic and might even be described as
flip sides of the same phenomenon. These intersections serve as the
bases for the committeeÕs examination in Chapters 3 and 4.In seeking to understand ITCP and the people who do this work,the committee found it useful to examine not only the content of the
work involved, but also the details of how it is organized, both socially
and institutionally. As is further discussed in Chapters 5 and 6, dis-
tinctive new institutional structures have appeared over the past cen-
tury, combining studio or atelier creation with research-oriented knowl-
edge production in educational, cultural, scientific, and business
contexts. All these institutional contexts attempt to balance and sup-
port a variety of interests simultaneously. This hybridity is apparent in
the shifting roles individuals play both alone and in teams in such
settings, be it as artist, designer, researcher, theoretician, entrepreneur,
or technician. A similar hybridity was also evident in the artifacts that
the committee considered best to exemplify the intersections of IT and
creative practiceÑrather than material objects, they tended to be pro-cesses (e.g., interactive works) with social and material aspects, which
span boundaries and can be understood in different ways depending
on social context.These observations correspond closely to the social model of cre-ativity proposed by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi. In this model, creativity
is a three-part social system made up of individuals (or groups of
individuals), knowledge domains, and institutional structures. As il-
lustrated in Figure 2.1, individuals (or groups) produce new variationson inherited conventions stored in domains. These novelties are pro-moted or filtered in the field of social institutions, which select the
genres, theories, and technologies that become the new conventions
for the continuously updated knowledge domains, and that thus are
recycled to form new sources for individual creativity. The field com-
ponent implies that Òcolleagues are essential to the realization of indi-12Cultural informatics is Òa practice of technical development that includes a deepunderstanding of the relationship between computer science research and broaderculture,Ó according to Phoebe Sengers (
ÒPractices for Machine Culture:  A Case Study of
Integrating Artificial Intelligence and Cultural Theory,Ó Surfaces, Vol. VIII, 1999).When people orgroups are fluentin IT and arts anddesign disciplines,they may work ateither of twointersections ofinformationtechnology andcreative practices.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY34¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥vidual creativity, . . . because creativity does not exist until thosemaking up the field decide to recognize that a given creative product
represents an original contribution to the domain.Ó13 (See ÒValidationand Recognition StructuresÓ in Chapter 7.)Framed in terms of this social model of creativity as a dynamicsystem connecting people, institutions, and knowledge domains, the
creative core common to IT and the arts becomes easier to identify.
Creativity results from the interaction of these three systems. And
because the systems perspective underscores the importance of a com-
munity of practice to sustaining creativity, it also demonstrates the
importance of understanding what it means to foster and sustain a
community of practice, a goal of this report.It may be helpful to consider an example. The work of KarimRashid in industrial design is an illustrative case (see Box 2.1). The
boundary-pushing influence of ITCP work on its fields of origin is a
recurrent theme in the projects discussed in this chapter.HOW CREATIVE PEOPLE WORK
The functional integration of the arts and design fields and ITdepends on who is doing what work and how. The human resourcesSocial SystemCulture
FIELDSocial Organization of DomainDOMAINSymbol SystemPERSONGenetic Pooland Personal ExperiencesRetainsselected variantsTransmits structuredinformation and actionProduces variation and changeFIGURE 2.1  A systems view of creativity. This map shows the interrelationships of the three systems that jointly determine
the development of a creative idea, object, or action. The individual takes information provided by the culture andtransforms it, and if the change is deemed valuable by a field, it will be included in the domain, thus providing a newstarting point for the next generation of creative persons. The actions of all three systems are necessary for creativity to
occur. SOURCE: Derived from Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, 1987,  ÒA Systems Approach to Creativity,Ó p. 326 in 
The Natureof Creativity. Contemporary Psychological Perspectives, R. Sternberg, ed., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K.
13Simonton, 2000, ÒCreativity,Ó p. 155.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CREATIVE PRACTICES35BOX 2.1Information Technology and Creative Practices in an Industrial ContextIndustrial design has been largely re-created by computer software, from three-dimensional computer-aided design and manufacturing (CAD/CAM) packages to databases that list new grades and alloys of metal
and plastic, as well as factories themselves. Products, from automobiles to can openers, have been
transformed (it is no accident that consumer goods started getting curvy and ergonomic at around the same
time that buildings did). But the process of industrial design has also changed fundamentally, because the time
and cost of prototyping have been radically reduced. Designers can generate multiple concept models,
honing them in an iterative, evolutionary fashion. But beyond prototyping, information technology has made
it possible for industrial designers to engage creatively on a different levelÑat the level of the manufacturing
process itself.An exemplar of this innovation is Karim Rashid, a highly acclaimed industrial designer whose workincludes everything from wastepaper baskets at Bed Bath and Beyond to furniture in the New York Museum
of Modern ArtÕs design collection.1  RashidÕs experiments with product manufacturing are possible because
modern mass production is increasingly mediated by software. For instance, the apparatus that produced
RashidÕs curving metal napkin rings for manufacturer Namb” (Figure 2.1.1) is controlled by software that
regulates the circumference and length of each napkin ring. By programming the apparatus to vary these
parameters randomly, within a range, Rashid was able to create thousands of unique objects, as opposed
to thousands of identical objects. The idea of mass-produced one-of-a-kind productsÑpostmodern
manufacturingÑis possible because one talented individual can bridge the worlds of engineering and
consumer aesthetics, and because the technology exists to do so. In the process, the creative professionalÕs
role becomes more abstract. It is less about designing objects, and more about designing the process that
makes the objects, including the parameters that transcend the designerÕs direct control. The end result
conflates the uniqueness of handcraft with the scale of industrial production.1Further explanation and examples of RashidÕs work can be found online at <http://www.karimrashid.com>.FIGURE 2.1.1  Napkin rings. Photo by Dick Patrick.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY36can be obtained through the broadening of individual skill sets andthrough collaborations. Some individuals involved in the arts and
design are indeed expanding their knowledge and skills related to IT,
and, perhaps less obviously, some computer scientists and engineers
are acquiring knowledge and skills in the arts and design (there are
distinctive bases in such subdisciplines as graphics and computer
music). Collaborations, for all their difficulties, are frequently the pre-
ferred and sometimes the required approach, because they demand
far less individual investment in learning and therefore accelerate the
process of experimentation in combining different kinds of expertise
(which is especially important in the early stages of exploration be-
cause of the uncertain return from investing time in learning a new
area). Another factor arguing for collaboration as a stimulus is the
tendency of some cross-disciplinary work, in the absence of a diverse
team, to ossify within one discipline or the other. Collaborations may
involve anywhere from two to hundreds of people and often are
inspired and supported by non-profit organizations or commercial
enterprises. Obviously, scale can change the experience and outcome
of a collaboration enormously, but while it may seem obvious to
suggest that Òart,Ó being associated with individuals, requires few-
ness, the networked nature of modern IT may change that intuition.INDIVIDUALS WITH DIVERSE EXPERTISE ANDSKILLSThere are some unusually talented people who can do it all, or doenough to create work that straddles more than one discipline and
creates new skill sets. This approach has a unique beauty and economy;

as one reviewer of this report suggested, an individualÕs work tends tohave a conceptual wholeness, whereas collaborations may produce
ÒcamelsÑhorses designed by committees.Ó  Many artists prefer the
model of the multiskilled individual as the embodiment of the Òmovefast and travel lightÓ style of work, which allows for a degree of
independence in thinking and action that larger collaborative models
may not always offer. People who wish to diverge from the political or
aesthetic mainstream may want both complete control over their prod-
ucts and independence from external funding and its possible content
requirements. Or they may be invested in developing a specific form
of personal expression or crafting a concept or theory that they wish to
determine independently. These individuals may struggle with the
absence of standards in some ways but are able to make their own
rules and engage cutting-edge technologies in a personal way to trans-
form an aspect of the world.There are many models for this style of working, ranging fromindividuals taking various approaches to the visual arts to novelists to
the independent inventor. Growing numbers of artists are becoming
skilled in software programming or hardware development, perhaps
as a way to maintain a life of the imagination without interferenceMany artists prefer the Òmove fast and travel lightÓ style of work, which allows for a degree of independencethat largercollaborativemodels may notalways offer.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CREATIVE PRACTICES37from a client, patron, or co-worker. The acquisition of such skills is, ofcourse, an implicit acceptance of their value to artistic pursuits. Some
people, for instance, can write both computer code and music compo-
sitions or turn their code into sculpture. See Box 2.2. Such artists tend
to be internally driven by artistic impulses or research interests, al-
though they may benefit from institutional support.One beneficiary of such support is Michael Mateas, who, at thetime he described his work for the committee,14 was a research fellowin the Studio for Creative Inquiry (an Òart think tankÓ) at CarnegieMellon University (CMU) as well as a doctoral student in computer
science.15  Mateas combines cultural production with artificial intelli-
gence (AI), two activities that normally have very different goals. As
he described it, cultural production is interested in poetics (the nego-
tiation of meaning between the artist and audience), artistic abstrac-
tion, and audience participation and approval, whereas AI is con-
cerned with task competence, realism, and objectivity. He engages in
Òexpressive AI,Ó building novel architectures, techniques, and ap-
proaches. One of his pieces is Terminal Time, an interactive work that
constructs documentary videos in real time based on both real histori-
cal events and the biases inferred from audience feedback.16  Terminal
Time encompasses a new model of ideological reasoning and a new
architecture for story generation, combining the technical capabilities
of IT and the dramatic story structure concepts of the arts and humani-
ties in a novel way.17  In Mateas
Õs view, the project has influenced boththe technical research agenda and arts practiceÑthus fitting nicelyinto the social model of creativity described above. See Box 2.3.Individuals who wish to become proficient in multiple fields faceat least two formidable challenges. One is the need to deal with enor-
mous and increasing knowledge bases. Trying to remain up-to-date in
only one field is demanding enough for most people; the 20th century
witnessed tremendous growth in knowledge and a proliferation of
disciplinary specialization and narrow professional certification, with
a corresponding growth in support structures consisting of profes-
sional associations, conferences, periodicals, and curricula. The advent
of IT, especially the Internet, has further fueled this trend, especially
by facilitating communication among those with niche interests, thus
promoting the establishment and maintenance of narrow specialties
and interests. Even individuals who already possess both artistic and
technical skills may need to learn new ones or find specialists with
compatible aesthetic and intellectual views for particular projects.14He briefed the committee at its January 2001 meeting held at Stanford University.See Chapter 6 for further thoughts from Michael Mateas.15As discussed further in Chapter 6, CMU seems to be unusually supportive of cross-disciplinary activities.16For further information about Terminal Time, see <http://www-2.cs.cmu.edu/~michaelm/>.17For further discussion, see Michael Mateas, Steffi Domike, and Paul Vanouse, 1999,ÒTerminal Time:  An Ideologically Biased History Machine,
Ó AISB Quarterly:  Special
Issue on Creativity in the Arts and Sciences 102 (Summer/Autumn):36-43. Individuals who wish to become proficient in multiple fields face at least two formidable challenges: enormous and increasing knowledge bases . . .  and lack of a broad institutional support structure.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY38BOX 2.2Combining Sculpture, Software, and Hardware SkillsJohn Simon makes object-based sculptures that combine the skills of painting, sculpture, computerhardware construction, and software development. The work is based on algorithmically generated and
intricately cut interfaces between sheets of acrylic plasticÑa group of painting-like objects on a wall, withconstantly changing patterns on liquid-crystal display (LCD) screens mounted on a structure that is a cross
between a painting and a sculpture. See Figure 2.2.1. The software varies the patterns on the screen so that
they never repeat. The ÒpaintingÓ is constantly new and constantly changing. Simon
Õs work is in the collectionof the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum and the Print Collection at the New York Public Library.Simon on his approach and motivation:I take the screen and the processor from mostly used laptop computers, which I get from eBay or dealers.I am currently using Apple G3 Powerbooks with 14.1-inch screens. I remove the case and mount the LCD screen
to a plastic housing of my own design. The CPU [central processing unit] is mounted on the back of the housing.I install my own software, which runs automatically when the computer is turned on. The images on the screenare constantly changing. This is a way to write software directly for a processor and not have it compete for
attention with other things on your desktop. I sell these works through the Sandra Gering Gallery, with whichIÕve had a longtime association. IÕm also using a computer-controlled laser to cut and engrave materials like acrylic.I am interested in how the lines and shapes from my algorithmic tools can be manifest in material form.11See <http://www.creative-capital.org> and <http://www.numeral.com/articles/atkins/decodingdigitalart>.FIGURE 2.2.1  A work by John Simon.
 Photo courtesy ofJohn Simon.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CREATIVE PRACTICES39A second major challenge is the lack of a broad institutional sup-port structure. After decades of experimentation and practice, new
hybrid fields are emerging, but with lags in financial support.18  Lim-
ited support, of course, results in limited growth for these particular
fields. This is not necessarily bad, because the overall pattern of mul-
tiple hybridization results in a number of different intersections of the
arts and design with computer science and engineeringÑdifferentschools of ITCP thought and different kinds of activityÑwhich to-gether span the range from the fine arts through design and craft.BOX 2.3Terminal TimeTerminal Time is a mass-audience interactive work that constructs documentary histories in responseto audience feedback. The result is similar in style to a Public Broadcasting Service documentary, except that
the software constructs the documentary in real time, based on input from the audience. Thus, radically
different endings are possible.The work is produced in the following way. After a 2-minute introduction, the audience is asked threemultiple-choice questions. The level of applause from the audience determines the ÒcorrectÓ answer to each
question, with the loudest response winning. The answers to this first set of questions are used to create
a model of the audienceÕs ideological perspective, which is then used to create a 6-minute video cliprepresenting history from 1000 to 1750 A.D. After the first clip is presented, the process is repeated two
additional times, each resulting in the construction of another 6-minute clip, the first representing 1750Ð1950 and the second 1950Ð2000. The result is a film constructed in real time. One of the creators of TerminalTime likens it to a genie running amuck, in that the machine infers biases from the audienceÕs responses andthen constructs a reinterpretation of history based on exaggerating these biases.The software running the Terminal Time engine uses an artificial intelligence (AI) architectureconsisting of five parts:  a knowledge base, a collection of ideology goal trees (goals held by different

ideologues), a collection of rhetorical devices (narrative glue for connecting events), a natural language
generator, and a media sequencer. Stored in the knowledge base are thousands of terms associated with
historical events from the period 1000 to 2000 A.D. Based on an audienceÕs response to each series ofquestions, the goal trees select historical events from the knowledge base and slant them to accomplish the
rhetorical goals of the currently active ideologue. Next, the slanted events are connected together into a
story by searching for a sequence of events that can be connected together with the rhetorical devices. The
natural language generator then produces the text (based on the connected-together events) that will serve
as the voiceover for the documentary. Finally, the system selects and edits together video and audio clips
to create the finished documentary. To keep the audience engaged beyond the asking of questions, Terminal
Time uses a thematic sequence of rising action, crisis, climax, falling action, and denouement for each
complete film.Cultural productions such as Terminal Time help to synthesize the metaphors of traditional AI, in whichthe emphasis is often on construction (e.g., to accomplish a particular goal), and art, in which the focus tends
to be on conversation (e.g., to create a less-deterministic cultural product). Clearly, this type of cultural
production would not be possible without information technology, and computer scientists could not
generate this type of content without some knowledge from the arts and humanities concerning how to
structure drama.18See Chapter 6 for an extended discussion.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY40Multiple hybridization also militates against the institutionalizing oftruly creative practice, as any institution formulated to support some
particular conception of creative practice will necessarily curtail move-

ment beyond that paradigm (and increasingly, as the institution be-
comes established).The growth in cross-disciplinary computing-in-the-arts curricula,which takes many forms, is likely to yield increasing numbers of
multiskilled individuals capable of innovating in both technical and
artistic/arts-related fields (although at least for a while, their impacts
may be concentrated on the arts side, which appears to be more
receptive to this type of cross-fertilization than does computer sci-
ence). Funding may remain a chronic problem, however, for profes-
sionals who work (either alone or in groups) outside the commercial
sphere.19  The result is a certain amount of untapped creative energy
or underemployment, which limits cultural production to a narrower
bandwidth than otherwise might be possible with more generous
funding. This situation constrains the breadth and spectrum of the
technical syntax of ITCP:  Absent more funding for more experimental

work, ITCP may become centered in a commercial, material core. It
may be more pronounced in craft and in design than in art, per se, or
fundamental technical research.SUCCESSFUL COLLABORATIONSCollaborations in ITCP may differ from other kinds of collabora-tions in that they may well not be symmetrical. Given the differences
in training, objectives, and culture, it may be important to articulate
different goals between collaborators. A project can be successful and
synergistic even if the differing participants have completely different
goals for the fruits of the outcome of the collaboration. For example, a
particular tool can be used in one way by a scientist and in another
way by an artistÑbut they may develop the tool together (e.g., see theListening Post project described below). Further, quite different types
of relationships between the two communities are possible, each of
which embodies different values and therefore requires different tech-
niques in order to achieve success and devise methods for measuring
that success.Collaborations are intense, not superficial, relationships. Less in-tense forms of relationships include communication (the sharing of
information) and cooperation (in which participants influence the de-
cisions of other participants in a common effort). Collaborations may
take place in various sizes and forms, ranging from a small project
(e.g., academic researchers who agree to work together) to continuing
activities within the framework of an institution created for such a
purpose (e.g., the studio-laboratories discussed in Chapter 5), to large19Because many artistic endeavors are driven by contentÑartists have their ownvision and agendaÑrather than profit, they often struggle for support.Absent morefunding for moreexperimentalwork, ITCP maybecome centeredin a commercial,material core.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CREATIVE PRACTICES41commercial enterprises with well-defined and profit-motivated prod-ucts. What they share is the intention of creating something larger
than the sum of their parts. As once noted about the idea of artists
working with engineers, Òthe one-to-one collaboration between twopeople from different fields always holds the possibility of producing
something new and different that neither of them could have done
alone.Ó20Non-commercial collaborations often cope with the same inad-equate institutional support faced by multiskilled individuals. Such
collaborations may often involve people early in their careers who are
not yet highly invested in one field nor inhibited by professional
norms. They have little to lose by pursuing work that the mainstream
might consider marginal. In some cases, radical ideas are the point.
The Critical Art Ensemble,21 for example, is a loosely organized collec-
tive of five artists who use Òtactical mediaÓ to explore the intersections
of art, technology, radical politics, and critical theory. Starting out as
students looking for a way of organizing that would provide enough
financial, hardware, and labor resources to have a cultural impact, the
collective now expands and contracts based on specific project needs;
the members are geographically diverse and skilled across many disci-
plines. The results of the work take many shapesÑWeb sites, perfor-mances/installations, and booksÑwhich emerge through a horizon-tal, distributed think-tank process of discussion and exchange among
participants. Projects are funded through the participantsÕ Òstraightjobs,Ó writing and speaking fees, and an occasional sponsor. 22
Some non-commercial collaborative projects are both inspired andsupported by institutions. An example is Bar Code Hotel, an interac-
tive installation by artist/programmer Perry Hoberman that was
among nine virtual reality projects produced by the Art and Virtual
Environments project at the Banff Centre for the Arts.23  In Bar Code
Hotel (see Figure 2.2), ÒguestsÓ enter a room in which the walls are
covered with bar codes. The guests use a lightweight wand to activate
the black lines in the symbols and issue directives such as ÒgrowÓ or
ÒfightÓ to virtual objects they create in a computer
Ñsemi-autonomousagents with their own personalities and behaviors. Thus, the guests
create a narrative that is partly predetermined and partly spontane-
ous; when the objects ÒdieÓ and the guests leave, the hotel returns to
20From Paul Miller, 1998, ÒThe Engineer as Catalyst:  Billy Kl
ver on Working withArtists,Ó IEEE Spectrum, July, available online at <http://www.spectrum.ieee.org/select/0798/kluv.html>. Also see the work of Project Zero at the Graduate School of
Education at Harvard University, available online at <http://www.pz.harvard.edu>.21See <http://www.critical-art.net/>.22See <http://www.lumpen.com/magazine/81/critical_art_ensembles.html>.23See <http://www.perryhoberman.com>. Also see M.A. Moser and W.D. MacLeod,eds., 1996, Immersed in Technology:  Art and Virtual Environments
, MIT Press, Cambridge,Mass.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY42its original empty condition. Bar Code Hotel was produced through ahybrid work model in which the artist developed the concept but
accomplished the work with help from others. The approach was
similar to that of the film business (discussed below in this section) in
that it was hierarchical:  A producer (Banff) and a director (Hoberman)

worked with a team of programmers, sound designers, animators,
and other technologists and equipment provided at the Banff Centre.24Team members in such situations, while generally carrying out the
directorÕs concept, often provide essential ideas.A small but institutionally driven collaboration, this time involv-ing participants acting as equals, produced the highly successful Lis-
tening Post, which monitors online activity in thousands of Internet
chat rooms and message boards and then converts these public con-
versations into a computer-generated opera. This project was insti-
gated and supported by the Brooklyn Academy of Music (BAM),
Lucent TechnologiesÕ now-defunct pilot program in new media, and
by the Rockefeller Foundation. A symposium was set up at which
artists and Bell Laboratories engineers and scientists each gave 5-
minute presentations on their work and then had the opportunity to
talk with each other and find compatible collaborators. Administra-
tion was handled by BAM, which awarded $40,000 to each of three24For a comparison between HobermanÕs directorial role in relation to programmersand other less partitioned team design in the Banff CentreÕs Art and VirtualEnvironmentÕs project, see Michael Century and Thierry Bardini, 1999, ÒTowards aTransformative Set-up:  A Case Study of the Art and Virtual Environments Program at
the Banff Centre for the Arts,Ó Leonardo 32 (4):257-259.FIGURE 2.2  Bar Code Hotel enables guests to use
commands embedded in bar code symbols to inter-act with semi-autonomous computer-generated ob-
jects and create a narrative. Photo courtesy of PerryHoberman.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CREATIVE PRACTICES43projects. Listening Post was created by two peopleÑMark Hansen ofthe Statistics and Data Mining Research Department at Bell Labs,
whose cross-disciplinary research draws on numerical analysis, signal
processing, and information theory, and Ben Rubin, an artist who
works with interactive sound and image technologies. In Listening
Post, bits of sampled text are presented as light-emitting diode read-
outs and variously pitched speech synthesized to form a screen of
visual data accompanied by an ÒoperaÓ of spoken text. Statistical
analysis is used to organize the messages into topic clusters based on
their content, tracking the ebb and flow of communication on the Web.Listening Post demonstrates that collaborations not only draw on
and assemble a wide variety of skills in newly developing areas of
digital culture but also may alter creative practices themselvesÑtheshape and nature of the way people work, and the way disciplines are
defined and categorized. The boundaries of practice here were altered
as a result of challenges that arose in the legal territories of intellectual
property and licensing. Rubin also explained that, as a result of the
collaboration, his Òconceptual vocabulary has grown to include no-tions like clustering, smoothing, outliers, high-dimensional spaces,
probability distributions, and other terms that are a routine part of
MarkÕs day-to-day work.Ó  He added, 
ÒHaving glimpsed the worldthrough MarkÕs eyes, I now hear sounds I would never have thoughtto listen for.Ó  Hansen has expressed similar sentiments, saying: ÒThisinstallation, its physical presence as well as the underlying intellectual
questions, are new for me, as they are for Ben. I suppose itÕs the markof a genuine collaboration, that the participants are led in directions
they could never have imagined apart.Ó25At the other end of the spectrum of creative work models arelarger groupings. Larger groupings tend to be structured according to
either the directorial model (which is more common among first-
generation media artists) or the low-ego model of distributed respon-
sibility and anonymity (exemplified by the Institute for Applied Au-
tonomy). Many groups have occupied some middle ground between
these two. Longer-running collaborations such as Survival Research
Laboratories have become a brand with a figurehead, a semi-perma-
nent core, and a tiered and fluctuating membership. Larger, looser
groupings occur over the Internet and have their own dynamics, all
the way up to large virtual communities.Some of the more structured and better-funded ITCP collabora-tions are those found in commercial endeavors, such as segments of
the architecture, movie production, and computer game industries. In
the film industry, for example, there is a clear hierarchy with well-
defined jobs that form a pyramid of synergistic labor to carry out a
standardized process of making a product with clearly defined pa-
rameters. Such collaborations depend on conventions of practice, stan-
dard technologies, and infrastructures for distribution. These are alsoCollaborationsnot only draw onand assemble awide variety ofskills in newlydevelopingareas of digitalculture but alsomay altercreativepracticesthemselves.25See <http://www.earstudio.com>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY44professional contexts in which collaborations are the norm, with built-in motivations and rewards for making the process succeed. A shared
goal of generating some kind of product or service provides the extrin-
sic raison dÕ’tre for collaboration, communication, and coordinationamong disparate types of people. The following descriptions of work
models in these fields may provide some guidelines for future collabo-
rations of computer scientists and artists and designers.ArchitectureArchitecture is inherently a collaborative field. Only the very small-est design and construction projects are conceived and executed by
individuals. Projects of any scale and complexity are undertaken by
large teams of specialistsÑtypically including client representatives,architects, specialist engineering consultants, fabricators, subcontrac-
tors, and general contractors. The design architect plays a leadership
and overall coordination role, taking ultimate responsibility for the
quality of a project, but any member of a design and construction team
may be called upon to help frame problems and to contribute to their
solution. Experienced architectural designers know that innovative,
creative projects depend on harnessing the expertise, energy, and
imagination of all team members, not just assigning them routine
tasks.Forms of collaboration have evolved as supporting technologieshave developed. Medieval architects, for example, were not clearly
distinguished from builders, and they spent most of their time on
construction sites rather than in separate design offices. Under these
conditions, the interactions among team members mostly took the
form of on-site, face-to-face discussions, augmented when necessary
by the production of simple sketches and full-size templates of detail.
With the industrial revolution, a more formalized division of labor
emerged:  Architects definitively separated from the construction

trades, identified themselves as professionals, increasingly defined
themselves as knowledge workers rather than as master craftsmen,
and spent most of their time in their off-site ateliers and drawing
offices. Drawings on paper became the principal means of developing
and recording design ideas, communicating among members of the
design and construction team, and establishing construction contracts.
Within this new framework, drawings and scale models (rather than
on-site construction situations) became the objects of discussion. Col-
laboration increasingly took place around the drawing board, or in a
conference room.Since the 1960s, digital technology has been transforming designand construction collaboration once again. Computer-aided design
(CAD) files have replaced drawings on paper as the primary records
of evolving designs. Electronic file transfer and joint access to online
databases have increasingly supplanted the physical transportation of
drawings as means of communication among design team members.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CREATIVE PRACTICES45Videoconferencing and groupware (software tools to support collabo-ration) play growing roles. As a result, design and construction teams
may now be tied together electronically rather than by physical prox-
imity in their interactions and collaborations, they may be distributed
geographically, and they may operate asynchronously across multiple
time zones.26  Whereas architecture was once a very local activity, it is
now globalizing.27  Globalization, in this context, means that design
and construction teams are not limited to the talent and expertise
available locally. They can draw on much larger, more diverse, and
competitive talent pools. It is not necessary to go to the structural
engineer next door, for example; one can go to a leading international
specialist who has exactly the right skills and experience for the cur-
rent project.The shift to digital modeling and fabrication based on computer-aided design and manufacturing (CAD/CAM) also provides signifi-
cantly greater design freedom. Architects can now work, without
difficulty, with complex curved surfaces, non-repeating compositions,
and other elements that would have been completely unmanageable
in the days of hand drafting. And they can use sophisticated software,
applied to digital models of projects, to verify structural, thermal, and
other aspects of performance. Projects that would have been imagin-
able but infeasible in the past can now be pursued without much
difficulty (see Figure 2.3).28Movie ProductionThe movie industry exemplifies cooperative creative practices,relying on collaborative processes involving artists and technicians to
make its magic. Temporary task forces of actors, designers, electri-
cians, animators, and many others come together for a single project,
working intensely to build relationships and teamwork comparable to
that of a string quartet or baseball team.29  The director may work with
writers or composers to develop and revise the screenplay or score,
designers and technicians may work together to make the sets, and
film editors may rely on digital technologies to create special effects. A26Similar processes have, of course, unfolded in manufacturing and other contextswhere artistic concerns may be less evident (other than in the design component as
discussed above).27See Jerzy Wojtowicz, ed., 1995, Virtual Design Studio, Hong Kong University Press,Hong Kong; and Jose Pinto Duarte, Joao Bento, and William J. Mitchell, 1999, The LisbonCharrette: Remote Collaborative Design, ISP Press, Lisbon.28See, for example, William J. Mitchell, 1999, ÒA Tale of Two Cities:  Sydney, Bilbao,and the Digital Revolution in Architecture,Ó Science 285 (August 6): 839-841; or WilliamJ. Mitchell, 2001, ÒRoll Over Euclid:  How Frank Gehry Designs and Builds,
Ó pp. 352-364
in Frank Gehry, Architect, J. Fiona Fagheb, ed., Abrams, New York.29See Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Coun-cil, 1995, Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergenceof Computing, Communications, and Entertainment, National Academy Press, Washington,D.C., p. 33.Architects cannow work withcomplex curvedsurfaces, non-repeatingcompositions,and otherelements thatwould havebeen completelyunmanageablein the days ofhand drafting.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY46Hollywood production literally demands this vast array of talent andskill (witness the length and diversity of the credits on a typical film).
Then, when the project ends, the team dissolves and the individuals
seek new employment elsewhere.30  Movie production can also exist
on a smaller scaleÑfrom the experimental to small-budget indepen-dent films. These smaller-scale efforts are also collaborative in nature,
with profit or revenue as a less important consideration than it is for
mega-Hollywood-scale projects.Movie production has embraced IT. Indeed, over the past twodecades, virtually every facet of movie making has been transformed
by IT. Computer-generated imagery (CGI) is commonplace, from the
dinosaurs in Jurassic Park to the 
ÒleglessÓ lieutenant in 
Forrest Gump30For economic analysis of the evolution of the formerly dominant studio system toone based as described here, see Richard E. Caves, 2000, Creative Industries:  Contracts
Between Art and Commerce, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.FIGURE 2.3  Guggenheim Bilbao.
 Photo courtesy of William J. Mitchell, MassachusettsInstitute of Technology.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CREATIVE PRACTICES47and Gollum in The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers. Jurassic Park
 made
history by showcasing the ability to successfully model, render, ani-
mate, and composite three-dimensional images at film resolution.31Since that film was made, CGI has advanced to the point that, in the
words of Titanic director James Cameron, 
ÒAnything is possible rightnow, if you throw enough money at it, or enough time.Ó32  Digital
technologies also extend to sound recording, sound production, and
picture editing.The smaller studio and independent film markets also have beentransformed by the advent of digital video. The increased scale and
portability of cameras have changed shooting styles and are beginning
to evolve new aesthetic possibilities. Lower costs are expanding access
and the possibilities for experimentation. Thus, niche markets are
developing for lower-budget films and are causing an explosion of
low-budget production. Desktop tools for postproduction in editing
sound as well as animation and special effects are also creating access
for a whole new generation of filmmakers. Ironically, as this lower-
budget end of film making has achieved commercial viability, it also
has tended to compete with the experimental and non-commercial
arena of film making for resources, such as access to venues.Animated work is now being digitized on the scale of feature-length films, as evidenced by the release of Toy Story in the mid-1990s.
What had been confined to special effects or short demonstrations
since the late 1970s has reached a level of maturity able to convince
audiences at the subtlest level of expressionÑcharacter animation,long believed to be beyond the capacity of computer animators. A new
Oscar category has been created for Òbest animated pictureÓÑand thehonorees are just as likely (maybe more likely) to be digital artists as
traditional cartoonists who draw characters by hand. In fact, many
cartoonists are losing their jobs; membership in the screen cartoonists
union has dropped by almost 50 percent in the past 5 years.33  Of
course, computer-system animators and cartoonists alike have seen a
considerable volume of their work become industrialized, given the
division of labor associated with producing a contemporary theatrical
film. This does not necessarily spell the end of individual artistry,
however, although there is the risk that such artistry is migrating to
other realms. Some predict a resilient market for the warmth of tradi-
tional animated characters; there may also be new avenues for indi-
vidual creative practice as the costs of digital workstations fall.34  Ex-
perimentation with short works designed for Web distribution provides31Scott McQuire, 1999, ÒDigital Dialectics:  The Paradox of Cinema in a Studio
Without Walls,Ó Historical Journal of Film, Radio and Television, August, available onlineat <http://www.findarticles.com/cf_0/m2584/3_19/55610007/p1/article.jhtml?term=+>.32Cited in McQuire, 1999, ÒDigital Dialectics.Ó33See Claudia Eller and Richard Verrier, 2002, ÒAnimation Gets Oscar Nod as Indus-try Redefines Itself,Ó Orlando Sentinel, February 12.34See Eller and Verrier, 2002, ÒAnimation Gets Oscar Nod.ÓDesktop tools forpostproduction inediting sound aswell as animationand special effectsare creatingaccess for a wholenew generation offilmmakers.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY48an outlet for creativity in animation, while the definition of Òanima-tionÓ itself is evolving:  Time re-mapping and digital compositing on
existing footage extend the notion of animation into territories within
film, and in some ways, computer-generated imagery has made all of
film into a form of animation.Computer GamesTodayÕs game industry, which produces interactive media forpersonal computers, game consoles (i.e., Playstation 2, Xbox, and
Nintendo Game Cube), and online games, is an increasingly impor-
tant force in youth culture and the economyÑvideo games make moremoney than the Hollywood box office.35  Even more than film, com-
puter games require a close marriage between the practical aspects of
code and art, and between programmers and artists, at every stage of
production. It is not just that different skills are required to produce
the end result. Rather, it is the constant state of communication among
art, technology, and design that has to be maintained from beginning
to end, in order to ship a product.There are three groups of people involved in the production of agame:  designers, programmers, and artists. Designers are responsible

for the structure of the experience and the dynamics of interaction
between players, or between players and the game world. Program-
mers are responsible not only for the code that makes this interaction
possible, but also for the tools that are used to build the worldÑunlikefilm or architecture, most games are built with custom tools because
the technology changes so fast. Artists are responsible for the surface
of the gameÑthe topography and texture of the world, the way char-acters look, the animation that occurs when the player takes any kind
of action. In the course of production, from concept to completion,
these three groups have to work to achieve an almost spousal level of
understanding, because their jobs are so interdependent. Designers
have to work with programmers to shape the toolkit, to ensure that
player interactions will be technically possible. Artists have to talk to
programmers, so that they will have enough polygons (or digital
objects) to do what they want as well as suitable textural and proce-
dural complexity and character development. Designers and artists
must collaborate closely because look and feel are inextricably inter-
twined. All three groups contribute to the development of game Òen-gines,Ó36 which can be reused to develop different games. Game en-
35According to a report by the NPD Group (as reported in Khanh T.L. Tran, 2002,ÒU.S. Videogame Industry Posts Record Sales,Ó Wall Street Journal, February 7, p. B5),sales of video game software were $9.4 billion in the year 2001, while U.S. box-officereceipts totaled an estimated $8.35 billion. Also see Khanh T.L. Tran, 2002, ÒConsolesOutrun Computers,Ó Wall Street Journal, April 19, p. A13.36A game engine supports the basic software elements needed to develop a game,which include rendering, support for sound handling, and other elements and can bereused for other games.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CREATIVE PRACTICES49gines have become sufficiently sophisticated that their development isemerging as a category of problems addressed in computer science
research.37If the game is played online, all of these groups have to work witha fourth technical group, which oversees the network platform that
supports online interaction; this group is responsible for the data-
bases, server arrays, network security, bandwidth allocation, and so
forth. Although multiplayer online games may be constrained by
network architecture and capabilities, they also may inspire new re-
search and development in these areas. Even something as simple as a
player looking through a doorway requires multiple forms of exper-
tise:  Can the player see other people outside?  If so, that information

has to be streamed onto the playerÕs computerÑand if there is a crowdoutside, performance may suffer. Perhaps there is a way to limit the
field of vision (a conversation between programming and design) or
compress the graphics files (compromises among art, design, and
engineering). Can the other people see the player? (This involves the
same issues and more database work.)  Instead of segregating tasks,

development teams conventionally tackle cross-disciplinary problems
by assigning Òstrike teams,Ó composed of an artist, a programmer, and
a designer, to specific problems:  artificial intelligence, in-game re-

sources, and so on. High-level, cross-disciplinary collaboration is a
daily fact of life. See Figure 2.4.This level of collaboration exists in part because game technologyis a moving target. The medium is evolving so rapidly that many
games solve problems that did not even exist a year before, because
the tools were not there to solve them. The creation of custom tools to
take advantage of leading-edge capabilities means that such teams are
working on the edge of what is technically possible, to make a great
experience for the player (unlike film, which leverages standardized
technologies to a larger degree). Game companies do not have re-
search and development (R&D) departments because every product is
a collection of (applied) R&D that eventually has to work, one way or
another. In the words of one lead designer, ÒEvery game is a moonshot.Ó38A concept from this industry that may be applicable to other ITCPactivities is the leveraging of user talent (not unlike the audience
participation in Terminal Time and Bar Code Hotel). The computer
game industry is an example of cultural production as a technology37Game-engine development has been the focus of doctoral dissertation work at theNaval Postgraduate SchoolÕs MOVES Institute, for example (personal communication,Michael Zyda, Naval Postgraduate School, March 2002).38Of course, it is worth noting that not every game pushes the technology envelope.Some games, for example, exploit new ideas about social and storytelling approaches
that may or may not involve challenging technological problems to solve. And othergames may be mostly derivative in nature, using only well-established technology andtechniques.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY50¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥and market driver, where software engines and authoring tools areregularly made available to end-consumers who use them to redesign
or extend the core product, often in directions unanticipated by the
publisher. Even something as seemingly reductive as Quake, a first-
person shooter, has been reconfigured as a low-tech animation en-
gineÑplayers use the gameÕs editing tools to build environments andcharacters, which are then manipulated as virtual actors. This is not a
market the publisher would have envisioned, much less approached.
On the technical side as well, player innovations have driven the
artificial intelligence component of the game forward, resulting in
smarter code that drives not only sales of the end-product but also
commercial licensing of the underlying technology to third-party pub-
lishers. Essentially, the flexibility of QuakeÕs tool set has transformedthousands of players into a self-organizing market research and R&D
force driven by its own creative imperatives and social incentives.FIGURE 2.4  Development teams for computer games. Illustration created by Jennifer M.
Bishop, Computer Science and Telecommunications Board staff.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CREATIVE PRACTICES51CULTURAL CHALLENGES IN CROSS-
DISCIPLINARY COLLABORATIONS
Would-be collaborators from different disciplines can encounter anumber of obstacles, including difficulties in accessing appropriate
funding sources, differences in vocabulary, the absence of frameworks
for evaluating non-traditional work, and the long time periods re-
quired for projects to gel.39  Further, it may seem intuitive that the
greater the differences between the disciplines involved, the higher
these barriers become; one could argue that IT and the creative arts
register a high score on this scale. Yet, some claim it is easier to get
artists and engineers to work together as a team than it is to get
individuals from either group to work with their own colleagues in
the same field. That observation has been applied to both computer
science and various arts and design fields. Sometimes competition in
the same (or a similar) area of expertise is more difficult to deal with
than combining different skill sets to attain a common goal.When adequate resources are available, as is sometimes the case inthe corporate world, people can be formally taught skills that are
conducive to collaboration. The committee made a site visit to Pixar
Animation Studios,40 a successful company that offers a number of
creativity-enhancing activities. Corporate universities, per se, are not
new; for example, the Disney Studio offered art classes in its heydey of
the 1930s and 1940s.41  But there is something unusual about Pixar
University, a part of the company that has its own ÒdeanÓ and offers
courses in every aspect of filmmaking for Pixar employees (the classes
include both technical and artistic ÒstudentsÓ). The curriculum in-cludes many forms of studio art (e.g., sculpture, painting, drawing),
improvisation, storytelling, and even juggling. Pixar co-founder and
president Ed Catmull says a course in improvisation is the closest
thing there is to a class in how to collaborate. Perhaps the strongest
statement that can be made about these offerings is that they send a
signal, coupled with enabling resources and management support,
that creativity matters, is encouraged, and may be rewarded, and that
it can involve moving beyond oneÕs starting skill set, whether on anindividual basis or in combining people with different starting skill
sets into teams. In addition, Pixar University contributes to the
companyÕs human resources policy by promoting employee retention.Unlike other major studios, Pixar tends to keep its teams together39See National Research Council, 2000, Strengthening the Linkages Between the Sciencesand the Mathematical Sciences, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.40See Appendix B for a listing of Pixar participants.41See Frank Thomas and Ollie Johnston, 1981, The Illusion of Life: Disney Animation,Abbeville Press, New York.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY52between projects, rather than laying them off. There are downsides, ofcourse, to any strong internal culture, even one designed to promote
collaboration and creativity. A self-contained organization without
links to external perspectives may encourage homogenous values and
an insular view of the world, discouraging the criticism or controversy
that often is useful in ITCP work.42Even if specialized training is not an option, general awareness ofkey issues that arise in collaborations may help projects to succeed.
The overall challenge in collaboration is to transcend traditional role
boundaries to exploit different perspectives and skills and create new
ideas and products that are somehow greater than the sum of their
parts. Doing so may involve assessing the multiple dimensions of each
relevant disciplineÑwhich affects its interfaces to othersÑand theongoing processes of change affecting each discipline. Specific ob-
stacles to be overcome at the intersection of IT and creative practices
are discussed in the following subsections.OVERCOMING PRECONCEIVED NOTIONSABOUT COMPUTER SCIENTISTS ANDARTISTS AND DESIGNERSPerceptions about artists and designers and computer scientistscan often be formed through popular or anecdotal accounts, rather
than through actual encounters. Such perceptions can inhibit mutual
respect in collaborations, at least at the outset. The challenge of over-
coming such stereotypes permeated the personal accounts of those
who briefed the committee and of committee members themselves.43Although there are exceptions to and disagreements about stereo-
types, some generalizations are useful here for bringing an important
issue to light, even at the risk of oversimplification.Some scientists and engineers exhibit a sense of superiority, if notoutright hostility, toward those in the arts and design. Or, put another
way, ÒArtists see science; they donÕt understand it; they think it isbrilliant. Scientists see art; they donÕt understand it; they think it isdumb.Ó44  Part of the problem may be the connotations of 
ÒcreativityÓin some contexts. Creativity is often cloaked in an aura of mystery,
which suggests that the work results from spontaneous creative in-
sight without rigorous or repeatable methodology, from epiphanies42However, companies that wish to keep their work confidential until public releasedo have reasons for constraining external communication, or at the least, not encourag-ing it fully.43Of course, such perceptions do not exist in every collaboration. However, testi-mony to the committee, a review of published literature, and the experiences of most ofthe committee suggest that the lack of such perceptions is indeed the exception.44Based on discussions at the committeeÕs meeting at Stanford University, January2001. A reviewer of this report observed that Òsentiments here attributed to scientists areseldom encountered among European scientists, probably because U.S. scientists areoften unfamiliar with cultural practices.ÓBeyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CREATIVE PRACTICES53when alone rather than as a result of sustained discussion with peers;it downplays the analysis, struggle, debate, or committed engagement
with pressing social or technical problems. It is very difficult to com-
pare forms of creativity, or sometimes even to recognize them. Some
scientists and engineers can also view the arts or other cultural per-
spectives as luxuries, things that might be supported or pursued as
time and resources permit.Such attitudes may be traceable in part to disparities in fundingand, accordingly, some notion of status.45 The Xerox Palo Alto Re-
search Center (PARC) Artist-in-Residence (PAIR) program, for ex-
ample, received a certain amount of attention for its attempts to inte-
grate artists with computer scientists and others.
46 Although this
program may well have helped Xerox PARC to sustain its creativity,
constraints on social integrationÑaccentuated by pay differencesÑmay have limited the creative output.47 Although people can (and,
given discussions within the committee, clearly do) interpret compen-
sation disparities in different ways, national employment statistics
show significant differences among workers in the arts and those in
technical fields such as computer science; different occupations, even
among technical fields, have different earning power, for a variety of
reasons that derive from the structure of the economy (and profes-
sional conduct).48 The marked contrast between compensation levels
for computer scientists and for artists, other things being equal, is
significant for the intersection between IT and the arts inasmuch as it
affects collaboration and education. Across organizations, and even
departments in a university, compensation levels affect patterns of
time use, expectations for research and for infrastructure, and so on.Similarly, the arts establishment sometimes regards technologysuspiciously, as if it lacks a worthy lineage or is too practical to be
creative. This attitude was evident in early committee discussions,
coming out most strongly in contrasting perspectives on the potential
for creative practices within industry. Because of their experience in45As Michael Mateas, creator of Terminal Time, told the committee:  ÒPower is a bigissue . . . . Certainly in our society thereÕs a power asymmetry between technocratsÑscientists and technologistsÑand artists. Technocrats are . . . in the driverÕs seat rightnow in our society.Ó46The context is a research laboratory that had already blended a variety of scientistsand engineers and a small group of social scientists.47As characterized to the committee at its January 2001 meeting at Stanford Univer-sity, the PAIR program when it was launched included ÒcreativeÓ people from the arts
with a lot of experience who were paid less than some technical student interns, andwho disparaged the scientists as suburban bourgeoisie.48According to economist Richard Caves, creative professionals earn less, on aver-age, than their human capital might suggest, in part because their commitment toproducing creative output may lead to different activity and output than would asimpler commitment to satisfying consumers. See Richard E. Caves, 2000, CreativeIndustries: Contracts Between Art and Commerce, Harvard University Press, Cambridge,Mass.; and James Heilbrun and Charles M. Gray, 2001, The Economics of Art and Culture,Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY54deriving research inspiration from practical problems, the technolo-gists found it easier to see creative potential in industry than did the
artists, who found more cause for concern about motivations or con-
straints based on commercial imperatives.49  Skepticism about tech-
nology was also evident in the early days of ÒNet artÓ (art using the
Internet), which took off in 1994 when the Mosaic browser was first
distributed and people realized that the Web was a fertile canvas for
art making. Net art was ignored as unimportant at first by art institu-
tions, museums, galleries, art magazines, and funders. (Now that it
has gained credibility, some suggest that Internet art may in fact be the
medium that best reflects the transformations of the information revo-
lution, the same role that photography and film played in the indus-
trial revolution.50)  This type of cultural bias can undermine respect
and communication, unless the participants are aware of their differ-
ences and are willing to modify their behavior appropriately. Al-
though the committee context forced the process of articulating and
overcoming such differences among its members, accommodation was
neither rapid nor easy, an insight that is important for planning for
other contexts.One concern arising from some quarters of the arts world is that acelebration of the potential of ITCP not become a dirge for more
traditional forms of art.51  One is not a substitute for the other; both
should be viewed as complements. Nor should ITCP be viewed as
privileging popular forms, such as design, over the fine arts. Although
the direct pop culture, because it is so pervasive and so easy to learn
and transmit through media, has pushed developed art to the mar-
gins, both ends of the spectrum need each otherÑthe direct end torevitalize points of view and connect with basic feelings, the other to
reveal much more about an idea (and about ideas) than was first
supposed.The challenge of maintaining respect across disparate fields is anextension of the frequent differences in attitude encountered within a
field between researchers in the more theoretical and the more applied
areas. More generally, every social context has a prestige and status
hierarchy, standards of excellence, standards of language, and modes
of expression. It is too late to establish social contexts for ITCP de novo
so that everyone is socialized ab initio into shared norms, goals, and
expectations. Hence it is important to foster social contexts that recog-
nize explicitly that people come from different cultures and explicitly
work to bridge those differences. Establishing strong common goals
and simultaneously ensuring individual work satisfactionÑthe sup-port of individual goals within the groupÑis one strategy for cross-49This perspective is likely to be more common among studio artists than, forexample, commercial artists who work in advertising or industrial designers.50Based on a presentation by Mark Tribe to the committee in November 2000 in NewYork City.51This theme emerged in the review process for this report, for example.Cultural bias canunderminerespect andcommunication;overcoming suchdifferences wasneither rapid noreasy, an insightthat is importantfor planning forother contexts.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CREATIVE PRACTICES55disciplinary communication. Creating an atmosphere of equal valueamong members is another tactic. Dissension flourishes in an atmo-
sphere of inequity; the collaborative process requires an atmosphere
that allows for relaxed exchange.Perceptions of teamwork in the arts have, in the past, centered oneither identical roles (i.e., people working together as equals) or clearly
unequal ones (e.g., one person is Òin controlÓ and the other is the
technician or helper). These models are changing in the wake of new
practices such as those used by the Critical Art Ensemble, discussed
above. Differentiations between ÒtechniciansÓ and 
ÒprofessionalsÓshape computer scientistsÕ views of collaborations, too, especially in across-disciplinary context. Because people play different roles in teams,
assigning credit can be difficult. A major impediment to cross-disci-
plinary collaborations is the traditional academic focus on isolated
disciplines, the organizing principle for departments, journals, and the
reward system for teachers and researchers.52  New technological art
forms require new ways of organizing, which can take decades to
stabilize, as was true for cinema and perhaps for emergent forms such
as virtual environments.53MINIMIZING COMMUNICATIONS CLASHESAlthough the arts and sciences are not completely separatespheresÑindeed, some see them as intricately relatedÑthey do speakdifferent languages. During the writing of the present report, for ex-
ample, committee members and staff with IT backgrounds had diffi-
culty understanding the nonlinear concepts and writing style of those
with art and critical studies backgrounds. Similarly, a Stanford Uni-
versity computer science professor reported difficulty in collaborating
with art historians because they were unfamiliar with data and mod-
els.54  Simply recognizing the barriers posed by jargon, terms of art,
and localized practices goes a long way toward bridging such gaps.
The Textile Museum in Washington, D.C., for example, took a straight-
forward approach in demystifying its exhibition of textile art made
with digital printing and/or digital weaving techniques, which Òallowthe artists to investigate traditional textile concepts with a new flexibil-
ity and range of creativity.Ó55  Because casual visitors might have haddifficulty understanding either the art pieces or the advantages of-
fered by technology, the museum provided a glossary of textile terms
such as ÒwarpÓ and Òweft.Ó5652See Chapter 6 for a detailed discussion.53See Brenda Laurel, Rachel Strickland, and Rob Tow, 1994, ÒPlaceholder:  Land-
scape and Narrative in a Virtual Environment,Ó ACM Computer Graphics Quarterly28(2):118-127.54Personal communication from Marc Levoy, Stanford University, March 29, 2000.55See ÒTechnology as Catalyst:  Textile Artists on the Cutting Edge,
Ó 2002, Textile
Museum, Washington, D.C.56See ÒAn Introduction to Textile Terms,Ó 1997, Textile Museum, Washington, D.C.New technologicalart forms requirenew ways oforganizing, whichcan take decadesto stabilize, aswas true forcinema andperhaps foremergent formssuch as virtualenvironments.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY56¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥CommunicationÑnot only the words but also the styleÑis animportant issue for collaborators. Education and training shape expec-
tations for communication; they can also factor into receptivity to the
vocabulary and styles of others. In a productive architectural process,
roles are flexible and the many actors can cross professional bound-
aries and interact in ways that enable creative things to happen. If an
architect knows something about structural engineering, and a struc-
tural engineer knows something about architecture, they can perform
their specialized roles at a sophisticated level of discourse. For in-
stance, the architect can tell the engineer that a column is oversized
and know, without being told, that it could be cut in half. They know
enough about each otherÕs jobs to communicate across role bound-aries. Thus, mechanisms such as crossover books (books that are in-
tended for non-specialist audiences) can be useful; such books boil
down the essence of an area for the intelligent and interested novice.
However, these adaptations must not be so diluted that real insights
are obscured by superficialities.It is no secret that scientists and artists have widely differingcommunity standards with regard to language and modes of expres-
sion and the types of questions to explore. As noted by Michael Mateas,
for example, the scientist seeks abstract and objective knowledge,
whereas the artist seeks an immediate perceptual experience for the
audience.57  Accordingly, it can be difficult for them to reach consen-
sus on common problems and topics and to establish common under-
standings.58  Yet there are also rapid changes redefining practice thatare blurring previously rigid boundaries, as collaborators find ways to
accommodate their differences. As noted by a reviewer of this report,
successful collaborations involve mutual respect and friendship:  Each

knows enough about the otherÕs field for meaningful conversation totake place, but respects the otherÕs expertise enough to leave special-ized decisions to that collaborator. Shared goals, group dynamics, and
psychological maturity are more important than complete coverage of
required expertise.57Although scientists and artists may have different motivations, and public appre-ciation may play a relatively greater role in artistsÕ visibility and income, in both cases
professional advancement depends heavily on the judgment of peers.58See Denise Caruso, 2001, ÒLead, Follow, Get Out of the Way:  Sidestepping the
Barriers to Effective Practice of Interdisciplinarity,Ó white paper, Hybrid Vigor, see
<http://www.hybridvigor.org>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CREATIVE PRACTICES57RESOURCES THAT SUPPORT
CREATIVE PRACTICES
SKILLS TRAININGWork in ITCP not only demands new capabilities from many of itspractitioners, but also offers novel avenues for learning these skills.
That is to say, IT can be exploited both to help technologists and artists
learn skills and methods and gain access to tools, and to motivate and
educate others, including young people, who might one day become
active in the field. This last point is important, because children natu-
rally possess both the experimentalism and the fascination with com-
puters that drive success in this field. Online vehicles are already
supporting distance education, including instruction in new method-
ologies in general and the use of specific tools. Organizations that
produce tools are increasingly turning to the Web as the medium of
choice for providing educational material, supporting user-directed
learning.There seem to be more resources offering IT skills training andtools than offering arts education, paralleling what some see as an
asymmetry in the motivation of artists and technologists to ÒcrossoverÓ into the other domain. There is a belief that, in general, artists
can learn IT faster than technologists can learn art, in part because
artists are more motivated to use IT as a way to do exciting and
distinguished work (e.g., in computer animation). Technologists gen-
erally have little general education in art and tend to see the beauty of
finding and solving problems in programming and mathematics as
their art; in addition, they are paid well in their chosen profession and
have less motivation to learn art or design.59An important resource in the mid- to late-1990s was Open Studio:The Arts Online,60 a national initiative of the Benton Foundation and
the National Endowment for the Arts that provided Internet access
and training to artists and non-profit arts organizations. According to
promotional materials, Open Studio empowered the arts community
to Ògive the Internet a soul,Ó helping artists and arts organizations
gain powerful new opportunities to network, strengthen ties to com-
munities, and build new audiences, while ensuring that the online
world is a source of creative excellence and diversity.Technology plays a role in education at Eyebeam Atelier, wherethe goal is to expose broad and diverse audiences to new technologies
and the media arts while simultaneously establishing and articulating59Based on a personal communication from Bill Alschuler, School of Critical Studies,California Institute of the Arts, 2002.60See <http://www.openstudio.org>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY58new media as a significant medium of artistic expression.61 Eyebeam
accomplishes this objective through three core outlets: education, ex-
hibition, and an artist-in-residence program. The education programs
focus on exposing youths, families, and the general public to new-
media art using the atelier method, in which an emphasis is placed on
studio-based education augmented by technology, and through one-
on-one instruction and mentoring. The new artist-in-residence pro-
gram connects artists with Òtechnology partners,Ó primarily for-profitfirms, that provide the technology needed by the artist. The partners
share a common goal of exploring the technologyÕs potential in theprocess of making art.62Relevant online resources are not focused exclusively on the tech-nology side of the ITCP equation. Practitioners can learn elements of
artistry as well. For example, mH2O provides the software and samples
(short loops of beats, instruments, and vocals) for anyone to create and
record music. It also offers a variety of resources including digitized
classes with master musicians. For example, users can select from five
lessons (on topics such as the ÒDoodle SystemÓ and the 
ÒOoo BahSystemÓ) with Clark Terry, a master of the trumpet and flugelhorn,who teaches form, phrasing, articulation, riffing, and other elements
of the blues to a group of students at a high school in Connecticut, a
project organized by the Greater Hartford Academy of the Arts.Advances in IT can enable new modes of learning. For example,Maestro Pinchas Zukerman held a videoconference chamber music
demonstration and discussion using Internet2 networks and peer net-
works, CANARIE, and NYSERNet. Zukerman led the class from Ot-
tawa to a talented young string trio in New York. Audience members
at Columbia University as well as observers on the Internet could
watch the session in real time. A question-and-answer session was
held for both in-person and Internet observers.63WORK SPACESAppropriate work spaces are an essential ingredient in creativeproduction.64  People need a comfortable setting offering access to
their tools and collaborators. Most discussions of IT work spaces as-
sume the conventional form factor of computing:  a screen, a key-

board, and a mouse. Add in all of the normal peripherals of scanner,61See <http://www.eyebeam.org/about/profile.html>.62See <http://www.eyebeam.org/artists/index.html>.63See <http://www.columbia.edu/acis/networks/advanced/zukermaninteractive>.Also see Cultivating Communities: Dance in the Digital Age, Internet 2, University ofSouthern California, October 29, 2002, <http://apps.internet2.edu>.64ÒIt is easier to enhance creativity by changing conditions in the environment thanby trying to make people think more creatively.Ó  See Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, 1996,
Creativity:  Flow and the Psychology of Discovery and Invention, Harper Collins, New York,p. 1.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CREATIVE PRACTICES59printer, telephone, and so on, and the space suddenly needs a deskand a chair. Then information has to be stored in folders, files, draw-
ers, and shelves. Suddenly the work space is an office. Is the artist/
designer studio of the future really a conventional office?Contemporary work spaces are in flux. During this time of change(or evolution), ITCP practitioners might be best served by flexible and
open designs that allow for new configurations to alter the flow of
work and communication. Wired spaces (in which there are distrib-
uted communication systems for Internet or broadband access) and
wireless spaces (areas set up for pervasive access to wireless commu-
nications for access to the Internet and to people or devices within the
area) are a new part of this landscape. The re-thinking of design for
knowledge sharing, through both physical proximity and electronic
communication, is an important part of creating new work processes
and has to evolve hand in hand with space planning. How can these
processes be facilitated in ways that allow for the flexibility and cross-
pollination that are desirable in facilities for research and creative
production?  How can environmental adaptability, and signaling that

colleagues are available, be achieved without the suggestion of a sur-
veillance culture?  Does electronic networking really reduce 
ÒonepersonÐone computerÓ isolation?  How is it possible to create spatial
configurations that reduce isolation and foster or enhance discussion?In the future, devices will get tinier and interfaces will becomemore complex. The world will have more buttons to push, more
gadgets to carry, and/or more systems embedded in the environment
(physical or natural) that provide services without direct human inter-
action. Or perhaps there will be systems for direct input to or output
from human brains, possibly through implanted devices. Simply imag-
ining something with visual or physical form could spark an entire
sequence of events to occur in the physical world. The boundaries of
the real and the imaginary could become obscured. There might be no
need for a physical workplace, at least for utilitarian reasonsÑal-though there may be essential social needs that are unfulfilled in a
virtual workplace. One might just imagine a workplace, and it would
appear just as imagined. Early indicators of such phenomena can be
found in experiments with virtual worlds, although virtual- and aug-
mented-reality technologies engage a broader range of senses for in-
puts and outputs than those accessible to ordinary office or home
computing systems.65The desktop will most likely have to change to enable a moresophisticated dialogue with digital media. A variety of technologies
offering three-dimensional graphics, voice and touch input and out-
put, rapid macro-fabrication capabilities, and terabytes of storage all
point to a potential diversification of tasks involving IT and an in-65See Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Coun-cil, 1997, More Than Screen Deep:  Toward Every-Citizen Interfaces to the Nation
Õs InformationInfrastructure, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY6066See Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Coun-cil, 2002, Broadband: Bringing Home the Bits, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.crease in activities that seem to be more versatile and challenging. Inthe end, environments have to be engaging on many levels for users to
have the necessary impetus to respond with impassioned contentÑtobe creative.Virtual spaces can be architectures for collaborations that allowmultiple users to talk and share work and work space across geo-
graphical territories. These capabilities are changing the nature of
collaborative work as well as the markets and audiences for it. The
ability to access and work with a niche group that is broadly distrib-
uted geographically allows for new kinds of practice to evolve. Skills
that were previously determined locally no longer need be, and audi-
ences that once had to be concentrated at a local level to make the
activity economically viable can now be spread over a wide geo-
graphical area. These practices and methods of communication are
beginning to generate new tools and work methods as well as new
territories of content. Academic institutions and research facilities can
become leaders in this area, empowering people to experiment in a
non-prescriptive way.As one example, the entire economy of music production has beentransformed by digital technologies. Large commercial studios and
studio musicians are vanishing as the home studio becomes the stan-
dard for production in both the commercial and non-commercial
spheres. These studios can now access a level of technology previously
unavailable to the individual and will certainly produce new forms of
sound design. But technology and social infrastructures have to be
developed carefully to avoid jeopardizing social interactions, in which
people learn how to play with each other in groups. Access to tools
and to other musicians through electronic networks has tremendous
potential. It is possible to think of situations, in academic and research
institutions as well as in commercial and non-profit production facili-
ties, in which musicians and composers can collaborate both physi-
cally and electronically, or virtually, with enhanced potential for dis-
cussion and research. A convention of distributed performance has
developedÑa concert with some players at one site and some atanother, or people waving across videoconferencing systems. But the
increasing diffusion of broadband technologies66 has begun to suggest
a more complex and sophisticated set of possibilities for multisite
performance, including collaborative production and development
and new methods of distribution.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.61ˆow can computer scientists support new artistic and de-sign practices? How is computer science (CS) research
and development being stimulated and altered by emerg-
ing practices at the intersection of information technology(IT) and the arts and design? What are the prospects for new research
directions that are interesting and useful for both computer science
and the arts and design? Answering these questions requires a close
look at the relationship between IT and the arts and design. That
examination begins with this chapter, which focuses on the design,
applications, and implications of the tools of IT from the perspective of
the arts and design worlds, and it continues in Chapter 4.STRANGE BEDFELLOWS?One of the more obvious ways in which IT and the arts and designinteract is in the use of technology to extend the expressive range of
and modes of access to existing genres of the arts and design: Ex-
amples include Web-based art and hypertext, opera staging using new
sensing and video technologies, musical compositions that feature
both newly created instruments and interaction styles, and textile
design and production based on digital weaving techniques. Given
experimentation to date, it is clear that new tools developed by com-
puter scientists can be immediately applied by artists and other cre-
ative practitioners within a wide array of contexts.But there are further important implications of information tech-nology and creative practices (ITCP) for computer science research
and development. Box 3.1 provides context on the nature of that
research for those who may be unfamiliar with it. Rather than using
computational technology as black boxes for arts and design applica-¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY62BOX 3.1Computing, Computer Science, and ResearchComputing is rooted in the discipline of computer science,1 which studies information and computa-
tional processesÑincluding the representation, implementation, manipulation, and communication of
information.2 There are relatively few inherent natural limitations in computer science, as compared with
other science and engineering fields such as physics, chemistry, and mechanical engineering. This means that
the definitionsÑand, by extension, the capabilitiesÑof computing and IT often do not have an obvious finite
upper bound for expansion. There are, however, practical constraints on the available capabilities of
computer hardware and software. In addition, the growing reach and complexity of computers and
networks (such as the Internet) have heightened the risk and impact of system failures and created
formidable challenges in areas such as security and the management of intellectual property. Efforts to
improve computing capabilities are central to IT research. The key intellectual themes in computer science
and engineering are algorithmic thinking (i.e., about rules for processing information), representation of
information, and computer programs.3 Some IT research lays out principles or constraints that apply to all
computing and communications systems; other studies focus on specific IT systems, such as user interfaces.1The history of computing (which involves other fields such as electrical engineering) has been widely documented;see, for example, Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, 1999, Funding aRevolution: Government Support for Computing Research, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.; and the publictelevision documentary Triumph of the Nerds, transcript available at <http://www.pbs.org/nerds>.2These aspects of computer science will be discussed in the forthcoming report of the Committee on theFundamentals of Computer ScienceÑChallenges and Opportunities, Computer Science and Telecommunications
Board, National Research Council.3See Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, 1992, Computing the Future: ABroader Agenda for Computer Science and Engineering, Juris Hartmanis and Herbert Lin, eds., National Academy Press,Washington, D.C.tions, some are engaging in IT research as a form of art and designpractice itself. This activity is less like historical arts research and more
like computer science research, although it asks radically different
kinds of questions and introduces a variety of methodologies gener-
ally unfamiliar to computer scientists. In certain areas of research,
particularly human-computer interaction and artificial intelligence,
there may be a convergence developing between new trends within
CS research and the work of ÒoutsidersÓ who bring in fresh perspec-
tives. Unlike the use of computers for particular applications, this
intersection of art and design and IT research leads to some deep and
fundamental rethinking of CS research and what it is about in the first
place. The intended outcomes go beyond making new tools for art and
design practice, though that may be one outcome, to arrive at a funda-
mentally new way to do researchÑa true hybrid.Both of these perspectives on interaction are important for thefuture of ITCP. In practice, they are intermingled. On the one hand,
developing tools for new kinds of practices can lead to fundamental
insights into the tool-development process. On the other, artists and
designers who get their hands dirty in fundamental CS research areBeyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ADVANCING CREATIVE PRACTICES THROUGH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY63able to build new tools and applications that can be useful for the artsand other creative domains.The implications of this new medium for artistic and design prac-tice run deeper than simple application. In previous communications
revolutions, a new medium that was widely adopted not only added
new possibilities for artistic and design expression, but also changed
the way older media were used.1 Communication media influence the
relationship between sense and bodily skill, and they alter the way in
which artists and designers reason or feel about time and space.If one were to think of such a shift as a radical break, in which adeveloping medium brings an entirely new art form into existence
with little relationship to historical precursors, the naŁve response forcomputer science researchers would be simply to generate as many
new-media forms as possible as a way of advancing the opportunities
for art and design practice. One technically oriented current in the
contemporary avant-garde has indeed sought to push technology for-
ward, in order to discover new expressive possibilities and genres that
can be conceived only with the help of advanced technologies. Tech-
nological advances exert a strong pull, challenging artists and design-
ers to conceive new expressive forms that can take full advantage of
ever-increasing processing speeds and bandwidth rates. Both this push
on and pull of new technologies focus on the new possibilities created
by those technologies, rather than on the needs and perspectives of art
and design practices using ÒoldÓ (and by implication out-of-date)
media.It is a mistake to overemphasize the entirely new digital worldsthat are uniquely possible using computers, as though the adaptation
of already existing content or art forms to the new medium were only
a lesser, transitional stage on the way toward the more significant
discovery of purportedly new, essentially digital art forms.2 What
tends to be overlooked, both by the modernist artistÕs and designerÕstechnology push and the information technologistÕs pull for advancedcontent, are the subtle and by no means trivial processes of change
occurring in the traditional art and design forms as they adjust to and
begin to find their own responses to information technologies. See Box
3.2 for an overview of how technology has influenced music while
traditional activities have persisted.Precisely because these developments are less visible, whetherjudged by criteria of radical artistic and design novelty or technical1The rise of broadband continues that phenomenon. For example, one recent studyfound that, because of Internet use, 37 percent of broadband users watched less televi-sion, 31 percent spent less time shopping, and 18 percent spent less time readingnewspapers; nearly 90 percent said that the Internet had improved their ability to learn.
See <http://www.pewinternet.org/reports/toc.asp?Report=63>.2See J.D. Bolter and R. Grusin, 1999, Remediation, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., pp.48-50. Note that this situation may differentiate the arts from various practical activities
(e.g., office and factory work), where early mechanization was, indeed, a step towardbroad reconceptualization of different activities. Tradition and continuity are recog-nized across the arts.The naŁveresponsefor computerscienceresearcherswould be togenerate as manynew-media formsas possible for artand designpractice.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY64BOX 3.2Technology, Music, and the Evolution of ExpectationsConsider the history of music. Early music was not writtenÑthere was only the performance. Theevolution of the musical score, a standardized interface between the composer and the performer, made
it possible for the composer to achieve wider visibility by having his music performed numerous times by
different groups. One tradeoff for this wider distribution was limited scopeÑonly music that correspondedto this standard score could be written down (excluding all but Western music). Another was that the
performance was still transient. It is said that Bach and Mozart were wonderful performers, but records are
preserved mainly in listenersÕ accounts, and in the occasional attempts by both masters to notate transcripts
of their more spontaneous fantasy.With the advent of recording, the performance itself could be captured. And the relationship betweenthe composer and performer shifted. More improvisational styles such as jazz, blues, and rock can now be
captured as a performance, not as a score, and the performer of current popular music is expected to
perform his own music, not ÒcoverÓ the music of others. We are back to the era of Bach or Mozart, but
with global scaleÑthe benefits of wider distribution now extend to other forms of music that cannot bewritten down. In turn, recording technology also enabled a new form of musicÑmusic that was created inwhole or in part with synthesized, recorded, electronic signals, defying both transcription and performance.
Thus, the introduction of recording raised new questions about music as a creative process and the definition
of a live performance. There is something incongruous about attempting to trigger all the pleasure and
excitement of a live gathering of an audience to look at a computer and a bunch of speakers up on stage.
To some extent, of course, this is because we know that there will be no spontaneity in the performanceÑthat creativity has already happened. This is what recording did to the creative aspect of music.The computer is now doing much more. First, the computer can now be the performer. Digitaltechnology allows composers to craft their own instruments and to create a performance using only the
computer. Computer-driven pianos now replay a performance with many of the nuances of the original
pianistÕs keystrokes. Interactive computer programs can participate in the performance, producing andmanipulating sounds in response to a performerÕs actions. Digital technology, through interactivity, helpedbring spontaneity back into the performance of electronic music. What seems to be evolving is a
remodularization of the creative process, the resolution of which is a creative act in its own right, and one
that cannot escape the feedback and interaction with the listener. The role of the listener, the audience,
illustrates how advances are gated by a social process.Secondly, the computer can capture a performance and make it permanent. What the recordingindustry did for music, the computer can in principle do for a more dynamic and multimedia creation.
Consider also the emergence of the disc jockey who does a live remix of pre-existing music (including
electronic music): This seems to be a reassertion of the persistent value of the spontaneous process of
performance, involving real-time feedback between the performer and the audience. Here, again, questions
arise about how to view the ÒdilemmaÓ of the computer as a part of the creative process.progress, they receive less attention than more obviously glamorousshowcases do. But these subtle developments are no less important for
the long-term ecology of digital culture, suggesting limitations of, and
different possibilities for, the development of technology as a me-
dium.For example, tacit knowledgeÑunformalized and probablyunformalizable knowledge such as design methodologies or embod-
ied skills such as drawing or dancingÑhas always played an impor-Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ADVANCING CREATIVE PRACTICES THROUGH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY65tant role in the arts. Yet IT has by its nature had severe difficultycodifying the most subtle and refined of such artistic practices. The
ineffable human feel can be simulated acceptably through clever tricks,
but the danger all too often is that consumers of technology, including
artists and designers, will accommodate themselves to the reduced
expressive bandwidth afforded in easy-to-use interfaces, as discussed
below.3 The emerging research paradigm for embodied interaction inhuman-computer interaction (HCI) is one opportunity for a different
style of interface perhaps more compatible with highly skilled art
practice.4TOOLS NEEDED TO SUPPORT
CREATIVE WORK:

HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE
Computer and communications hardware and software are thetools of ITCP and the means by which almost all digital media are
created and manipulated. These tools can do many things,5 each and
all of which may be embraced in ITCP. A simple list of gross capabili-
ties would include:¥Automation of processes such as drawing, composing, editing,and so on (assorted software);¥Handling, representing, and displaying or performing infor-mation (databases, browsers, displays and speakers, printers, projec-
tion systems, and so on);¥Analysis of information and phenomena (visualization andsonification, modeling and simulation, artificial intelligence and learn-
ing systems);¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥3For sociological analysis of creative effects of the commoditization of musicalinstruments in digital forms, see P. Th”berge, 1997, Any Sound You Can Imagine: MakingMusic/Consuming Technology, University Press of New England, Hanover, New Hamp-shire.4Embodied interaction has been a theme in digital arts at least since Myron KreugerÕsVideoPlace of the early 1970s. See P. Dourish, 2001, Where the Action Is: The Foundations ofEmbodied Interaction, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.; and P. Dourish, 1999, ÒEmbodiedInteraction: Exploring the Foundations of a New Approach to HCIÓ (see <http://
www.ics.uci.edu/~jpd/publications>). An example of a new body-centered interface
for art is described in Steven Schkolne, Michael Pruett, and Peter Schrıder, 2001,ÒSurface Drawing: Creating Organic 3D Shapes with the Hand and Tangible Tools,Ó pp.
261-268 in Proceedings of CHI 2001, ACM Press, New York.5Broad interpretations include not only components and artifacts but also theirtheoretical underpinnings and digital content. The Computing Research Repository, forexample, lists 34 subject areas; see <http://xxx.lanl.gov/new/cs.html>. The Comput-
ing Research Repository is an online archive of computer science research results thatuses the Internet to allow access to technical reports, conference papers, and other workon a near-real-time basis.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY66¥Connection to the physical world (sensors, microphones, digi-tal cameras, actuators, robots, human interfaces, systems for

interactivity); and¥Communications (telephony, television, the Internet, and as-sorted underlying capabilities, from wireless to broadband connectiv-
ity).Ultimately, IT acts on information typically associated with productsof the human mind (pictures, music, and ideas), although IT must also
address data and information in less processed, intermediate states.66This concept is derived from Computer Science and Telecommunications Board,National Research Council, 1992, Computing the Future: A Broader Agenda for ComputerScience and Engineering, Juris Hartmanis and Herbert Lin, eds., National Academy Press,Washington, D.C.BOX 3.3One Set of ITCP TechnologiesOne perspective on technologies relevant to ITCP work is provided by Carnegie Mellon UniversityÕsEntertainment Technology Center (ETC), which offers a masterÕs degree jointly conferred by the Collegeof Fine Arts and the School of Computer Science. Entertainment technology Òrequires a fluid definition,necessitated in large part by advances in technology that are making possible ever-new entertainment
experiences and venues. What was meant by the phrase entertainment technology as recently as a year ago
requires redefinition in light of recent developments in both technology and entertainment.Ó1 Nevertheless,
the following listing is provided:¥Networked and free-standing interactive computer games¥Avatar creation and utilization¥Massive multiplayer online games¥Digital entertainment¥Specialty venues such as theme parks¥Motion-based rides¥Console and PC interactive game design¥Creation of unique input devices¥Virtual reality utilizing head-mounted displays¥Other forms of virtual reality technology¥Wearable computing for entertainment purposes¥Massive immersive display environments¥Interactive robot animatronics¥Synthetic interview technology¥Speech recognition¥Augmented reality¥Telepresence for entertainment and education purposes¥Digital production and postproduction¥Sound synthesis, surround sound, three-dimensional sound, and streaming audio¥Development of haptic devices (e.g., force feedback)¥Entertainment robotics.1See <http://www.etc.cmu.edu/about.html>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ADVANCING CREATIVE PRACTICES THROUGH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY67Human-computer interaction specialist Ben Shneiderman argues thatIT for creativity support falls into eight categories: searching, visualiz-
ing, consulting, thinking, exploring, composing, reviewing, and dis-
seminating.7 Because the currency of IT is bits, IT tools can handle any
mode or medium, and they can integrate any combination of mediaÑalthough sophistication has costs in complexity and dollars, and for
technical and/or economic reasons, not all desired effects are possible
(see ÒEconomic RealitiesÓ below). For a concrete illustration of a tool
set inspired by entertainment applications, see Box 3.3. Lists like these
show the broad range of IT that may be linked to some aspect of the
arts or design through ITCP; no list conveys all the creative possibili-
ties inherent in the use of IT.By definition, tools are supposed to be helpful, but like other tools,IT tools have shortcomings. The insights into the nature of IT that
collectively constitute fluency, as described in Chapter 2, include an
understanding of the limitations of the tools and the constrained na-
ture of the typical software design. The pervasive hype about IT in the
mass media may, by contrast, feed unrealistic expectations. Although
artists and designers share frustrations with other user groups, their
perspectives, like those of other users, may help illuminate new paths
for IT research and development. This situation was recognized in a
recent special issue of a leading computer science journal:Many significant advances in research on human creativity haveoccurred, yet todayÕs tools often contain interface elements thatstymie creative efforts. A discontinuity exists between technology
tools and our ability to interact with them in natural, beneficial, and
most importantly, for this discussion, creative ways.8Tools vary in terms of the computing and programming skillsrequired to use them. As long as the tools required to produce com-
puter-mediated work are programming tools, the result will be pro-
grammer-created design. That is not a bad thingÑand in some casesthe result(s) can be wonderful. But it does mean that an investment
must be made in learning, which is somewhat like the requirement to
master other tools used by artists, but also different, because of factors
such as the range of features and capabilities available from software
and the relatively rapid change in technology. There is a great distance
from the paintbrush or piano to programming in C++. As emphasized
in Chapter 2, fluency can provide a middle ground between simple
acceptance of a tool and expertise in programming.9 Although the
7See Ben Shneiderman, 2002, ÒCreativity Support Tools,Ó Communications of the ACM45(10): 116-120.8Winslow Burleson and Ted Selker, 2002, ÒIntroduction (Special Issue: Creativityand Interface),Ó Communications of the ACM 45(10): 88-90.9Of course, new approaches to programming that simplify it may be helpfulÑassuming that the results do not present the same concerns that software packages doabout built-in constraints.There is a greatdistance from thepaintbrush orpiano toprogramming inC++.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY68discussion in this chapter focuses on software and to a lesser extenthardware for creating artifacts and performances, it should be noted
that other tools consist of content (images, sounds, text, and so on)
repositories. There the concerns center on the accessibility of the con-
tentÑinvolving indexing, permission to use (or ease of obtaining same),and so on. Yet still other tools support public access.10HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE TOOLS: A MIXEDBLESSINGInformation technology has obviously proved useful and acces-sible enough to give rise to ITCP in many guises. In the process, a
number of observations have emerged about the nature of IT and the
adaptations that artists and designers make in using it. The concerns
gleaned from artists and designers help to explain why it takes a long
time to integrate a new technology into the making of non-trivial art or
design work.Because all computers are universal machines, more advanceddesigns can replace simpler ones, providing improved performance
without changing the basic functionality of computation. Software is
even more mutable in that it has almost no physical constraints. Be-
cause of rapid changes in hardware capabilities, software rarely ma-
tures to a stable configuration. On the positive side, this pace of
change provides frequent opportunities to incorporate improved sup-
port for creativity in new systems. But for most users, especially in
relatively resource-poor areas such as the arts and humanities, this
constantly changing tool set is difficult to master. For well over a
decade, it has been the lament of artists and designers that the intellec-
tual and financial demands of constantly updating tools and playing
technological catch-up results in low-quality work and burnout.11Smart artists, observed a reviewer, resign from the MooreÕs law ratrace. These conditions suggest that it is reasonable to expect a wide
range of willingness and ability among artists and designers to retrain
and to upgrade their tools; how this will affect ITCP remains to be
seen.Developers of software tools that can support creative practiceshave a number of variables to consider, all of which may affect the10See tool characteristics in Sharon L. Greene, 2002, ÒCharacteristics of ApplicationsThat Support Creativity,Ó Communications of the ACM 45(10): 100-104.11An anecdote shared by a reviewer featured a senior colleague who reported thatwhen he discovered the Amiga computer, he felt sure he had found the tool with whichhe would make his magnum opus. After several years of learning about and constantlyupgrading his Amiga tools, he had become an Amiga expert but as yet had produced no
work. Much to his chagrin, the machine then became obsolete. More generally, in themid-1990s a committee of media arts faculty prepared a document, colloquially referredto as the ÒÔburnoutÓ document, that outlined the new and unrecognized loads on media
arts faculty. It was endorsed by the College Art Association, Inter-Society for theElectronic Arts, and Special Interest Group on Computer Graphics and InteractiveTechniques.It takes a longtime to integratea newtechnology intothe making ofnon-trivial art ordesign work.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ADVANCING CREATIVE PRACTICES THROUGH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY69ways in which users interact with the toolsÑand through the tools,their own workÑand the ease with which users can produce originalor even groundbreaking works with those tools. To name just a few,
tool developers dictate the user conceptual model (or metaphors)
exposed by their tools, the amount of structure supported or imposed
on the work process and product, the number and kinds of different
presentations and representations of content supported, the kinds of
manipulations directly implemented, the openness and extensibility
of the tool at various levels, and the levels of abstraction afforded. The
developersÕ decisions often reflect attempts to make the system easy to
use,12 or simplifying assumptions about what users want, but they can
also greatly affect what users produce.13 Very little research has ex-
plored the relationships between these design decisions and the fit-
ness of the tool for various kinds of ITCP workÑwhat follows aresome observations made by the committee.In an effort to get work done, it is only natural to follow the path ofleast resistance established by the tools that are available, so these
tools play a very important part in how users conceptualize their work
and assess their options. The tools may also leave traces: Architects
may look at a building and detect which design tools were used, and
musicians may hear new pieces and detect which composition tools
were used.14 Thus, IT may act as a flywheel in at least some contexts of
its use. Artists with IT fluency recognize these practical realities and
their roots in the values and procedures of computer science; they
work with or around the limitations of the tools.In the popular style known as object-oriented programming, aprogrammer creates a new kind of object (concretely, a data structure
that describes something) and defines the operations that other pro-
grammers can perform on it. Other programmers that use the object
cannot get at the data structure itself, but only at the operations that
the object-creator defined. This gives the object-creator the ability to
come back later and change the actual data structure (perhaps to make
it more efficient) without having to coordinate with any other pro-12An early illustration in a number of (non-artistic) fields was statistics; statisticalsoftware (and later spreadsheets) popularized and helped to disseminate a variety ofquantitative methods used in different applications. More recently, software packageshave begun to implement neural networks, face recognition, data acquisition, or image
display. Because these functions can be technically difficult to create, careful packagingcan allow others to use advanced technology with less effort.13For example, the literary theorist has written, with reference to hypertext authoringenvironments: ÒThe strength of metaprograms is that they take away most of the paininvolved in programming an application from scratch; . . . [their] weakness is that theylimit the programmer by presenting a predefined range of operations that the program-
mer must use.  .  .  . This may be compared to pre-modern modes of authorship, in which
the author could use predefined paradigms to produce a genre text, without muchcreative effort.Ó See Espen J. Aarseth, 1997, 
Cybertext: Perspectives on Ergodic Literature,Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, Maryland, p. 173.14In other contexts, such as education, people have noted how the presentationsoftware PowerPoint shapes and constrains their choice of content and organization for
public speaking.Tool developersdictate the userconceptualmodel (ormetaphors)exposed by theirtools.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY70grammers. The drawback is that the user can perform only the opera-tions the object-creator thought of. If the user wants to add a new
operation, he or she cannot, if doing so requires getting at the base
data representation. It is much easier to design a tool for a well-
defined task than for non-deterministic, creative work, which cannot
be reduced to a set of tasks.As one example of how these design decisions can affect the utilityof tools, consider an image-editing program that provides a ÒblurÓfeature with a capability for ÒmoreÓ and 
ÒlessÓ control. Technically,
this is a simple mathematical convolution on the image, but the tool
designers chose not to expose the numeric parameters for this opera-
tion. The benefit is that an operation assumed to be commonÑblur-ring an imageÑis simplified. The tradeoff is that other convolutionsÑwhich might prove interesting or useful to a userÑare impossiblewithout some other software mechanism.One design point that provides good support for explorations ofITCP is to use a small number of concepts in a general and flexible way
combined with openness and interoperability with other tools. A good
example is the interactive music language ÒMax,Ó a full visual pro-
gramming environment that has developed a community with at least
three ranks of creative users. The least technical of these would be a
performer who develops skills as an interactor with a particular set of
patches (configurations), much like a musical performer would prac-
tice her instrument. Users may then learn to make their own pro-
grams, by patching together already existing objects in unique ways.
Such patches then become instruments that permit a high degree of
virtuosity for use within particular genres (like techno-music or inter-
active dance).Creating a good tool requires an understanding of the problemarea and often experience at the cutting edges of artistic and design
and technical disciplines, just to understand the underlying concepts
and representations that the tool will address. Tool making also can
benefit from combining technical expertise in designing and imple-
menting software with a healthy dose of common sense to arrive at
something general enough to be useful but simple enough to be used.
15Problems sometimes arise when tool design assumes too much sepa-
ration of idea from expression.1615People familiar with computer science might consider Donald Knuth as an earlyexplorer of ITCP. Venerated for his understanding of software, Knuth has done work onfonts and electronic composition that is recognized broadly.16Wright points out that the separation between idea and expression in softwareÑwhich can degenerate to the software supplying all the ideasÑis one example of a moregeneral problem with creative software tools. These tools most commonly Òaim tomirror internal creative process by organizing it into an external data process or struc-
ture. The software is a system of menu commands and options which seeks [is de-signed] to match an internal model of creativity as a process of decision making thatseeks to approximate an ideal artistic goal.Ó But artists and designers 
Òdo not know inadvance what they want before they startÑthe creative process is actually a process ofIt is much easierto design a toolfor a well-defined task thanfor non-deterministic,creative work.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ADVANCING CREATIVE PRACTICES THROUGH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY71A tool may offer just the right functionality, but not at the rightcomponent level. For example, an image can be manipulated through
the use of a comprehensive interactive application such as PhotoShop,
or by typing a command to run a specific program such as one of the
Unix ppm utilities,17 or by calling a function in an image processing
library. A software library is of little use to a non-programmer, whereas
a full-blown application is of little use in creating a custom software
program. Sometimes, a full-blown application can be made to perform
like a custom software program through scripting, and sometimes
software libraries or other components can be integrated with an
application via a plug-in capability (see below). More could be accom-
plished with tools designed to suit a range of different tasks. Ensuring
this flexibility calls for either a variety of tools or a hierarchical struc-
ture that allows access to tools at various levels of abstraction, permit-
ting a migration path from intelligent enhancement at the novice level
to customization for experts (as illustrated by the language ÒMaxÓdescribed above).Because creativity is associated with novelty, comprehensive toolsfor creative work will be neither possible nor necessary to develop,
any more than it is necessary for a pencil to include all functions for
drawing. It will always be the task of the innovator to create new tools
from components, to create new applications, and to create new arti-
facts by using tools in unanticipated ways. In this respect, ITCP will
draw from both artistic and design and computer science traditions
with experimentation. Small professional communities that share ex-
periences and talent often develop effective toolsÑthis phenomenonis evident in the growth of computational science and the develop-
ment of the Web by and for physicists, and it has been observed in
humanities fields as well.18 Many small tools are developed by indi-
viduals or small teams that are able to keep their tools focused and
coherent.Design choices related to tool extensibility may be particularlyimportant for broadening participation in ITCP and tool development.
Programming language extensions (also called scripting languages)
allow end users to customize applications. For example, computer
music and animation programs often use text-based scripts or scores
to describe music and images. Users can create scripts either by edit-
ing text directly or by writing programs to generate scripts. Another
way to customize tools is with a plug-in, which is a software compo-playing and Ôvisual thinkingÕ that leads to a variety of interim ÔsolutionsÕ and modifica-tions of the original ÔproblemÕ . . . .
Ó See Richard Wright, 1999, 
ÒProgramming with aPaintbrush: A Study in the Production Culture of the Moving Image,Ó Filmwaves, Issue12.17These programs perform a wide range of image-processing tasks including formatconversion, scaling, filtering, and color adjustment.18See American Council of Learned Societies, 1998, Computing and the Humanities:Summary of a Roundtable Meeting, Occasional Paper No. 41, available online at <http://www.acls.org/op41-toc.htm>.Comprehensivetools for creativework will beneither possiblenor necessary.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY72nent that extends an application by implementing a new functionÑamuch simpler approach than writing an entirely new application.
Plug-ins are common for image- and audio-processing programs; they
exist for such popular design tools as PhotoShop and Auto-CAD.19Although commercial image and video editors may not support func-
tions desired by researchers, artists, and designers working at the
creative frontiers, a plug-in architecture enables users to extend edi-
tors with new custom functions. Note that this capability presents its
own challenges to implement: A program like PhotoShop that allows
other programmers to create plug-ins has to reveal a lot of its internal
structure. This allows more third-party creativity (by those who have
the programming skills), but it constrains the maintainers of PhotoShop
to preserve all this internal structure as they move from revision to
revision. Balancing these tensions is an act of creativity in applied
computer science. Generalizing from the discussion of plug-ins, cre-
ativity can be supported by systems that are extensible, a feature that
is often associated with a modular design (a plug-in is a module), to
support a broad range of users and their tasks. Modular designs
require software ÒhooksÓ to which new capabilities can be added.
Recently, however, as programs have grown to help users accomplish
more tasks with less expertise, they have tended to hide their inner
workings and to inhibit flexibility to do things that were unanticipated
by the designers of the program.Open application program interfaces, scripting languages, andplug-in architectures are no panacea, however. Decisions about what
to expose (the level of abstraction, the set of functions, access to data,
and so on) will still influence the ways in which users can extend a
tool. Also, taking advantage of these forms of extensibility requires
expertise in programming. Research could illuminate alternative ap-
proaches, exploring how to make extensibility and alternative con-
figurations more cost-effective and how to implement virtual tuning
knobs that allow artists and other users to make various adjustments.In the hardware area, sensors20 often require significant engineer-ing expertise and are difficult to interface with popular operating
systems. Ready-to-use designs, circuit boards, and specialized operat-
ing systems can simplify the use of hardware sensors in many interest-
ing applications,21 and there is evidence that at least elements of a19An example is the RealOne Player (by RealNetworks) for downloading and view-ing video segments on the Internet. See <http://www.real.com>. Other examples in-
clude plug-ins that allow browsers to read proprietary files, such as those in PortableDocument Format (PDF).20Sensors can be applied in many contexts relevant to ITCP work, as described insubsequent sections of this chapter.21See, for example, information on prefabricated robot microcontrollers, such as theHandyboard, at <http://www.handyboard.com/>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ADVANCING CREATIVE PRACTICES THROUGH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY73relevant tool base are emerging in IT research circles that may bevaluable for ITCP.22Inasmuch as artistsÕ needs depart from commercial offerings, or
inasmuch as specialized tools are kept proprietary, as with some in-
stances in the competitive animation arena, artistsÕ work in ITCP mayrequire support for experimentation in tool development. New soft-
ware tools could be developed that would enable users to build their
own software toolsÑcollaboration between artists and designers andcomputer scientists could aim at a meta-toolkit that would offer ease
of use plus flexible, extensible results, and an Internet-accessible re-
pository of available software and hardware tools as well as guidance
on what it takes to use them would broaden access and experimenta-
tion.23 Support for programming by people lacking full-fledged pro-
gramming skills could be part of this kit.24 For effective development
to take place, it is important to understand what shape the desired
ITCP software will takeÑwhat interfaces it should provide, whatfunctions it should support, and so on. Hence, building research pro-
totypes would be a reasonable first step; such prototypes are going to
be built by motivated practitioners or researchers rather than by com-
mercial software developersÑwho may, of course, transform attrac-tive prototypes into products.As with other instances of user-generated IT tools or the broaderphenomenon of popular culture finding new purposes for tools,25ITCP tool-development efforts may prove to have broader appeal.
The rationale for encouraging this activity echoes the rationale for
encouraging research on usability: Steps designed to benefit a small
constituency (e.g., people with various disabilities) may prove to
benefit users in general.26 Research oriented to enhancing creativity is
high-leverage.22See, for example, the TinyOS work based at the University of California at Berkeley.
It aims at developing an open experimental software/hardware platform for networkembedded systems technologyresearch that will dramatically accelerate the develop-

ment of algorithms and services and their composition into challenging applications.Small, networked sensor/effectornodes are developed to ground algorithmic work in
the reality of operating with numerous, highly constrained devices. See <http:
//webs.cs.berkeley.edu/tos/>.23Rhizome.org, for example, has incubated an open-source software archive forartists (artists can submit open-source code to an online database, download code,
discuss it, and so on).24There may be capabilities to borrow from the education community, such as Logoand its derivatives, or from efforts aimed at broadening use of the Web. Or there may be
insights to glean from other kinds of tools. For example, Mathematica is a program toperform mathematics. An important component of Mathematica is its programminglanguage, which allows tedious tasks to be automated, presumably freeing up some of
the userÕs time for more exotic pursuits. See <http://www.mathematica.com>.25As William Gibson puts it in Neuromancer (Ace Books, New York, 1984), the street
finds its own uses for things.26Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council,1997, More Than Screen Deep: Toward Every-Citizen Interfaces to the NationÕs InformationInfrastructure, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Collaborationbetween artistsand designers andcomputer scientistscould aim at ameta-toolkit thatwould offer easeof use plusflexible, extensibleresults.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY74SUPPORT FOR FLEXIBILITY, EXPERIMENTATION,AND PLAYIT facilitates the rapid design and creation of digital artifacts andtheir equally fast refinement.27 Creative design is often an iterative
process in which many ideas are considered. Sometimes a sketchpad
is much more effective than a computer-aided design (CAD) tool
because the precision and detailed specification required for CAD are
not needed in the early stages of design. The computing literature
gives a number of examples of Òsketchy interfacesÓ that allow design-
ers to make rough prototypes to explore a design space rapidly. There
is also evidence that ÒsketchyÓ designs tend to elicit more higher-level
comments (ÒWhy do you need this function?Ó as opposed to 
ÒI donÕtlike the color schemeÓ). These and other examples illustrate how tooldesigners vary the kinds of structures imposed on the work process
and product in their tools, often to facilitate experimentation, improvi-
sation, and flexibility. See Box 3.4.BOX 3.4Sketchy InterfacesÒSketchyÓ interfaces provide the ability to describe objects with ambiguous types, sizes, shapes, andpositions quickly. The ambiguity encourages a focus on larger concepts, rather than details such as font size
or precise alignment. James Landay has developed a tool called ÒSketching Interfaces Like KrazyÓ (SILK) that
allows designers to create prototypes of interface designs by sketching. The difficulty with previous interface
tools is that they have required designers to specify color, shape, size, and orientation of the elements of
an interface precisely from the start. This requirement focuses the designerÕs and his or her test usersÕattention on aspects of the design that are irrelevant in the early stages of design. As a consequence, many
designers prefer old-fashioned paper sketches. Based on a survey of interface design practices, SILK attempts
to combine the positive imprecision of paper sketches with the benefits of storage, searchability, and
interactivity that information technology can provide. Designers can roughly sketch and storyboard their
ideas on a sketch pad, while SILK automatically makes the sketches interactive, allowing them to be used
for testing.11For further discussion on SILK, see <http://www.cs.berkeley.edu/~landay/research/publications/CHI96/video.html>or James A. Landay, 1996, Interactive Sketching for the Early Stages of User Interface Design, Ph.D. Thesis, Carnegie MellonUniversity, Computer Science Department, available online at <http://reports-archive.adm.cs.cmu.edu/anon/1996/
abstracts/96-201.html>. Also see <http://www.computer.org/computer/homepage/march/cov_feat/0301silk_side.htm>;James A. Landay and Brad A. Myers, 2001, ÒSketching Interfaces: Toward More Human Interface Design,Ó IEEEComputer 34(3): 56-64; and James A. Landay and Brad A. Myers, 1995, 
ÒInteractive Sketching for the Early Stages ofUser Interface Design,Ó pp. 43-50 in Proceedings of CHI Ô95, Denver, Colo., ACM Press, New York.27ÒSupport pain-free exploration and experimentation (a ÔsandboxÕ mode). There
should be an easy way to undo and redo all or part of oneÕs work. There should be nobig penalties for mistakes, and there should be meaningful rewards for success. There
should be immediate and useful feedback for oneÕs actions, promoting a sense ofcontrol.Ó See Ben Shneiderman, 2002, ÒCreativity Support Tools,Ó Communications of theACM 45(10): 102.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ADVANCING CREATIVE PRACTICES THROUGH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY75In the right hands, the right computer tools can enable improvisa-tion, which is an important expression of creativity in response to a
dynamic situation. Just as a jazz musician improvises by listening and
responding to a dynamic musical context, all artists improvise with
media in creative ways; on the computer science side, the synthetic
nature of software implies that improvisation played a role in its
development. At least for some artists and designersÑand for manycomputer scientists and other scientists and engineersÑcomputerscarry out computations to explore Òwhat ifÓ scenarios. Such computer-
based experimentation inspires new ideas, driving the interplay among
design, simulation, surprise, and creation. Tools support improvisa-
tion when they offer interactive design, revision, and elaboration of
partial specifications. Doing this successfully requires careful consid-
eration of the tradeoffs between imposed structure and clean-sheet
approaches, among other design parameters. A highly structured mu-
sical tool with a rich model of tonal music may be excellent for certain
kinds of improvisation and experimentation, but not for others, for
example. See Box 3.5.THE INTERNET AND THE WEBThe Internet28 is particularly useful in ITCP work because of sev-
eral unique features that set it apart from traditional communications
systems, such as the public switched telephone network and the cable
and broadcast television systems.29 The Internet
Õs design encouragesinnovation at the edges by users, allowing a relatively unrestricted set
of applications to run over it. By contrast, traditional networks are
centrally developed and managed and historically have limited what
users can do with them. Connection, interconnection, and innovation
in facilities and services are relatively easy with the Internet, making it
possible to use the underlying communications infrastructure more
efficiently and inexpensively. These factors have generated a pattern
of innovation in Internet technologies and uses associated with a
culture of cumulative knowledge-building. Thus, not only are per-
sonal computers and larger computer systems attached to the Internet,
but so also are televisions, telephones, personal digital assistants, and28The Internet has both computing and communications components. The networksthat constitute the Internet are composed of communications links, which carry datafrom one point to another, and routers, which direct the flow of communications
between links and, ultimately, from senders to receivers. Routers are computer deviceslocated throughout the Internet that transfer information from a source to a destination.And of course, users access the Internet from a computing device, which may be in a
form other than a conventional computer.29For the history of the Internet, see the home page of the Internet Society at <http://www.isoc.org>. See also Katie Hafner and Matthew Lyon, 1996, Where Wizards Stay UpLate, Simon and Schuster, New York; and Computer Science and Telecommunications
Board, National Research Council, 1999, Funding a Revolution: Government Support forComputing Research, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY76BOX 3.5Improvisatory Interactivity in MusicIn his briefing to the committee, George Lewis described his work with improvisational systems.1Improvisation characterizes much of human activity, but it has not been explored nearly as much as relatedactivities such as engineering, design, and even creativity generally. At its most basic level, improvisation is
a series of reactions to situations, often intuitive, expressive, and spontaneous. Improvisation is about finding
structure, not imposing it. In spite of the informal and unplanned nature of improvisation, it can be conducted
with consummate artistry, and great improvisers develop their skills over a lifetime of work. Improvisation
is an interesting metaphor for human-computer interaction.Current technology, as practiced in computer music systems, has a long way to go before it will beconsidered highly skilled, intelligent, or creative. In fact, it can be argued that present systems are successful
because of the skill of human performers. Humans can form plans at many time scales, from milliseconds
to minutes, and humans are uniquely equipped to listen to and evaluate music as it is created. In contrast,
machine musicianship is generally weak and at best skillful in a very narrow range of situations. However,
there are interesting and humanly impossible tasks that computers can perform, creating some very
interesting musical possibilities.What does it mean, technologically, to build an improvisation system? First, any interactive system musthave sensors and analysis functions. Second, the system must have some method of making high-level musical
decisions and generating music. Third, the system must have performance skills, that is, the ability to
transform musical information into real-time commands controlling pitch, amplitude, vibrato, and other
expressive parameters of sound. Finally, the system must generate sound from this control information, also
in real time.Sensing can be accomplished using a microphone to ÒlistenÓ to the human performer. Signal processing
can detect pitch, amplitude, brightness, and other features, although this is currently restricted to
monophonic instruments, those that produce only one tone at any given time. Sensing can also use non-
acoustic means, such as optical or electrical position sensors in electronic keyboards, accelerometers,
optical sensors, and even a standard computer keyboard and mouse. Once low-level sensor data is acquired,
the system must interpret the data in musical terms.2 The system might parse the data into phrases, build
histograms of pitch (indicators of keys and modulation), estimate tempo,3 or use statistical classifiers todetect emotion,4 style,
5 or other musical information.Once  processed into some abstract representation of music, sensor data become an input to the
improvisation process. The system performs decision making and planning at this stage based on input from
sensors, memory of past events, and built-in knowledge.6 For example, George Lewis
Õs Voyager programis capable of generating music without any input or interaction, but when it senses certain trends in the
human improvisation, it can modify its own performance to either go along with, or contrast with, the human
musician. This aspect of the improvisation system often draws on formal theories of music and computer
science. For example, the system might use Markov models to generate chord progressions, or 12-tone
serial techniques to generate melodies. Rule systems are often used to react to sensor data, generating
decisions and plans that in turn modify the music generation process.As high-level representations of music are generated, the music must be performed in real time.Performance can include such things as voicing and orchestration, that is, deciding which synthetic
instruments will perform which notes of the music, expressive modulation of various control parameters,
and at the lowest level, scheduling accurately timed parameter updates to the music synthesizer. Some
recent advances in the understanding of emotion in music, for example, allow a stream of music events to
be transformed in ways that express anger, calm, happiness, or sadness.7The final stage is the actual generation of sound. Early improvisation systems often relied on off-the-shelf synthesizers to generate sound from low-bandwidth musical instrument digital interface (MIDI)8control information. Now that laptop computers can generate rich sounds in real time, many computer
musicians have been attracted to the possibilities of direct control over sound at the signal-processing level.
Systems often transform acoustic input from the human performer, giving the improviser a much more
intimate and direct connection to the generated sound. In this case, the improvisation might focus more onBeyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ADVANCING CREATIVE PRACTICES THROUGH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY77the character of the sound (timbre) rather than on abstractmusic structures of pitch and rhythm (Figure 3.5.1).Many interesting problems arise in interactive impro-visation systems. How do improvisers build on local,
almost reflexive decisions to create masterful form at a
more global level? Can this process be modeled in the
computer to create a musical companion?9 Human percep-
tion of music includes sophisticated recognition of patterns
and motives. Can systems be extended with better models
of perception? Improvisers study and learn. Can computer
systems also learn to improvise? Whether discussing bio-
logical or silicon systems, computation must take place at
many time scales. A jazz drummer produces events with
very high timing resolution relative to the speed of high-
level cognitive processing. Similarly, computer systems
must simultaneously deliver low-latency, hard, real-time
signal processing while simultaneously performing high-
level decisions at a more relaxed time scale.10Current systems have not solved all of these prob-lems, and they are generally weak at forming plans, per-forming high-level perception and recognition tasks, and offering sophisticated composition skills. Never-
theless, interactive computer music systems incorporating improvisation have established a new genre of
contemporary music. These systems offer a model for human-computer interaction driven by shared goals,
high-level task-oriented communication, and creative, situated decision making by both human and
computer.1See George Lewis, 2000, ÒToo Many Notes: Computers, Complexity and Culture in Voyager,Ó Leonardo Music Journal 10; GeorgeLewis, 1999, ÒInteracting with Latter-day Musical Automata,Ó Contemporary Music Review 18 (Part 3): 99-112 (with accompanying CD);
Kristin Palm, 2001, ÒMaking a PointÓ (review of interdisciplinary, multiartist project at the Point Loma Wastewater Treatment Plant inSan Diego, including a site-specific interactive videosonic installation by George Lewis), Metropolis (August/September); Guy Garnett,
2001, ÒThe Aesthetics of Interactive Computer Music,Ó Computer Music Journal 25(1); Todd Winkler, 1998, Composing Interactive Music:Techniques and Ideas Using Max, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.; Ben Ratliff, 1997, ÒImprovisers Meet the MachinesÓ (Review of 
ÒVoyager,ÓCD recording featuring the computer music of George Lewis), New York Times, October 14; and Joel Chadabe, 1997, Electric Sound: ThePast and Promise of Electronic Music, Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, N.J.2See Robert Rowe, 2001, Machine Musicianship, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.3See Masataka Goto, 2001, ÒAn Audio-based Real-time Beat Tracking System for Music with or without Drum-sounds,Ó Journal ofNew Music Research 30(2): 159-171.4See A. Friberg, E. Schoonderwaldt, P.N. Juslin, and R. Bresin, 2002, ÒAutomatic Real-time Extraction of Musical Expression,Ó pp.
365-367 in Proceedings of the International Computer Music ConferenceÑICMC 2002, International Computer Music Association, SanFrancisco, Calif.5See Roger B. Dannenberg, Belinda Thom, and D. Watson, 1997, ÒA Machine Learning Approach to Style Recognition,Ó in
International Computer Music Conference, International Computer Music Association, available online at <http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~rbd/bib-styleclass.html#icmc97>.6See Todd Winkler, 2001, Composing Interactive Music, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.7See R. Bresin and A. Friberg, 2000, ÒEmotional Coloring of Computer-controlled Music Performances,Ó Computer Music Journal24(4): 44-63.8See Joseph Rothstein, 1995, MIDI: A Comprehensive Introduction, 2nd Ed., A-R Editions, Madison, Wisc.9See Belinda Thom, 2001, A Customized, Interactive Melodic Improvisation Companion, Ph.D. Thesis, Carnegie Mellon University,Computer Science Department, Technical Report CMU-CS-01-138, Pittsburgh, Pa.10See Roger B. Dannenberg and Patrick van de Lageweg, 2001, ÒA System Supporting Flexible Distributed Real-Time MusicProcessing,Ó pp. 267-270 in Proceedings of the 2001 International Computer Music Conference, International Computer Music Association,San Francisco, Calif.FIGURE 3.5.1 Andrew Schloss improvises with an interactivecomputer music system, using a radio drum and foot pedals.Image courtesy of the Banff Centre.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY78other devices; the future is likely to see many other devices emerge(e.g., music, medical, and kitchen appliances) that will be directly
connected to the Internet, opening up many intriguing possibilities for
ITCP work.30 Of course, traditional media, such as television, are also
expected to evolve, partly in response to the Internet and partly on
their own.31 Because the Internet is a transnational system, albeit with
distributed management, it offers the potential of a worldwide forum.
Global digital telecommunication establishes new ways of aggregat-
ing expertise and accumulating creative capital, thereby allowing
people with similar interests to communicate with each other and
share resources.The World Wide Web, which served to popularize the Internetbeginning in the 1990s, has an obvious attraction: It allows media to be
distributed at low cost without any special organizational support,
and the content can be viewed from anywhere in the world. The Web
is quite flexible, offering the capability to publish text, images, sound,
and video and to organize the presentation of material in creative
ways. In the literary arts, for example, the combination of increasingly
powerful desktop computers and the development of the Web has
created unparalleled opportunities for people to engage in collabora-
tive work at sites where, for example, hundreds of novice writers may
contribute to a narrative. Such opportunities have led to an increasing
amount of creative literature on the Web. That said, there are funda-
mental aspects of the design of the Web that constrain creative work.
For example, the client/server model limits interactions either to fol-
lowing links or to performing computations at the server. In addition,
the Web browserÕs distinctive interface containing back and forwardbuttons works well for some types of work, but not for others, such as
work trying to convey complex ideasÑanother example of the impor-tance of the tradeoffs related to imposed structure. Given that a certain
kind of creativity is inspired when faced with limitations, it may be
that the limitations of the format can provide a framework for creative
work, much as the traditional form of the classical symphony did for
classical and romantic music, acting as a structure to both work within
and rebel against.Other models of Web programs suitable for ITCP work are pos-sible. It is not that difficult to program networked applications that30This paragraph is drawn primarily from Computer Science and Telecommunica-tions Board, National Research Council, 2001, The InternetÕs Coming of Age, National
Academy Press, Washington, D.C.31For example, new roles for public broadcasting (and for broadcasting more gener-ally) may become possible. Television stations in the United States are required by law
to convert to digital transmission and program production by December 2006. Initially,it may well be the case that programs are simply converted to digital format in toto.However, the creative integration of digital technology and content may enable many
new possibilities for ITCP work. See Lawrence K. Grossman and Newton N. Minow,2001, A Digital Gift to the Nation, Century Foundation Press, New York, available onlineat <http://www.digitalpromise.org>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ADVANCING CREATIVE PRACTICES THROUGH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY79operate away from the biases and constraints of back and forwardbuttons and that are not subject to the biases and constraints of
Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) and Flash (a multimedia plug-
in). More computational power is generally available locally, so highly
interactive systems such as computer games run on a personal com-
puter. Multiuser games can combine communication over the Internet
with local computation. One could even imagine hybrid systems us-
ing cable TV, satellite, or telephone communication channels com-
bined with the Internet and local computation. The development of
grid infrastructures and applications32 provides additional capabili-
ties for distributing and sharing capacity and activity, as do two-way
protocols like those sponsored by the Universal Description, Discov-
ery, and Integration (UDDI) project.33 The client/server model is evolv-
ing into a many-to-many, dynamic infrastructure.Recent experience with Napster and other peer-to-peer systemshas motivated experimentation among researchers and other creative
communities in uses of the Internet for producing and distributing
work. Peer-to-peer computing holds enormous promise for leveraging
the intellectual and cultural resources of millions of people by allow-
ing connections to be developed independent of centralized servers.34Significant proposals include those from scientific researchers, such as
Thomas Ray working in the field of artificial life, for research projects
to run in the background on computers that are otherwise underused,
for example, during the nighttime hours at most large organizations.
Notwithstanding constraints on Napster, projects that do not involve
copyright issues can still take advantage of peer-to-peer software to
carry out research, share information, and share computing resources.35Technologies such as peer-to-peer networking also can challenge basic
notions of exhibition or participation.36  Multisite performances in
games like Everquest, with persistent virtual realities that endure over
days and months, allow participants to create complex virtual societ-
ies and emergent dramas. How might conventional museum exhibi-
tions incorporate (or complement or compete with) such new applica-
tions of IT?32A grid infrastructure is hardware and software infrastructure that supports wide-scale distributed computing, which enables high-performance applications.33The project creates a platform-independent, open framework for describing ser-vices, discovering businesses, and integrating business services using the Internet, as
well as an operational registry, according to the project Web site at <http://www.uddi.org>.34Peer-to-peer networking as a technology is not so new per se. The growth of thenumber of Internet users across diverse segments of society provides the basis for newapplications for ITCP work.35Peer-to-Peer: Harnessing the Power of Disruptive Technologies (O
ÕReilly, Beijing andCambridge, Mass., 2001), edited by Andy Oram, gives a good overview of these possi-bilities.36Other efforts that may benefit from peer-to-peer computing include scholarlyresearch to which amateurs have made significant contributions, for example in wide-ranging areas such as meteoritics (the study of meteors and mapping of the strewnfields of meteorites), Civil War history, and biography.Technologies suchas peer-to-peernetworking canchallenge basicnotions ofexhibition orparticipation.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY80The question is how creative practice can really leverage the capa-bility of the InternetÑgoing beyond pretty pictures on Web sites toaddress the real issues and opportunities that lie on the other side of
the (fire)wall. The Listening Post project (which characterizes Internet
traffic using sound) described in Chapter 2 represents one of the few
ITCP initiatives that delve into the IT infrastructure. As Napster,
SETI@Home, ICQ,37 and countless multiplayer games have proven,
peopleÑeven millions of peopleÑwill take 5 or 10 minutes to down-load an application if it is sufficiently compelling. There are many
opportunities for further work here.But the commercialization of the Web and associated business andproduct developments place pressures on Web technology. For ex-
ample, a break with earlier versions of a software package means that
the authors of creative works must spend literally thousands of hours
retrofitting those works when a few changes would have made it
possible to avoid this tedious labor. This situation is similar to others
where backwards compatibility has not been maintained; the larger
issue of how vendors choose what features to add or drop reflects
what economists refer to as market power, which influences the de-
gree to which consumers have an effective voice. Although other
groups of users would also have been inconvenienced by disruptive
product changes, that artists and designers complain is a reflection of
their comparative lack of financial and technical-support resources to
help in adapting to change. A contrasting example of best practices in
this context is Rob KendallÕs development of HTML authoring soft-ware, done in close cooperation with the people who are most likely to
use it.38 See the section 
ÒStandardsÓ below for a discussion of stan-
dards setting.Given their roles as content-generators, artists and designers havea special interest in the Internet as a vehicle for content. The Web offers

ready access to stored documents, access to which has often required a
physical presence (e.g., to view tax rolls, government archives, materi-
als in libraries, and the like), but these materials can increasingly be
accessed easily by any Web publisher.
39 The ability of virtually anyone
to publish on the Web enables producers of ITCP work to contact
audiences more directly. User-provided content plays an important
role in the computing and Internet culture, thus offering a unique37ICQ (pronounced as ÒI seek youÓ) is an online instant messaging program devel-oped by Mirabilis Ltd. that is similar to AOL Time WarnerÕs Buddy List and InstantMessenger programs.38See the Word Circuits Connection Muse, available online at <http://www.wordcircuits.com/connect/index.html>.39The electronic documents on the Web are formatted in special languages (e.g.,HTML) that accommodate multiple media (text, graphics, audio, video), enabling the
development of creative applications ranging from online games to virtual museumsand galleries. These documents also can be linked to other pages so that users can easilyaccess more information.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ADVANCING CREATIVE PRACTICES THROUGH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY81market for innovators. A problematic issue with regard to Web con-tent is how to manage it all. How does one assess and even cope with
the amount of information available? How does one access what one
wants? How do people know when information is valid? Will people
rely on information retrieved for them, or will they still want to de-
velop internal knowledge to be used for judgment? How does one
redefine and control search engines? How do people ensure that search
engines are objective without being trapped by gluey sites? How do
people filter the results of searches to suit personal needs? New cul-
tural models of editorial sense-making have been defined technically
and to a certain degree tested: for example, collaborative filtering,
Òslash-dotÓ-style social intelligence applied to a common editorialbase by combining a group rating, the social status of content-evalua-
tors, and user interface design. These approaches are good examples
of hybrids requiring strong arts and humanities skills in the content
developing, shaping, rating, expression, and design, and strong IT to
deliver effective new platforms sensitive to the community-content
co-evolution.40 The engagement of artists and designers in the design discussions
for new technologies can help ensure that the technologies are as
powerful and thoughtful as possibleÑwhich is in the interest of every-one (see Box 3.6 for one possibility). However, engagement is a two-
way street: Technologists need to be receptive to the input from artists
and designers, and artists and designers must take the initiative to
become engaged with technologists (e.g., by participating in main-
stream technical conferencesÑand not only those related to animationor graphics).ECONOMIC REALITIESA key factor that shapes the development of tools for creativework is the economics of software. Software is expensive to develop
and inexpensive to distribute. Therefore, it is most profitable when it
appeals to many people, especially to non-experts (including the mass
market), and competition places a premium on being first to market,
another factor driving design compromises. The widespread use of a
software application can provide a return on the investment required
to create complex software systems. Of course, many hardware and
software tools developed initially for niche groups eventually find
their way into much broader, usually unanticipated, markets. Indeed,
some of the best-known information technologiesÑfrom the spread-sheet to the WebÑwere designed initially for narrow purposes. Butniche groups, including artists, have little luck in demanding special
capabilitiesÑeven when they have good connections to vendors. For40There is a well-developed, relevant literature in information retrieval, informationfiltering, information seeking, information organization, and related areas.Software isexpensive todevelop andinexpensive todistribute. It ismost profitablewhen it appeals tomany people,especially to non-experts.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY82BOX 3.6Databases and ArtistsDatabases touch nearly every aspect of daily life. They present opportunities that artists are onlybeginning to explore.1 Countless activities, such as using a credit card, visiting a physician, withdrawing cash
from a bank, or accessing Web sites, involve a database that mediates the transaction. The operation of these
databasesÑhow (your) information flowsÑis largely invisible to the general public. One function that artcan perform extraordinarily well is to make things visible. A cookie, for instance, is merely data flowing
between computers. Imagine how an artist might be able to depict this flow to communicate to the general
population what exactly is being transferredÑand possibly even some of the implications of the transfer.FIGURE 3.6.1 An artistÕsperspective on databaseprivacy. Illustration cre-ated by Jennifer M.

Bishop, Computer Sci-ence and Telecommuni-cations Board staff.1See Victoria Vesna, 2002, ÒDatabase Aesthetics: Of Containers, Chronofiles, Time Capsules, Xanadu, Alexandriaand the World Brain,Ó AI and Society, October 29, available online at <http://time.arts.ucla.edu/AI_Society/vesna_essay.html>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ADVANCING CREATIVE PRACTICES THROUGH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY83example, a leading photographer who has achieved acclaim in digitaland conventional photography has spent years working with corpora-
tions such as Adobe, Apple, Canon, Epson, and Kodak but reports that
there are limits to what the software engineers understand about his
artistic needs. He attends seminars with vendor engineers and asks for
features he needs for his art making. He teases that the problem might
be too hard for the engineers, hoping to harness their pride, recogniz-
ing that his goal is to get a new feature that is needed by only a very
few users.41Non-profit institutions and cooperative groups develop some ofthe best tools for creative useÑboth in computer science and in artisticand design contexts. This is true to a large extent because this software
is simply not viable commercially and does not appear in that sector.
Many good tools are non-commercial and open-source (see Chapter
7), developed and maintained by a number of programmers who
coordinate their work through the Internet. This approach allows
users to contribute capability directly, makes the software freely avail-
able, and allows users access to the inner workings of the software so
that creative modifications and customization are possible. See Box
3.7. But it is not a panacea: Open-source tools tend to depend on
volunteer efforts and often reflect the design effort of one or just a few
primary implementers. As with closed-development/proprietary com-
mercial products, users may not always get the features or design
changes they need. Software robustness, documentation, and support
may not reach commercial levels.42 Support and documentation tend
both to benefit from and to attract a larger user community. Small,
specialized projects often have the feel of Òwork in progress.ÓSubsidies are a way to encourage the development of creativetools. This approach is exemplified by the Studio for Electro-Instru-
mental Music (STEIM), a center in Amsterdam that helps many musi-
cians create new instruments using sensors.43 By subsidizing the engi-
neering costs of sensor systems, STEIM has enabled the exploration of
many novel electronic musical instrument designs. The engineering
resources established by STEIM have attracted artists from around the
world who otherwise would have no access to this technology. This
approach seems to resemble that seen in computational science in the
1980s, when centers providing access to specialized computing re-
sources were created. More generally, government (or philanthropic)
support for research, including the development of prototypes and
testbeds (see Chapter 8), is a way of subsidizing the development of
creative tools that the market, all other things being equal, is not likely
to develop in a timely manner. Whether induced through market41Personal communication between the photographer and a reviewer, summer 2002.42There are important counter-examples such as the Linux operating system, whichis often used in critical server applications.43For further information, see <http://www.steim.org/steim>.Non-profitinstitutions andcooperativegroups developsome of the besttools for creativeuse.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY84BOX 3.7Open-Source ToolsTools That Support ITCP WorkPython is a programming language created in the early 1990s by Guido van Rossum, who is still itsprincipal author. Python has gathered a large following, finding important applications in graphics including
Alice (see below), gaming, Web services, teaching, collaboration support, and research. Python is
copyrighted but is free for use and distribution, and versions are owned by the Centrum voor Wiskunde
en Informatica (National Research Institute for Mathematics and Computer Science in the Netherlands), theCorporation for National Research Initiatives, and BeOpen.com. In 2001, Zope Corporation and others
sponsored the formation of the Python Software Foundation, a non-profit corporation set up to own the
intellectual property of the most recent versions of Python. Conferences and workshops devoted to Python
have been held since 1994, and in 2002, Python conferences were held in both the United States and Europe.
Python users actively develop extensions and support for Python, including graphical programming
environments and debugging tools, a re-implementation in Java (another popular programming language),
and many new modules that support such things as Internet access, the XML language, linear algebra,
encryption, and multimedia.1PortAudio is an example of a much smaller open-software effort. PortAudio is a cross-platform librarythat supports audio input and output. It began with discussions about the need for such a library on an
Internet mailing list, music-dsp.2 Hosted by the California Institute of the Arts, PortAudio was developed
primarily by Ross Bencina and Phil Burk, who jointly control its design and distribution. More than 30
contributors have fixed bugs, offered expertise on the use of specific systems and hardware, and adapted
PortAudio to new systems and devices. A dozen or so commercial and non-commercial applications are
implemented using PortAudio.3In both cases, it is interesting that many of the developers and contributors have never met face-to-face. Designs and work plans are discussed via e-mail and the community is informed of recent developments,forces or supported by other resources, the research in directions
discussed here for hardware and software can be a powerful invest-
ment in the future.STANDARDSA review of hardware and software would be incomplete withouttouching on the perennial issue of standards, which can both limit and
support creativity. They obviously establish some constraints, but
they also can allow various programs to interoperate in new and
creative ways, and they are typically associated with stabilizing a
market, lowering costs, and facilitating training.44 Although perhaps
44This situation is exemplified by consumer electronics, but it also applies to variousforms of IT (and non-IT products).1See <http://www.python.org> for more information.2See <http://shoko.calarts.edu/~glmrboy/musicdsp/whatis.html>.3See <http://www.portaudio.com> for more information.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ADVANCING CREATIVE PRACTICES THROUGH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY85more obvious in IT, standards are common in arts and design arenas,from the dimensions of a violin to the Pantone color system. Standards
can emerge from a standards-setting body or de facto from a leading
supplier (as a consequence of competition within the marketplace). A
good example for ITCP is digital images and associated software.
Digital images are basically just arrays of pixels, yet they can be
produced, stored, and manipulated in many ways. With standard
representations for digital images, many programs and devices can
interoperate, including cameras, digital editors, Web browsers, optical
character reading (or other scanning) software, and graphical interface
tools. But what should be standard? An image can exist in several
formsÑa set of high-level instructions for rendering, a set of polygons,or an array of pixels. A pixel representation may be a universal stan-
dard, but it forces the loss of high-level information. A high-level
standard may be more complex to define, and to agree to, but it canproblems, and solutions through electronic bulletin boards. Most of the contributors work without
monetary compensation. In both examples, it is important to have a relatively small group to coordinate and
integrate various contributions in order to maintain a coherent product.Open-Source Tools for LearningPython, based on early Lisp-like languages, is excellent for art and design education because of its simpleand powerful syntax. An example of looking ahead to new models for languages is the Design by Numbers
project at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology,4 which includes a simple language for graphical
expression (called DBN), distributed freely over the Web, as a means to teach programming to visual artists
and designers. This system is currently in use in more than 25 schools worldwide, with a sequel called the
Proce55ing project that introduces two-dimensional and three-dimensional graphics concepts to visual
designers.5Individual tools available online include Alice,6 a three-dimensional (3D) interactive graphics program-
ming environment for Windows built as a public-service project by a research group at Carnegie Mellon
University. The intent was to make it easy for novices to develop interesting 3D environments and to explore
the new medium of interactive 3D graphics. Alice is primarily a scripting and prototyping environment for
3D object behavior, not a 3D modeler, but it does read many common 3D file formats. By writing simple
scripts, Alice users can control object appearance and behavior, and while the scripts are executing, objects
respond to user input via mouse and keyboard. The current version of the Alice authoring tool is free to
everyone and runs on computers that are commonly available for reasonable prices. Worlds created in Alice
can be viewed and interacted with inside a standard Web browser once the Alice plug-in has been installed.
The Alice core distribution includes a large library of textured models. The Alice plug-in does not allow
authoring, but it does allow viewing of any Alice world.4Led by John Maeda at the MIT Media Lab. See <http://dbn.media.mit.edu>.5Proce55ing, an electronic sketchbook for developing ideas and a context for learning fundamentals of computerprogramming within the context of the electronic arts, was initiated by Ben Fry and Casey Reas at the MIT Media Laband by the Interaction Design Institute Ivrea. As of November 2002, the software is in a pre-release stage, but bug fixes
are being made in preparation for a more complete 1.0 release. Proce55ing will be free to download and use. See<http://proce55ing.net/>.6See <http://www.alice.org>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY86preserve the ability to perform high-level operations. Another ex-ample is the musical instrument digital interface (MIDI) standard.
MIDI was created to connect music keyboards to synthesizers, but it
was soon realized that MIDI could allow computers to control synthe-
sizers. The availability of low-cost synthesizers that are more or less
interchangeable has been critical to any number of creative computer
music systems.The rise of ITCP raises questions about the standards-setting pro-cess and the opportunities for artists and designers, as users, to have
input. It is not uncommon for user groups to be on the sidelines of
vendor efforts to set standards; artists and designers are not being
singled out. And as recent attempts by non-profit organizations to
explore how to inject Òpublic interestÓ voices into IT standards-setting
demonstrate, it is not easy for people with less technical depth, fewer
financial resources, and different conversational norms to participate
effectively in various IT standards-setting cultures.45 That said, a con-
structive step would be for specific communities of practice within the
arts-design/ITCP world to try to determine for themselves a consen-
sus view of the kinds of features or qualities they would like to see. A
consensus statement would carry more weight with standards setters
than would input from lone individuals or representatives of small or
niche groups. As suggested above, research prototypes could aid in
fostering consensus by demonstrating what a standard may lead to in
practice.SELECTED AREAS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OFHARDWARE AND SOFTWARE THAT WOULDPROMOTE CREATIVE WORKPrecisely what the future holds is uncertain, but based on currentexpectations and trends,46 the capabilities available for work in ITCP
will become far more powerful and diverse in the coming years. The
timing of the present report is therefore propitious. Among notable
research trends, nanotechnology is becoming a reality.47 Computers,
45For example, the advocacy group, the Center for Democracy and Technology, hastried an experiment in the last couple of years to see how it might participate in InternetEngineering Task Force (IETF) standards-setting activities (John Morris, a lawyer, was
the groupÕs participant). The Ford Foundation also fostered discussion of standardssetting in its Digital Media Forum. Of course, since the early days of computing therehave been various user groups that tried to influence the product designs of major
vendors.46Raw computational power has been rising exponentially for years. A popularyardstick is MooreÕs law: For the last 40 years, computing capability per dollar hasdoubled every 18 to 24 months, equivalent to a 100-fold improvement every 10 to 13years, reflected in both rapidly increasing performance and declining price. Internettraffic has been growing by a factor of about two annually, outstripping the growth in
computing speed.47Nanotechnologies are generally defined as having structures in the size range of 1to 100 nanometers (billionths of a meter). Technologies of this size often exhibit novel
properties. See, for example, information on the National Nanotechnology Initiative at<http://www.nano.gov/>.Researchprototypes couldaid in fosteringconsensus bydemonstratingwhat a standardmay lead to inpractice.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ADVANCING CREATIVE PRACTICES THROUGH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY87sensors, and other devices are becoming ever smaller. New sensors forsound and light combined with faster and cheaper digital signal pro-
cessors will make large-scale system sensing increasingly practical.48The synthesis of materials to meet defined requirements means that
the manufacture of devices will be simplified. In the near future, a
number of specific changes are envisioned. Computing speed will
become so great (10 gigahertz in a handheld device) that operations as
complex as real-time voice recognition without a learning curve could
be commonplace. There is also likely to be enhanced machine intelli-
gence and capability for seeing, hearing, and speaking.49 And many
devices will likely be considered disposable.Thus, although some excellent tools for ITCP work are available,there are many opportunities for improvement. The committee identi-
fied a handful of areas that could exert considerable leverage in pro-
moting ITCP, because such tools often enable the widespread adop-
tion of new technologies.Distributed ControlOne area in need of support is distributed control. Software thatcoordinates multiple computers is among the most difficult of pro-
grams to write. This is true even for commercial business systems, but
the problem is more acute in creative contexts because programming
resources tend to be much more limited there. Tools can provide
simplified protocols for communication between networked comput-
ers, including wireless devices.The essentially sequential nature of software systems has made itdifficult to envision a plausible distributed control paradigm. Much
research in the related area of parallel computation was curtailed in
the 1990s due to the evolution of the conventional microprocessor
from the megahertz to gigahertz speed range in only a decadeÑtherewas no need to make computer programs run faster when the com-
puter itself had become faster in a matter of months. Distributed
control has taken center stage once again, not as a potential means to
increase the speed of computation but as a way to handle the difficult
task of coordinating computation across multiple computing units.
There is a simple impediment to advancing the state of the art in this
area; namely, programming methodologies for asynchronous com-
puting are not in place, even in high-end systems. Software system
designs inherit a legacy similar to that of the automobile industry in
that only incremental, evolutionary changes are adopted instead of
the kind of revolutionary advancements needed to write more sophis-48From Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Coun-cil, 2001, Embedded, Everywhere: A Research Agenda for Networked Systems of EmbeddedComputers, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.49See, for example, John Markoff, 2002, ÒTechnology Gives Sight to Machines, Inex-pensively,Ó New York Times, June 17, available online at <http://www.nytimes.com/2002/06/17/technology/17VISI.html>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY88ticated programs that take advantage of multiprocessor and multisys-tem interactions.Sensors and ActuatorsAnother area deserving attention is sensors and actuators. Artistsand designers and scientists alike often want to collect data in the real
world and to control mechanical devices using computers. Advanced
sensing technologies and actuators exist, but without tools to simplify
their use, these technologies remain out of reach of most individuals
who are not specialists. Sensors and actuators that can be used by non-
experts can promote creative endeavors (see, for example, Box 3.8).
Note that the area of motion control and robotics is experiencing a
renaissance in computer science: Advances in component technolo-
gies and artificial intelligence moved the field along considerably in
the 1990s, and research in the area is expected to thrive.A subtle reason for recent advancements in this area can be associ-ated with the development of the Web. Once-difficult-to-obtain cata-
logs or obscure parts listings that were available only to hacker com-
munities are now easily found on the Web with a quick search.
Interfacing with these parts was once also difficult, requiring access to
the relevant technical community. Now most of this knowledge is
published and easily accessed on the Web. Interfacing information,
sample projects, and even advanced research can easily be found by
the curious builder.In addition to the challenge of using sensor and actuator technolo-gies, there is the problem of interfacing them to computers, especially
if they are non-standard. This situation might be alleviated by the
design and distribution of software and hardware that take advantage
of serial interfaces such as the universal serial bus (USB) and the IEEE-
1394 multimedia standard.50 There have been several attempts at de-
veloping general-purpose sensor systems and input/output boxes in
the arts, such as the iCube system and notably, Michael RodemerÕsEZIO board, designed at the Art and Technology Department of the
Art Institute of Chicago in the mid-1990s and now commercially avail-
able.The success of the Parallax Inc. Basic Stamp microcontroller as alow-cost platform for educational experimentation has changed the
publicÕs access to embedded computing. Ample documentation, com-plete technical information, and well-documented sample projects have50One interesting effort is the development of Òphidgets,Ó or physical widgets, at the
University of Calgary. Phidgets are building blocks that assist in the development ofphysical user interfaces. Phidgets consist of a hardware device, software architecture forcommunication and connection management, a well-defined software application pro-
gramming interface (API) for device programming, a simulation capability, and anoptional component for interacting with the device, as described in ÒAn Overview ofPhidgets,Ó available online at <http://www.cpsc.ucalgary.ca/grouplab/phidgets/>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ADVANCING CREATIVE PRACTICES THROUGH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY89made this the platform of choice for many budding Òphysical comput-ingÓ courses nationwide. Once one is versed in the Basic Stamp
microcontroller, it is easy to move to more economical systems by
going one level deeper into the inner workings of the Basic Stamp to
its central controller, the ÒPICÓ chip. A wide variety of PIC chips, and
competitor single-chip computers such as AVR Inc.Õs line, have madeit possible for anyone to easily build a sub-$10 computer for embed-
ded control. Any art education program should find it attractive that
platforms priced at less than $10 can be budgeted for as easily as any
other art supply like paint, canvas, or a brush.With respect to interfacing the various devices that are emergingtoday, one challenge is the speed and reliability of data transfer. Re-
cently buses such as the CAN bus have emerged as high-speed stan-
dards for the robotics community, and the consumer-class USB and
IEEE-1394 technologies are continually giving rise to faster versions
like USB-2 and Firewire-2.51 Yet at some point the rapid progress in
these standards can lead to confusion in the general population. What
economists call the cost of switchingÑhaving to relearn a technologythat one had finally felt comfortable with but then learned had sud-
denly become pass”Ñcan deter or slow adoption of technology, aswell as influence standards-setting tactics.Video and AudioExtensive editing and processing tools exist for time-based media(including video and audio), but these tools assume a particular style
of workingÑnamely, that the product will be a linear video or audiorecording. In addition, most tools do not support real-time processing.
These limitations hamper artists who want to work with video and
audio media in interactive performances, take other approaches to
interactivity, stream material over the Internet, or use scripts to pro-
cess or generate video.Standards continually emerge and compete in this arena such asApple QuickTime, Macromedia Flash, and Real Video. A common
difficulty for all of these standards is to maintain compatibility across
the multiple platforms they support. Often the same version of any
system, such as Flash, will display a file properly on a PC but not on a
Macintosh. These inconsistencies are rarely addressed, and content
creators must simply work around these known problems. The stan-
dards are constantly upgraded, solving some problems yet introduc-
ing others. For an emerging field, like digital media or ITCP generally,
standards that lack reliability are a serious problem. It is as if the art of
film were emerging in an era when the film you might have shown
just once might suddenly dissolve before your very eyes.51Buses enable data transfer among the different components of a computer.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY90BOX 3.8GhostcatchingThe fruit of a collaboration between multimedia artists Paul Kaiser and Shelley Eshkar and dancer/choreographer Bill T. Jones, Ghostcatching1 is a virtual dance performance that makes use of motion-
capture technology. Envisioning a blend of performance, filmmaking, drawing, and computer composition,
the artists used light-sensitive sensors attached to 22 key points of JonesÕs body and eight cameras to capturehis movements. Roughly 40 sequences of JonesÕs movement were recorded digitally. The resulting ÒcapturedataÓÑwhich represented a record of only the movements of the sensors and not of JonesÕs body per seÑwere then used as the raw information for Kaiser and EshkarÕs creative application. See Figure 3.8.1. JonesÕsÒmovements were then manipulated electronically and re-choreographed on a computer screen to makean original virtual performance.Ó2The results include an 8-minute digital projection, 13 still images taken from the dance, photographsthat describe the artistsÕ process, and a soundtrack consisting of Jones
Õs own sounds: Òchanting, humming,singing, talking, grunting, and more.Ó3 Commissioned by the Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science
and Art,4 the installation opened at the Cooper Union
Õs Arthur A. Houghton Jr. Gallery in New York Cityand ran from January 6 to February 13, 1999.1For more information, see <http://www.cooper.edu/art/ghostcatching/ghost/exhibit.html>.2Zoe Ingalls, 1999, ÒUsing New Technology to Create ÔVirtual DanceÕ,Ó Chronicle of Higher Education 45(21): A29-
A30.3Ingalls, 1999, ÒUsing New Technology to Create ÔVirtual DanceÕ.Ó1. Improvising2.  Wearing motion-capture markers
Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ADVANCING CREATIVE PRACTICES THROUGH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY915. ÒHand-drawnÓ lines modeled as
mathematical curves3. Markers optically recorded and convertedto digital three-dimensional files4.  Motion files applied to kinematic model of the body6. Sampled charcoaled strokes applied and rendered asa final drawn bodyFIGURE 3.8.1 Ghostcatching. Images courtesy of Bill T. Jones, Paul Kaiser, and Shelley Eshkar; available for download at<ftp://ftp.eshkar.com/ghostcatching/>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY92Generative ProcessesFrom both a computational and an artistic and design standpoint,an attractive feature of computers is that they enable generative pro-
cesses. Rather then creating each note or brush stroke by hand, an
artist or designer can design a process that generates material auto-
matically. Of particular interest are fractals, chaotic systems, and sys-
tems exhibiting non-linear dynamics. These have strong connections
to natural processes, can be explored only by using computers, and
often create interesting and unpredicted output. A programmer could
set up a generative process relatively easily, but tools are needed that
can encapsulate these processes to make them more accessible to
artists and designers. Generative processes are interesting to contem-
plate for a few reasons. First, the associated computer models depend
on assumptionsÑand to ensure that the models do not present thekinds of constraints criticized above, it will be important for artists
and designers to have some understanding of the modelsÕ inner work-
ings, which in turn depends on comfort with quantitative analyses.
Second, some of the earliest explorations of ITCP were generative
processes. A notable instance is Harold CohenÕs work with the artifi-cial intelligence drawing-generating program, Aaron.52 More contem-
porary simulation models, some of which explore Òartificial life,Ó have
been used by biologists and other scientists to understand evolution,
yielding a new understanding of its pacing and realization. The Santa
Fe Institute led the development and use of these models, providing
training in modeling methods, and it also has reached out to the arts
community. The rise of computer games that feature artificial worlds
suggests but one of the more obvious potential ITCP connections.
Artificial-world development is also being explored outside the game
context.53When computing was young, the most natural form of creativeactivity on the computer was programming. This led to some land-
mark work by researchers at Bell Labs, such as Ken Knowlton, who
were versed in programming but in addition had a penchant for visual
art. The idea that forms can emerge from programming echoes com-
plex processes in the physical world where the result is something you
cannot expect. More recently with the rise and proliferation of digital
tools, programmatic approaches to form have become less popular.
For ITCP to advance, a fundamental shift is needed from computation
or mathematics based on numbers to that based on symbols.52See <http://www.umcs.maine.edu/~larry/latour/aaron.html>.53See the World Generator/The Engine of Desire by Bill Seaman with Gideon May.The work enables the construction of virtual worlds in real time in an interactiveenvironment. Although the work is artistic, it has been featured in a number of IT
studies and has potential for many design and interactive tool applications. For furtherinformation, see <http://faculty.risd.edu/faculty/bseamanweb/web/texts.html> and<http://www.nada.kth.se/erena/pdf/D1_2.pdf>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ADVANCING CREATIVE PRACTICES THROUGH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY93Reliable, Low-latency Communicationover the InternetArtists and designers have common cause with a wide range ofusers in their interest in reliable, low-latency communication over the
Internet.54 Higher bandwidth and/or quality-of-service guarantees
could enable new levels of interaction, distributed concerts, two-way
video, and other creative activities that necessitate specific levels of
network performance. As some observed to the committee, were art-
ists able to stream their own bandwidth-demanding work out, it would
yield greater diversity of voices and stimulation to creativity. This is
the crux of the broadband dilemma: Broadband users are twice as
likely as dial-up users to have their own Web sites, with nearly 60
percent becoming creators and managers of content in this manner,
according to a report by the Pew Internet & American Life Project.55But pervasive broadband deployment in the United States will require
billions of dollars in investment;56 subscriber levels, while growing,
fall far short of the potential, given existing deployment, and therefore
widespread use is not expected soon. That said, in the academic world,
the Internet2 project and complementary federal research infrastruc-
ture programs provide high-bandwidth service on and between many
campuses because of its potential to support cutting-edge application
research. Music performance over the Canadian equivalent, the
CANARIE network, illustrates the general proposition that these fa-
cilities could be valuable ITCP vehicles. Recent advances in low-la-
tency ultra-videoconferencing have been carried out by musician-
researchers at McGill and Stanford Universities.57As in other communities, opinions in the arts world about thevalue of broadband differ. To some, a benefit of ever-increasing pro-
cessor speeds has been the development of media-rich simulations
and other works, stimulating demand for broadband services. Yet
others find such digital spectacles less compelling than new social
models for peer-to-peer cultural production. From this standpoint,
advanced content should be focused not on creating volumes of traffic54The Internet is based on best-effort policies that make no guarantees for the timelydelivery of information. Reliability is achieved by re-transmitting data when a loss isdetected, but this recovery introduces delays. See Computer Science and Telecommuni-
cations Board, National Research Council, 2001, The InternetÕs Coming of Age, NationalAcademy Press, Washington, D.C.55Mike Snider, 2002, ÒFaster Connection Allows Users to Do More,Ó USA Today
, June23, available online at <http://www.usatoday.com/life/cyber/tech/2002/06/24/
broadband.htm>. See also The Broadband Difference: How Online AmericansÕ Behavior
Changes with High-speed Internet Connections at Home, available online <http://www.pewinternet.org/reports/toc.asp?Report=63>.56See Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, 2001, The InternetÕs Comingof Age, p. 45.57Jeremy Cooperstock, an engineer at McGill University, and Chris Chafe, a com-poser at Stanford University; see <http://www.cim.mcgill.ca/~jer/research/rtnm/>.Internet2 and CANARIE are discussed further in Chapters 5 and 8.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY94that can fill up fat data pipes, but on infrastructural advances thatwould allow a wide public access to and control over digital objects,
although with the recognition that there are certainly legitimate and
productive needs for greater capacity.58 This perspective shifts the
focus to thinking of how to increase the range of interpersonal connec-
tion and personal expression distributed across society.One issue relating to broadband is that the quantitative increase inbit traffic makes possible qualitative change in digital expression.
However, this potential is confounded by a tendency for capabilities
to fluctuate with IT innovations: After the initial emergence of digital
media serving smaller amounts of kilobytes, higher amounts of data
could be conveyed through the CD-ROM media, only to go back to
smaller amounts of kilobytes over the (narrowband or dial-up) Web,
and then up to large capacity again via DVD-ROM and now to broad-
band. Looking across this series of innovations, they have not been
associated with an intrinsic change in content for the betterÑperhapsbecause of uncertainty associated with the fluctuations, or perhaps
because experience with any one technology has been too abbreviated.Tool Design and Human-ComputerInteractionThere is a great deal of work to be done in understanding theramifications of the tradeoffs that occur every day in the design of
tools. The discussion above includes examples of how the tool design-
ersÕ choices in areas such as abstraction, extensibility, and metaphor
can affect the practices within a field and the results obtained through
the use of the tool. Insufficient work has gone into understanding how
to leverage this relationship to better support creative practices. This
goes far beyond the usability studies once typically associated with
human-computer interaction research. Questions to be addressed in-
clude these: When does embodying domain knowledge in a tool help?
What is the impact of supporting multiple metaphors in one tool?
When are constraints good inspirations, and when do they cause
excessive perspiration? When can implicit assumptions help, and when
can they be hindrances? How much and what kind of openness yields
opportunity, and what yields frustration? In other words, what is the
relationship among information, its representation, presentation, and
manipulation, and the range of work encouraged? Researchers and
developers have produced a small number of data pointsÑmore workin understanding this area can have deep ramifications for encourag-
ing ITCP.58A Canadian task force concluded a series of consultations with the arts and culturalcommunity with a report entitled Filling the Pipe: Stimulating CanadaÕs Broadband ContentIndustry Through R&D, available online at <http://www.canarie.ca/press/publications/
broadband_report.pdf>.A quantitativeincrease in bittraffic makespossiblequalitativechange in digitalexpression.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ADVANCING CREATIVE PRACTICES THROUGH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY95Programming LanguagesFinally, some areas of great interest to artists are not well servedby programming languages, which tend to be driven by science, engi-
neering, the Web, and more commercial application areas. Some of the
topics discussed above, especially distributed control, video and au-
dio processing, and generative processes, could be supported better
by languages. Languages are particularly important for specifying
interactive behavior and generative processes, an area not well sup-
ported by commercial software. Because a great deal of creative activ-
ity involves combining existing concepts in new ways, and because
programming languages provide the glue for assembling software
tools and libraries into applications, languages are critical to innova-
tion. Progress has been achieved in making programming languages
simpler for novice programmers, but this work needs to be adapted to
support more creative work.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96
˙¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥nformation technology (IT) as a medium for the work ofartists and designers is discussed in Chapter 3, which
points out that there are many ways for computer science
(CS) to support new tools and applications for the artsand design disciplines, in service to cutting-edge and more main-
stream practitioners alike. These tools and applications offer the po-
tential for beneficial developments in information technology and
creative practices (ITCP). But there are further, more profound impli-
cations of the intersection between IT and the arts and design, and
these are the focus of this chapter, which views art and design prac-
tices as forms of CS research and development. This perspective on CS
is more subtle, more challenging, and more fundamental than the
tools orientation of Chapter 3. It involves a non-traditional and per-
haps unfamiliar kind of art and design practice. It also involves re-
thinking CS in ways that many computer scientists would find non-
traditional.BEYOND TOOLSTHE INFORMATION ARTSWriting in 1993 during the take-off of the wired boom of the 1990s,veteran commentator Stewart Brand pondered whether Òtechnology
has swallowed art, and so is art gone now?Ó1  In fact, if art is under-
stood as the making of unique individual objectsÑsuch as paintings,
sculptures, and drawingsÑor the result of traditional approaches to1Stewart Brand, 1993, ÒCreating Creating,Ó Wired, 1.01 March/April.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INFLUENCE OF ART AND DESIGN ON COMPUTER SCIENCE R&D97the performing arts, then, for some new-media artists, the answer maybe yes. They take information technologies for granted, but their art is
not fixated on the computer as a medium, as if it were paint or a violin,
or even the sound artistÕs turntables or the scenic artistÕs optical instru-ments. As Stephen WilsonÕs recent encyclopedic compendium of con-temporary intersections between art, science, and technology shows,
the information arts range across the life and space sciences,
nanotechnology, robotics, and other new materials, as well as IT it-
self.2 This style of practice does not use technology to create new
artworks so much as it uses artistic practice to manage and interpret
information at the cusp of technological and scientific research.This new kind of art and design practice looks increasingly liketechnical research, but it is done from an artistic or design rather than
a scientific perspectiveÑit asks different kinds of questions and usesdifferent kinds of methods to search for answers. Generally speaking,
technical research focuses almost exclusively on new technical possi-
bilities: What new things can be done? How can they be done faster or
more efficiently? By contrast, artistic and design work tends to focus
on the social and cultural meaning of the technology that is under
development. This aspect differentiates the approach from that of
conventional CS, which does not tend to address explicitly such impli-
cations of decisions about system design and implementation, and
which may look askance at approaches that have a social science
flavor. While a traditional work of art can be thought of as a represen-
tation of an artistic concept, the information arts often ask what tech-
nologies themselves (perhaps unintentionally) express and how they
ought to be reconceived.3ArtistsÕ questioning can be a powerful, constructive force. In par-
ticular, since the mid-19th century artists have often personified the
Òuser to comeÓ for new cultural technologies. Many media technologi-
cal advances have arisen in the arts and design fields or have been
modeled there, a decade or a generation ahead of the industrial-
academic curve; see Box 4.1. For Alvy Ray Smith, the prominent
computer graphics expert, artists are most valuable as Òexplorers atthe edge of our culture,Ó and he looks to them to 
Òtell the rest of uswhat [computation] really is.Ó4  Thus, the information artist functionsas an archetypal knowledge worker:  someone able to 
Òpenetrateconventional organizations to which their continuing attachment to an
ÔexternalÕ knowledge community represents a valuable asset.
Ó5  ITCP
2See Stephen Wilson, 2001, Information Arts, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass. Also see
links to online resources at <http://online.sfsu.edu/~infoarts/links/wilson.artlinks2.html>.3The CATÕs MeAoW lecture series at New York University, for example, was framedaround such questions; see Box 6.1 for details.4Alvy Ray Smith, 1998, ÒThe Stuff of Dreams (25 Years = 100,000x),Ó ComputerGraphics World 21(7): 27-29.5See Paul A. David and Dominique Foray. 2002. ÒAn Introduction to the Economy ofthe Knowledge Society,Ó International Social Science Journal (UNESCO 171) 54:25-37.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY98BOX 4.1Far from Unprecedented:Influences of Art and Design on Information TechnologyThe role of artists in defining technology is well established in history, though this history is often notwell-known, as least by modern pundits and chroniclers of information technology (IT). For example, Louis
Daguerre, often cited as one of the pioneers of photography, was neither a chemist nor an optics professor;
he was a painter of sets for the opera (and the inventor of daguerreotype).1It is instructive to consider the history of electronic and digital musical instruments. From the pointof view of composers, the critical discussions were about timbre, scales, and compositional techniques and
influences, thus shaping how electronic and digital music instruments were imagined, used, and developed.
The instruments, performances, and means of distribution were all co-developed between artists and
engineers.2  The artistsÕ work was a precondition to commercial exploitation (in the direct and indirect
senses).Such a process is contrary to the traditional historical accounts of engineers (or the military) drivingthe development of technology and the artists following by finding Òcreative applications.Ó  Instead, it is often

the artists who make the initial investment. The investment of artists is critical to this innovation, as it is artists
who are motivated to explore alternatives beyond what has already been framed as acceptable, often long
before major commercial applications can be imagined (e.g., the Hammond organ is the direct application
of patents filed by a musician before the miniaturization of electronics).Why are such observations on the way to innovation often omitted from histories of technologyevolution?  First, art critics often do not Òdo technologyÓ; art critics and curators, because of their education

and expertise, generally do not have much acquaintance with technological concepts, technologies, or
theoretical tools for techno-social interaction. Second, because commercial success has become the
dominant measure by which to evaluate and justify technological and scientific research, less attention is
accorded systematically to non-commercial applications.1See ÒDaguerre, Louis Jacques MandeÓ at <http://www.rleggat.com/photohistory/history/daguerr.htm>.2See David Dunn, 1992, ÒA History of Electronic Music Pioneers,Ó an essay written for the catalog accompanyingthe exhibition ÒEigenwelt der Apparatewelt:  Pioneers of Electronic Art,Ó Ars Electronica, Linz, Austria, curated by
Woody and Steina Vasulka. Also see Trevor Pinch, 2002, Analog Days:  The Invention and Impact of the Moog Synthesizer,
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.makes apparent the value of the artist as mediatorÑsomeone who isincreasingly intercommunicatingÑaddressing IT-related process andcontext and expanding beyond the traditional artistÕs focus on content.For an example from the world of design practice, recall the workof Karim Rashid (presented in Chapter 2). The software that controls
the variations in each of the napkin rings produced is integral to the
creative process. Without such software control, the rings would be
identical as the outputs from a mass production process. In both
instances (with and without the intervening software), the initial de-
sign involves creative practice. However, the introduction of RashidÕssoftware into the production process offers an additional opportunity
for creativity. In this sense, the reach of the information artist extends
beyond product design to process design.The reach of theinformation artistextends beyondproduct design toprocess design.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INFLUENCE OF ART AND DESIGN ON COMPUTER SCIENCE R&D99MODELING DISCIPLINES:  FROMMULTIDISCIPLINARY TO TRANSDISCIPLINARYThe relationship between IT and the arts and design as discussedin Chapter 3 can be described using a multidisciplinary model. Each
discipline (e.g., architecture) is represented as a circle; the area where
the circles overlap is the area of intersection (e.g., IT-enhanced archi-
tecture). One implication of this representation is that the non-over-
lapping areas do not change. Each discipline provides some piece of
its practice or theory that is compatible, useful, or mutually beneficial
to other disciplines without any change in the way the discipline itself
fundamentally works (see Figure 4.1a).6  This kind of representation
conveys how aspects of already-existing genres, methods, or theories
are applied in different contexts
Ñin the case of this report, how IT canbe applied in the arts and design areas.But in another possible model (Figure 4.1b), the circles do notintersect but instead share a common frame. Each discipline maintains
its own knowledge and methodologies but is fully, not partially, open
to the other disciplines.7  In this second model, the disciplines not only
apply their methods in a new context but also are receptive to funda-
mental changes in knowledge and methodology based on their inter-
action. What is crucial to enable this kind of interaction is the ÒframeÓsurrounding the disciplinesÑa mutual awareness and understanding,especially a historical understanding, of one another and their rela-
tionship. The shared frame may be only a transient phenomenonÑthedisciplines may come into contact, engage in some fruitful exchange,
and then continue to develop separately and move apart, as con-
trasted with the multidisciplinary approach sketched in Figure 4.1a. In
transdisciplinary research,8 the point is not just application of given
methodologies but also implicationÑa result of imagining entirely newpossibilities for what disciplines can do.6It is worth noting that areas such as Òthe artsÓ cannot be reasonably contained
within a circle implying that what is ÒinÓ can be distinguished easily from what is 
ÒoutÓ(or even that an ÒinÓ versus 
ÒoutÓ categorization is useful). The use of a circle to
represent disciplines is, of course, a heuristic for purposes of exposition.7Disciplines can be relatively open or closed in various ways. One way to assesswhether a discipline is open is through the use of tools from bibliometrics. One can, for
example, employ citation analysis to determine the frequency with which a disciplinecites articles in (certain) other disciplines. Those disciplines with a higher percentage ofoutside-discipline citations could be characterized as more open than disciplines with
lower percentages. Standards (and representational structures more generally) can alsobe examined in their role of affecting openness. Standards (e.g., HTML) can serve aswonderful contributions to work at the intersection of disciplines, but at the same time
can be the source of resistance to change in the home discipline.8Margaret A. Somerville and David J. Rapport, eds., 2000, Transdisciplinarity:  Recre-
ating Integrated Knowledge, EOLSS, Oxford, U.K.Intransdisciplinaryresearch, thepoint is not justapplication ofgivenmethodologiesbut alsoimplicationÑaresult ofimaginingentirely newpossibilities forwhat disciplinescan do.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY100 ABCAB C (b) Transdisciplinary Model:New Context of ApplicationTransaction space requires understanding ofown and other disciplines¥New common space created specifi-cally from interpenetration of disciplines¥Boundaries are shown as perturbed,and they adjust to accommodate the reflec-
tion from other circles¥Intensity of communication betweendisciplines becomes context for implicationÑexpansion beyond context of immediate ap-plication to Òanticipatory visionÓ of future pos-
sibilities¥Transaction space may be transient,leaving separate circles reconstituted basedon a single transactionÑor sustained overtime, leading to a durable merging(a)  Multidisciplinary Model: New Context of Application¥Mixes knowledge of disciplines A, B,and C for a common purpose, but each disciplinekeeps its former shape¥Intersected area creates new context forapplication of already-existing concepts and meth-odsÑIT as a means to replicate, automate,speed up, and/or reduce the cost of prior analogpracticesÑArt as post hoc ÒbeautificationÓ of
separately conceived functionality stylingFIGURE 4.1  Models of the relationship between information technology and the arts and design:  Multidisciplinary versus
transdisciplinary. SOURCE:  Adapted from Margaret A. Somerville and David J. Rapport, eds., 2000, 
Transdisciplinarity:Recreating Integrated Knowledge, EOLSS, Oxford, U.K, pp. 248-249.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INFLUENCE OF ART AND DESIGN ON COMPUTER SCIENCE R&D101The project on Internet data sonification (introduced in Chapter 2)involving a Lucent Technologies statistician and a media artist/com-
poser illustrates the differences between the two models. Brought
together through an ad hoc, short-term artist-in-residency effort co-
sponsored by Lucent Technologies and the Brooklyn Academy of
Music, neither the scientist nor the artist had a preexisting hypothesis
or conception of how to combine musical gesture and statistical mod-
eling of data. The outcome was a prototype listening station that
conveys the dynamic properties of Internet communication flows (e.g.,
newsgroups and chat communities) through sounds:  melody, texture,

and rhythm. This common object resulted from reciprocal learning
about the implications of each field for the other. Beginning with a less
joint or problem definition, a multidisciplinary outcome would have
been different from thisÑand arguably less innovative. For example, acomposer or a painter might have interpreted the abstract patterns
revealed by the data flows; that kind of approach has been seen in art
inspired by data visualization. Or the statistician might have proposed
to a designer the production of an elegant display of quantitative
tables.The Listening Post research prototype has spawned several se-quels, each realized in the separate worlds of the scientistÕs and theartistÕs ongoing work. Mark Hansen, the scientist, defined applica-tions relevant to the operation of Lucent network-monitoring facili-
ties; Ben Rubin, the artist, continued to present data-driven network
sonification in musical and gallery contexts. The team has, in fact,
endured longer than the initial pilot.9  Two co-authored papers on the
results of the experiment address different specialist readers, account-
ing for the collaboratorsÕ contribution symmetrically.
10  Intellectual
property agreements unique to the dynamics of the project were de-
veloped after some difficulty; they recognized that the artistic content
and the invented intellectual propertyÑtogether constituting theproject outcomeÑare inextricably merged and are co-owned.11In the intersection of multiple disciplines described above, theroles of artists and designers and computer scientists are clear-cut.
Artists and designers have needs that computer scientists can fulfill.
Engaging in a fruitful exchange requires conversations to identify
those needs and to determine how computer scientists can best fulfill9Through the sponsorship of the Rockefeller Foundation, their collaboration contin-ues as of this writing:  The 
ÒBen Rubin and Mark Hansen: Listening PostÓ exhibition is
running at the Whitney Museum of American Art from December 17, 2002, through
March 9, 2003; see <http://www.whitney.org/information/press/87.html>.10Ben Rubin and Mark H. Hansen, 2000, ÒThe Audiences Would Be the Artists andTheir Life Would Be the Arts,Ó IEEE Multimedia 7(2): 6-9; Mark H. Hansen and Ben
Rubin, 2001, ÒBabble Online:  Applying Statistics and Design to Sonify the Internet,
Ó pp.
1-15 in Proceedings of the 2001 International Conference on Auditory Display, Espoo, Finland,July 29-August 1.11In 2002, Mark Hansen joined the faculty of the University of California at LosAngeles. Interestingly, Hansen developed two presentations for interviewsÑone forfaculties of science and one for faculties of art and design.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY102them. In a transdisciplinary situation, however, artists and designersare not clients of computer scientists but instead interact with them as
peers. Bringing to the exchange their own disciplinary methodologies
and value systems, artists and designers have their own opinions
about what research ought to be pursued and how it ought to be done.
One result is a fundamental rethinking of how research into informa-
tion technology might be conceived.IMPLICATIONS FOR COMPUTER SCIENCEFor computer science work, the advantages of being open to theperspectives of the arts and design disciplines are potentially large.
Computer science already has a productive tradition of drawing on
other disciplines, from mathematics to physics to cognitive psychol-
ogy, to advance its own work by exploring new problems and think-
ing about new potential solutions to those problems.12  Similarly,
responding to disciplines from the arts and design worlds opens the
possibility of discovering new methodologies for and solutions to
problems that, until now, have been beyond the reach of the computer
science field to solve or perhaps even articulate. Often the effects of IT
research have proved profound (and sometimes unintentionally so),13and ITCP serves as a way for those with primarily technical interests
to communicate with those more interested in the social, cultural, and
political aspects of technology.The perspectives of the information arts are particularly interest-ing in cases where CS research itself is already moving toward the
perspective embodied by art and design practices. One example of
such a shift is in the field of human-computer interaction (HCI). In the
last 10 years, the field has moved gradually from focusing largely on
the hardware and software of human-computer interaction (e.g., de-
velopment of the mouse and graphical interface) to paying more atten-
tion to human psychology (e.g., what mental models of software are
constructed by users) and social interaction (e.g., how software can
support project collaboration). More recently, HCI has begun to draw
more broadly on the social sciences, especially ethnography (the rigor-
ous, qualitative study of human use and contexts of technology), in
order to design systems that better fit into the lives of human users.
Simultaneously, the connections have deepened between HCI and the
design community, which approaches human-computer interaction in
more open-ended ways.14  These shifts in HCI as a field bring it closer
12See Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Coun-cil, 1992, Computing the Future:  A Broader Agenda for Computer Science and Engineering,Juris Hartmanis and Herbert Lin, eds., National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.13For example, it is clear that the developers of Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol were not looking to challenge the music recording industry, or toenable the wide distribution of technical information on making inexpensive bombs.14See, for example, Terry Winograd, John Bennett, Laura De Young, Peter S. Gordon,and Brad Hartfield, eds., 1996, Bringing Design to Software, ACM Press, New York, N.Y.,and Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass.One result is afundamentalrethinking of howresearch intoinformationtechnology mightbe conceived.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INFLUENCE OF ART AND DESIGN ON COMPUTER SCIENCE R&D103to the information arts and suggest that there is now a potential forsynergy between the two.One such area where the methodology and attention to social,cultural, and political context typical of the information arts may
benefit HCI is the use of technology outside of work contexts. Work
applications tend to focus on efficient, problem-solving functionality
for which we now have well-understood design and evaluation tech-
niques. Applications for everyday life, however, suggest the impor-
tance of aspects that are less understood and are hard to quantify, such
as quality of experience, meaningfulness, personal values, identity,
and appropriateness to social and cultural contextÑareas for whichthe perspectives of the information arts may be particularly appropri-
ate. This concern with the human element can already be seen in
consumer electronics, which have a history of drawing on market
research and human factors analysis and which often depend on
design for competitive advantage; the broader uses of IT envisioned
with increases in the embedding of computing and communications
components implies a broader and often rather different set of per-
sonal and other non-work-focused technologies in the future. HCI
researchers are realizing that there is a need to do some fundamental
rethinking of HCI methods to understand what these assumptions
are, to analyze the extent to which they are applicable to the new
contexts of everyday life, and, in cases where they are not applicable,
to invent new methodologies that are more appropriate.15  This kind
of rethinking is an endeavor for which the information arts can be
helpful; concrete examples where interaction may be particularly fruit-

ful are discussed further in the section ÒNon-utilitarian EvaluationÓbelow.Similar shifts are occurring in other areas of computer science. Inartificial intelligence (AI), for example, there has recently been a focus
on lifelike computer characters or believable agents, with a great deal
of interest in incorporating approaches from drama and the arts into
agent design.16  The development of algorithms for information re-
trieval on the Web has underscored the need to combine theoretical15See, for example, recent publications of the ACM Press, including the proceedingsfrom the CHI 2002 Workshop on Funology, the HCI 2002 Workshop on UnderstandingUser Experience: Literary Analysis Meets HCI, and the CHI 2003 Workshop on Design-ing Culturally Situated Technology for the Home; also Bill Gaver and Heather Martin,
2000, ÒAlternatives: Exploring Information Appliances Through Conceptual DesignProposals,Ó pp. 209-216 in 
Proceedings of the CHI 2000 Conference on Human Factors inComputing Systems; ACM Press, New York; Debby Hindus, Scott D. Mainwaring, NicoleLeduc, Anna Elisabeth Hagstrım, and Oliver Bayley, 2001, ÒCasablanca: DesigningSocial Communication Devices for the Home,Ó pp. 325-332 in 
Proceedings of CHI Õ01,ACM Press, New York; and Jon OÕBrien and Tom Rodden, 1997, ÒInteractive Systems inDomestic Environment,Ó pp. 247-259 in 
Proceedings of the 1997 Conference on DesigningInteractive Systems, ACM Press, New York.16See, for example, Clark Elliott and Jacek Brzezinski, 1998, ÒAutonomous Agents asSynthetic Characters,Ó AI Magazine 19(2): 13-30; and Joseph Bates, 1994, 
ÒThe Role ofEmotion in Believable Agents,Ó Communications of the ACM 37(7): 122-125. Also see Box
4.2.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY104computer science with an understanding of the social structure of theWeb17 and raises potential connections to the cultural politics of Web
information,18 an area in which the information arts are working. For
areas like these, in which purely technical solutions do not seem
adequate to fully address the problems of interest to computer scien-
tists, interaction and engagement with information arts could be ben-
eficial to computer science.Because the information arts are inherently transdisciplinary, theyhold the possibility of motivating more than just the straightforward
use of information arts for computer scienceÕs ends or simple collabo-ration between information artists and computer scientists. Instead,
there can be a mingling and repositioning of each interacting disci-
pline. From the perspective of computer science, this implies a move
to more qualitative, rather than quantitative, research methods; a
greater incorporation of political, social, and ethical considerations
into computer science research; and more focus on intuition and aes-
thetics.19  Given the movements that have already taken place on the
arts and design side, productive cross-fertilization and a broader base
for ITCP will depend on the flexibility and openness of individual
researchers, research communities, departments, universities, and pro-
fessional societiesÑthe institutions and organizations that define aca-demic computer science.20  As detailed elsewhere in this report, there
is both movement in that direction21 and resistance to such movement.
PROMISING AREASDuring the course of its deliberations, the committee identified anumber of promising areas for transdisciplinary work. Several have
attracted fairly active interest, whereas others are just emerging. They
open the possibility of fruitful discussion and collaboration in these17See J. Kleinberg and S. Lawrence, 2001, ÒThe Structure of the Web,Ó Science
 294(5548):
1849-1850.18Richard Rogers, ed., 2000, Preferred Placement, Jan van Eyck Akademie, Maastricht,
The Netherlands.19For a compelling example of how AI research can be rethought to incorporatecritical thinking from the  humanities, see the discussion of critical technical practices in
Philip E. Agre, 1997, Computation and Human Experience, Cambridge University Press,Cambridge, U.K. For a similar integration of critical thinking and HCI, see Paul Dourish,
2001, Where the Action Is, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.20See Chapter 6 for discussion.21Sometimes movement may occur in teaching, as opposed to research, the focus ofmost of the examples in this report. For example, Robert Coover developed ÒCaveWriting,Ó a course at Brown University that brought together English students, artists
from the Rhode Island School of Design, and computer scientists from the Brown CS
department. They explored the creative potential of the Cave, a high-end virtual realityenvironment for text and related digital media elements of sound and image in virtualspace.¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INFLUENCE OF ART AND DESIGN ON COMPUTER SCIENCE R&D105areas between computer scientists and artists and designers engagedin computer-science-like work. The discussion below focuses on areas
that the information arts are particularly well suited to address based
on the following factors:  The areas involve the social context or

politics of computing; they raise difficult ethical issues that need to be
addressed in the context of technical research; they have high public or
social impact; and/or they suggest fundamental rethinking of com-
puter science. Although the following compilation is neither compre-
hensive nor predictive of the most promising areas, it does give an
idea of the breadth of possibilities for productive engagement be-
tween the information arts and computer science.MIXED REALITYMixed reality is a new, interactive medium in which computing istaken off the desktop or head-mounted display and linked with real-
world objects and places to become part of everyday, physical lives. In
these approaches, IT development and other creative practices are
synergistic. On the one hand, IT provides a new medium for creative
expression, opening up a space of possible developments to be ex-
plored. Design and media art practice, on the other hand, offer a
broader functional and aesthetic perspective. An art and design per-
spective introduces a cultural awareness that is essential in the devel-
opment of devices that not only are functional but also contribute to
the quality of life in a less direct, but often more profound, way.22In one classic design, Durrell BishopÕs marble answering machine,each message is represented by a marble (see Figure 4.2).23  When a
message is taken, the machine produces a marble.24  The marble can be
picked up and put back into the machine in order to play the message.
Placed on a matching phone, the marble causes the phone to dial the
original caller. Messages are deleted by recycling the marble in the
machine. The marble answering machine speaks to humansÕ physical-
ity.25Approaches to mixed reality include tangible media and aug-mented reality. In tangible media, physical objects like BishopÕs marblesFor areas  inwhich purelytechnicalsolutions do notseem adequate,interaction andengagement withinformation artscould bebeneficial tocomputer science.22Considerations beyond the utilitarian are pervasive and dominant in developedeconomies:  The design and production of myriad products and services, from automo-
biles and clothing to news services and computer systems, incorporate many features
that are not strictly necessary from a functional perspective.23Gillian Crampton-Smith, 1995, ÒThe Hand That Rocks the Cradle,Ó I.D., May/June,pp. 60-65.24The movie Minority Report (produced in 2002 by 20th Century Fox and starring
Tom Cruise) employs a similar marble to announce the names of the victim(s) andperpetrator(s) of crimes that will take place in the future.25Dag Svanaes and William Verplank, 2000, ÒIn Search of Metaphors for TangibleUser Interfaces,Ó 2000 Conference on Designing Augmented Reality Environments, Associa-tion for Computing Machinery, New York.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY106have computational properties. Augmented reality is an alternative tovirtual reality in which virtual images and data are projected onto and
thereby incorporated with the physical world. For example, one can
look through augmented-reality binoculars mounted in the atrium
lobby of the Center for Art and Media (ZKM) in Karlsruhe, Germany,
to see the heart of the building, overlaid with labels explaining what is
done on the different floors:  reality plus.
26  Both augmented reality
and tangible media have their roots in Mark WeiserÕs vision of ubiqui-tous computing.27Technical issues in mixed reality include the maintenance of corre-spondence between real-world and virtual objects, standards for

interobject communication, perception (including vision processing,
video tracking of objects, plan recognition, and integration of multiple
forms of sensory data), spatial reasoning, and learning and adapta-
tion. But designing and constructing mixed-reality devices that are
functional, useful, interesting, and desirable are not only technical
challenges, but also artistic and practical challenges. University envi-C. Recycle old messagesA. Pick up new messagesB. Play messagesC. Recycle old messagesA. Pick up new messagesB. Play messagesFIGURE 4.2  A conception of Durrell Bishop
Õs marble answering machine. When a new message is left, the machinedeposits a marble in the upper tray (A) for the recipient to find. The marble can then be placed on the lower indentation (B)to play the message. When the message is no longer needed, the recipient recycles it by dropping the marble into the hole(C). Illustration created by Jennifer M. Bishop, Computer Science and Telecommunications Board staff.26Work by Jeffrey Shaw; see <http://www.zkm.de>.27A vision in which processors are embedded in everyday objects and networkedtogether would integrate computation invisibly and seamlessly into daily life. See Mark
Weiser, 1991, ÒThe Computer for the 21st Century,Ó Scientific American 265(3): 94-104.
Ubiquitous computing is discussed further in the section ÒMobile and UbiquitousComputing,Ó below.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INFLUENCE OF ART AND DESIGN ON COMPUTER SCIENCE R&D107ronments are one venue where the relevant expertise and aspirationsare brought together.At Georgia Institute of TechnologyÕs Graphics, Visualization, andUsability Center, for example, computer scientist Blair MacIntyre and
media theorist Jay David Bolter collaborate on the Sweet Auburn
project, cross-informing augmented-reality technology and content
development. They are developing applications to support tours of
AtlantaÕs historic Auburn district, in which ÒghostsÓ from Auburn
Õspast appear superimposed over the landscape and address users with
their stories.28  At the MIT Media Laboratory, Hiroshi IshiiÕs TangibleMedia group integrates art, design, and human-computer interaction
to generate pre-market speculative applications such as music bottles
that can be uncorked to release the music inside and ÒcurlybotsÓ that
record and play back physical gestures.29  A playful, speculative de-
sign approach is taken at the Computer-Related Design program at
the Royal College of Art (London), home of BishopÕs marble answer-ing machine and whimsical applications ranging from a telepathic
Tamagotchi30 to a bird feeder that use principles of reinforcement
learning to teach songbirds new tunes.COMPUTER GAMESComputer games, having long ago left their roots as playful ex-periments for academic computer scientists, are emerging as a con-
temporary topic of computer science research because advances in
many component technologies have driven burgeoning interest in
ÒgamesÓ for serious contexts as well as entertainment.
31  Thus, for
example, in the mid-1990s the Department of Defense (DOD) began to
explore prospects for research collaborations among people doing
modeling and simulation in defense and entertainment (including
games) contexts,32 and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
28Blair MacIntyre, Marco Lohse, Jay Bolter, and Emmanuel Moreno, 2001, ÒGhosts inthe Machine: Integrating 2D Video Actors into a 3D AR System,Ó pp. 80-83 in Proceedingsof 2nd International Symposium on Mixed Reality, Yokohama, Japan, March 14-15.29Hiroshi Ishii and Brygg Ullmer, 1997, ÒTangible Bits:  Seamless Interfaces Between
People, Bits and Atoms,Ó pp. 234-241 in 
Proceedings of the 1997 Conference on Computer-Human Interaction, ACM Press, New York.30A Tamagotchi (pronounced Òtom-ah-GOT-cheeÓ) is a relatively inexpensive toycontaining a small liquid-crystal display, a few touch-sensitive user controls, and aprogram in which the image of a small creature is visible. Users can see the creaturemature or, if insufficient attention is paid, see the creature die.  Tamagotchi comes from

the Japanese terms ÒtamagoÓ meaning 
ÒeggÓ and 
ÒchiÓ as a term of endearment; it
means, approximately, Òlovable egg.Ó  Derived from <http://whatis.techtarget.com/
definition/0,,sid9_gci213089,00.html>. Also see Anthony Dunne, 1999, Hertzian Tales:Electronic Products, Aesthetic Experience & Critical Design, Art Books International Ltd.,
London.31The popular appeal and success of computer games are discussed in Chapter 2.32See Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Coun-cil, 1997, Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment and Defense, National Academy
Press, Washington, D.C.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY108has begun to explore the potential of games for decision support. TheDOD exploration gave rise to an Army-funded center at the Univer-
sity of Southern California, the Institute for Creative Technology; re-
lated work had already begun at the Naval Postgraduate School in
Monterey, California.Computer games offer a unique playground for serious research,not only because of the underlying allure of fun and competition, but
also because important new questions arise. For example, what is a
body, a surface (when infinitely malleable), or a space?  How does one

deal with a changing sense of time given that one can go back to a
saved game?  How then does one change the way one plays?  How

does one convey the essence of person despite screen formÑgestures,and so on
Ñvarying?  Most interestingly, designers of massively
multiplayer online games are grappling, with a large degree of suc-
cess, with the social, political, and aesthetic issues inherent in virtual
worlds. What is the social contract between participants, and between
the participant and the designer?  What are the consequences of con-

flicts in the virtual world, and to what degree should those conse-
quences be determined by the online population, versus the adminis-
tration?  How should people deal with the distribution of authorship

in an environment where narratives are participatory and emergent?
How does one foster organic, self-organizing social structures in a
virtual world?  How does a designer make places people want not

only to visit, but also to inhabit for hundreds or thousands of hours
over the course of several years?  These questions raise various issues

for a number of computer science fields, including information re-
trieval, database management, and computer graphics, to name a
fewÑthough such questions are not purely CS ones, but rather ques-tions that are truly transdisciplinary. There is evidence that CS is
beginning to address some of these questions (e.g., see the special
issue ÒGame Engines in Scientific ResearchÓ in the 
Communications ofthe ACM, January 2002).33NARRATIVE INTELLIGENCEIn the early 1990s, a group of graduate students at the MIT MediaLab formed a new reading group, which they called narrative intelli-
gence (NI).34  The group explored issues at the intersection of narrative
and both human intelligence and AI, seeking to develop a dialogue
between new computational concepts and technologies and the in-
sights of literary theories such as poststructuralism and semiotics. The
group came together with an understanding of, and the desire to33One reviewer observed that the CS research agenda was being only modestlyinfluenced as of November 2002.34Marc Davis and Michael Travers, 1999, ÒA Brief Overview of the Narrative Intelli-gence Reading Group,Ó pp. 11-16 in 
Proceedings of the 1999 AAAI Symposium on NarrativeIntelligence, Michael Mateas and Phoebe Sengers, eds., AAAI Press, Menlo Park, Calif.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INFLUENCE OF ART AND DESIGN ON COMPUTER SCIENCE R&D109reconcile, the contradictions and incompatibilities between these twoworld views:  AI technology focused by and large on formal, logical

representation and objectivity, whereas the analytical tools provided
by new literary theories focused on subjectivity, multiplicity, and the
limitations of formalism. The pragmatics of negotiating the differences
between these world views led to a creative foment. The group flour-
ished, exploring issues in the philosophy of mind, media theory, HCI,
psychology, social computing, constructionism, and AI, developing
theories and applications in all these areas, influencing the direction of
the doctoral program at the Media Lab, and connecting to a wider
network of researchers who joined in the groupÕs discussions over e-mail. Narrative intelligence as a field was born.NI research obviously incorporates influences from a variety offields. Artificial intelligence, with tools to model human emotion,
personality, and narrative abilities, provides a framework from which
much of the research grows. Psychology, especially narrative psychol-
ogy, generates explanations of the human ability to understand the
world through narrative, creating a basis for systems that model or
support this ability. Art research raises new questions about the na-
ture of narrative representation, keeping the concept of narrative fresh.
Cultural studies analyze hidden cultural narratives, including the sto-
ries AI researchers tell through their research. Literary studies exam-
ine the nature of narrative in traditional and interactive forms. Drama
provides understanding of the real-time performance of narrative.
This emphasis on mixing technology development with artistic and
humanistic perspectives is unusual in AI. It has supported the genera-
tion of new research fields within AI, such as lifelike interactive com-
puter characters, as well as an increase in cross-disciplinary engage-
ment between AI and other fields.35At the same time, narrative trends took on importance in relatedfields. The concept of supporting human narrative understanding
through the interface of human and computer began to gain ground in
the field of HCI. Work in media studies on hypertext and interactive
fiction was inspiring a generation of systems that support narrative in
new ways. Within AI, this interest began to spur research in AI for
interactive fiction and entertainment,36 including interactive computer
35Narrative as a topic of research is not new to AI. In the 1970s and early 1980s, therewas substantial interest in modeling story understanding and story generation, particu-larly by Roger SchankÕs research group at Yale University. Programs developed by thegroupÑwhich were able to generate stories and answer questions about them, albeit inlimited ways and domainsÑillustrated theories of human understanding and the struc-ture of knowledge in the mind. Massive, unwieldy, and hard to extend, these systemsran into trouble during the ÒAI winterÓ of the 1980s. Researchers, seeking to combat the
image of AI as never living up to its inflated claims, favored clearly defined problemswith easily measurable outcomesÑa situation that is not conducive to this kind ofcreative workÑand, therefore, narrative fell out of favor for a decade as a research topicin AI.36Joseph Bates, 1992, ÒVirtual Reality, Art, and Entertainment,Ó Presence:  The Journal
of Teleoperators and Virtual Environments 1(1): 133-138.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY110characters and interactive plots. Many of these research areas explic-itly draw on the arts and drama as a source of inspiration. With the
growth of the computer game industry has come an interest in new
game forms that support narrative in more complex and interesting
ways than a stereotypical shoot-and-kill form.Research in NI is flourishing, with applications in a variety ofareas. Narrative interfaces explore possibilities for making interfaces
more usable by incorporating elements of story, for example by em-
bodying interaction in a storytelling character. Artificial agents can
themselves be designed to use narrative, as humans do, to make sense
of the world and each other (see Box 4.2). Researchers are developing
systems to support human storytelling, as in the case of plush toys that
children can program to tell their stories to families and friends.37Databases of stories allow people to search for and share stories perti-
nent to their experiences.38  Stories can be automatically generated,
perhaps in response to input from human users. Interactive digital
video allows video sequences to be generated interactively, tellingBOX 4.2Virtual CharactersÑImprovisational ActorsThe research, development, and commercialization of a new class of intelligent-agent applications thatreflect a philosophy of learning through play is the focus of Extempo Systems. Software-driven virtual
characters, which Extempo SystemsÕ founder Barbara Hayes-Roth
1 calls improvisational actors, can take the
form of a human, an animal, or just about anything the imagination can dream up, to interact directly with
people visiting a Web site. What makes them different from other types of intelligent agents is their ability
to improvise stories. According to Hayes-Roth, this design allows the actors to achieve their goals while
providing engaging conversation for many different Web site visitors. One of ExtempoÕs creations, a dognamed Jack, seeks to achieve six goals when people interact with him:  get them involved, guide them to target

information, gather customer data, personalize the experience, delight them, and build site loyalty. Jack
accomplishes his goals by improvising appropriately in response to a situation. For example, as a visitor
enters a site, Jack says what he can do for the person. If the visitor stops Òtalking,Ó Jack is programmed with
a few things to say based on the content of the conversation thus far. Like a human, Jack is designed to have
a certain protocol involving turn taking and interruption. This allows him to have characteristics of intelligent
conversation, such as making functional transformations and analogizing between topics.1See <http://www.extempo.com> for additional information about Extempo Systems and the work of BarbaraHayes-Roth, who was a briefer at the committeeÕs January 2001 meeting held at Stanford University.37Marina Umaschi, 1997, ÒSoft Toys with Computer Hearts: Building PersonalStorytelling Environments,Ó pp. 20-21 in CHI Ô97 Proceedings, ACM Press, New York.38See Justin Cassell and Jennifer Smith, 1999, ÒThe Victorian Laptop,Ó pp. 72-78 in
Narrative Intelligence: Papers from the 1999 Fall Symposium, Technical Report FS-99-01,Michael Mateas and Phoebe Sengers, eds., AAAI Press, Menlo Park, Calif.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INFLUENCE OF ART AND DESIGN ON COMPUTER SCIENCE R&D111interactive stories.39  The field of interactive fiction and drama has
exploded,40 including the subfield of interactive computer characters,
or characters with emotion and personality who respond to human
users in the context of a story.41  A complementary area of narrative
intelligence studies the stories that AI researchers themselves tell about
what they are doing.42  Sometimes, analysis of these stories can lead to
new forms of AI technology by building on alternative stories.43In this explosion of research, the interdisciplinary engagementbegun by the NI group at the Media Lab remains presentÑin worktaking place in traditional computer science departments, in cross-
disciplinary arenas like the Media Lab, in humanities and arts depart-
ments that incorporate new media such as Georgia Institute of

TechnologyÕs School of Literature, Communication, and Culture,44and in the computer game industry.NON-UTILITARIAN EVALUATIONAs discussed above, artists traditionally use evaluation techniquesthat differ radically from those of computer scientists, with little inter-
est in formal user studies and more interest in social impact, cultural
meaning, and the potential political implications of a technology. They
seek to provoke as well as to understand the user. There is an opportu-
nity to develop hybrid evaluation methodologies to combine the
broader concerns of artists with the narrower and more structured
methodologies of HCI. For example, Angela Garabet, Steve Mann, and
James Fung use strategies that are open-ended and interpretive45 to
evaluate usersÕ reactions to wearable computing designs. Interest-
ingly, they demonstrate that users are more open to and accepting of
new technology that is presented as the product of a commercial
venture rather than as art. Jonas Lundberg and colleagues uninten-39See Glorianna Davenport and Michael Murtaugh, 1997, ÒAutonomist StorytellerSystems and the Shifting Sands of Story,Ó IBM Systems Journal 46(3):  446-456.40For example, see Peter Weyhrauch, 1997, Guiding Interactive Drama, Ph.D. Thesis,
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Technical Report CMU-CS-
97-109, Pittsburgh, Pa.41See Bruce Mitchell Blumberg, 1996, Old Tricks, New Dogs: Ethology and InteractiveCreatures, Ph.D. Thesis, MIT Media Laboratory, Cambridge, Mass.42See N. Katherine Hayles, 1999, How We Became Posthuman:  Virtual Bodies in Cyber-
netics, Literature, and Informatics, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.43See Philip E. Agre, 1997, Computation and Human Experience, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, U.K.; also Phoebe Sengers, 1998, Anti-boxology: Agent Design in Cul-tural Context, Ph.D. Thesis, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University,Technical Report CMU-CS-98-151, Pittsburgh, Pa.44Described in Chapter 6.45For example, because evaluators are trying to understand how people react to asystem, users might not be told about the purpose or operation of a system. See Angela
Garabet,Steve Mann, and James Fung, 2002, 
ÒExploring Design Through WearableComputing Art(ifacts),ÓComputer-Human Interaction 2002, Interactive Poster: Fun,pp.
634-635.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY112tionally achieved similar results in their explorations of a provocativetechnology, a refrigerator that videotaped its users, ostensibly allow-
ing those who shared the refrigerator to find out if someone had stolen
their food. Although the goal was to confront users with negative
aspects of technology, users who saw the ÒproductÓ demonstrated in
an ostensibly commercial presentation were surprisingly enthusias-
tic.46  Such results may motivate some artists to be more interested in
collaborations with commercial objectives than they might otherwise
be.Evaluation techniques drawing on both HCI and arts traditionscould rigorously examine not only the usability and utility of software
and electronic products, but also the meanings they may take on in
usersÕ everyday lives, the background cultural assumptions that un-
derlie them (for example, the assumptions designers make about what
users are like), and their potential impact on current cultural issues
and debates, such as intellectual property issues. At the same time,
standard HCI techniques appropriately adapted to the goals of artists
(often far removed from issues of usefulness and efficiency that cur-
rent techniques can address) may help improve the sometimes opaque
design of interactive artwork. To achieve these goals will likely require
a fundamental rethinking of the notion of user tests, as well as other
evaluations. In an early example of what such work might look like,
artist-designers Anthony Dunne and Fiona Raby evaluated the Pla-
cebo project, electronically enhanced furniture that makes users aware
of activity in the electromagnetic spectrum, through open-ended inter-
views with users combined with photographic portraits of users with
their devices.47  Such techniques allow designers to do evaluation in a
form that is to some extent recognizable and understandable to HCI
practitioners, while exploring issues that matter to artists, such as the
subjective nature of user experience, the stories that give devices not
only functionality but also meaning in human context, and the mes-
sages that information technologies intentionally or unintentionally
communicate to users. There is a need to develop a repertoire of
evaluation techniques appropriate for these more open-ended ques-
tions that is as wide and deep as that already available for the rela-
tively well defined problems of usability and efficiency.EXPERIMENTAL CONSUMER PRODUCT DESIGNComputing is creating new challenges as it moves into everydaylife. The impact of IT on everyday culture is felt particularly strongly
through electronic consumer products such as handheld computers,46Jonas Lundberg, Aseel Ibrahim, David Jınsson, Sinna Lindquist, and PernillaQvarfordt, 2002, ÒThe Snatcher Catcher: An Interactive Refrigerator,Ó Short Paper,
NordiChi 2002, pp. 209-211.47Anthony Dunne and Fiona Raby, 2001, Design Noir: The Secret Life of ElectronicObjects, August/Birkhaeuser, Basel, Switzerland.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INFLUENCE OF ART AND DESIGN ON COMPUTER SCIENCE R&D113music storage and playback devices, and electronic toys. DesignersFiona Raby and Anthony Dunne have argued that such consumer
products are currently designed much the same way as Hollywood
movies:  They are generally uncontroversial, focused on socially ac-

ceptable needs, and broadly marketed, and they serve an optimisti-
cally idealized lifestyle. In the analogy to film, they note that the
alternatives to mainstream Hollywood filmÑsuch as film noir, experi-mental film, and independent cinemaÑconsistently develop techniquesof narrative and visual style that are later adopted by Hollywood, thus
in effect serving an R&D role.48  Likewise, experimental designers
often develop ideas that, while often not immediately marketed, influ-
ence and eventually help redirect contemporary design practices in
marketed products.Experimental designers explore a range of issues and ideas thatare often different from those of individuals working in specific prod-
uct fields who are more constrained by the demands of the market.
Their work often explores issues at the intersection of product design
and social issues. For example, the 2002 show of the Interaction Design
program at the Royal College of Art included Pedro SepulvedaÕsarchitectural designs responding to fears and anxieties about cell phone
radiation. There is tremendous potential for ITCP not only in
reconfiguring existing consumer electronic applications, but also in
imagining and building prototypes for new applications and markets.MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTINGAs hardware components become smaller, faster, and cheaper, ITis being embedded into more and more physical devices, linked to-
gether through (often wireless) networks. Networked systems of em-
bedded computers (EmNets) will be largely invisible but extremely
powerful, allowing information to be collected, shared, and processed
in new ways. EmNets promise significant changes in environmental
and personal monitoring as well as scientific research. Thousands or
millions of sensors could monitor the environment, the battlefield, the
home, the office, or the factory floor; smart space containing intelligent
surfaces and appliances would provide access to computational re-
sources.49However, product development often follows the path of leastresistance, resulting in products that are technically new but do not
take full advantage of the broad conceptual design space that is opened
up by mobile and ubiquitous technologies. For instance, it is not
uncommon to simply replace discrete analog or digital electronics
with an inexpensive microcontroller, or to imagine faster or smaller48Dunne and Raby, 2001, Design Noir.49This paragraph is drawn from Computer Science and Telecommunications Board,National Research Council, 2001, Embedded, Everywhere:  A Research Agenda for Networked
Systems of Embedded Computers, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY114versions of existing applications. These approaches reflect an internaltechnical logic and a safe approach to introducing new products to
consumers in a competitive marketplace. As a result, they can ignore
some of the larger challenges in designing devices that could and
should meaningfully support everyday quality of life.The views of social scientists, designers, and artists are needed toaddress the potential implications of EmNets. Imagine living in a
world where it is impossible for anyone to get lost anywhere. Cars,
wireless devices, laptops, TVs, and even articles of clothing will al-
ways be able to tell you and others exactly where you are. Imagine also
living in a world where devices recognize a personÕs speech, emotions(through physical expressions and tone of voice), and likes and dis-
likes, and respond accordingly. Now, many who use e-mail and the
Web enjoy relationships that involve real, but digitized, humans. Will
technology make so much available without complaint that the need
for interpersonal relations dissolves?  Will that relationship with tech-

nology generate an illusion of satisfaction, knowledge, creativity, and
life?  These are the kinds of questions that influence IT research, and

they are also the kinds of questions that inspire artistic exploration via
ITCP50Ñboth activities where government-funded academic researchor philanthropically supported arts-based activity can explore ideas
not likely to flow from conventional commercial efforts.51The development of smart appliances for the home provides aninteresting case study. Many of the gadgets being developed todayÑfrom refrigerators that can determine when to order more milk and
scales that monitor usersÕ weight gain and suggest low-calorie recipes
to home entertainment systems that remember the preferred settings
of different users in the homeÑare obvious extensions of already-existing technologies. The approach of the information arts, in which
technical questions are seen as interrelated with social and cultural
questions, lends itself well to a more fundamental shift in the design of
smart appliances to support not only new technologies but also new,
better, and/or more interesting ways of living in the home. The Do-
mestic Environments project of the Equator research collaboration,52funded by the U.K. Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Coun-
cil, is one model of how computer scientists collaborating with artist-
designers and social scientists can develop appliances that are inter-
esting both technically and socially. One of the appliances is a Òdrift50Although this chapter focuses on how ITCP, or the information arts, might influ-ence the discipline of computer science, clearly ITCP can (and does) influence theagenda for artists and designers as well. In this sense, IT does much more than providetools to the arts and design disciplines.51As a comparison, consider the challenge of developing new kinds of content andapplications for broadband networks. As CSTB has observed previously, there is animportant role for academic research. See Computer Science and Telecommunications
Board, National Research Council, 2002, Broadband: Bringing Home the Bits, National
Academy Press, Washington, D.C.52See <http://www.equator.ac.uk/>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INFLUENCE OF ART AND DESIGN ON COMPUTER SCIENCE R&D115tableÓ designed to promote daydreaming and reflection.  A 
ÒwindowÓbuilt into the table shows images of the British countryside.  As objects

are placed on the table, the window begins to drift slowly over the
countryside.The focus on security resulting from the September 11, 2001, ter-rorist attacks may well be a theme worthy of exploration. As technolo-
gists push ahead an agenda for more robust computer security, the
information arts would promote an agenda of how to improve secu-
rity with the least harm to society (or even allowing for the possibility
of improved security and a net positive gain to quality of life).53Additional areas of interest include work inspired by the implications
of intellectual property law and policy for the digital environment (see
Chapter 7 for a discussion of digital copyright) and bioinformatics.CONCLUSIONTwo different kinds of intersection between IT and creative prac-tices are presented in Chapters 3 and 4. On the one hand, Chapter 3
looks at the use of information technology as a medium for art and
design practices, suggesting that computer science can support ITCP.
On the other, Chapter 4 looks at ways in which art practice and design
and computer science can become fused, leading to new fundamental
insights into the nature of computer science itself. In practice, these
two kinds of intersection are not disjoint. For example, imagine the
development of new word processors with input from professional
writers (see Box 4.3).In policy circles, a vigorous debate has been taking place in recentyears about whether knowledge production at large is shifting from
discipline-bound, strongly bounded, and relatively stable models to
transdisciplinary, loosely coupled, and transient ones.54  There is littleto be gained by preferring either multidisciplinary or transdisciplinary
exchanges; both have their place and are capable of generating useful
and interesting results.¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥53Of course, new security sensitivities could have the side effect of complicatingITCP activities that seem to take advantage of weaknesses in order to manipulateconventional IT.54David et al. (1999) attacks Gibbons et al. (1994);  Gibbons et al. (2001) responds.
Paul David, Dominique Foray, and W. Edward Steinmueller, 1999, ÒThe ResearchNetwork and the New Economics of Science:  From Metaphors to Organizational
Behaviors,Ó in 
The Organization of Economic Innovation in Europe, A. Gambardella and F.Malerba, eds., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K., and New York; MichaelGibbons, Camille Limoges, H. Nowotny, S. Schwartzman, P. Scott, and M. Trow, 1994,The New Production of Knowledge. The Dynamics of Science and Research in Contemporary
Societies, Sage, London; Michael Gibbons, Helga Nowotny, and Peter Scott, 2001, 
Re-thinking Science:  Knowledge and the Public in an Age of Uncertainty,
 Blackwell, Malden,
Mass.There is little to begained bypreferring eithermultidisciplinary ortransdisciplinaryexchanges; bothare capable ofgenerating usefuland interestingresults.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY116BOX 4.3Information Technology and Word ProcessingConsider IT tools that support writing, such as the word processor. Most word processors are basedon an underlying representation of text as a long string of characters, each having some properties affecting
its surface appearance. This was not a deeply thought out metaphor for the process of writing; rather it
evolved through generations of automation toolsÑthe word processor as a better typewriter, or a softwaretool for automating typesetting. Some word processors evolved to have a rudimentary structural
representation of writingÑoutlines, for exampleÑbut the basic representation shines through even stylesheets and wizards. An apparent benefit of this approach is that it supports all kinds of writing equally well:
IT does not attempt to reinforce one writing style or approach to composition in favor of another (ignoring,
for the moment, the effects of grammar checkers and other add-ons that attempt to critique the actual
writing). However, there is little doubt that the ease with which revisions can be made, ranging from
typographical corrections to particular large-scale structural changes, has influenced the approach one takes
to writing. This design reflects choices by software developers to structure writing as a simple string of
characters, provide context-blind editing operations such as copy and paste, and let users work through the
higher-level concepts and details for themselves.As an example of a realization of a completely different set of design choices, consider Dramatica ProÑa popular tool for developing screenplays.1  Superficially, it is still a tool for supporting writing. However,
it uses a domain model for screenwriting, including characters, themes, scenes, plot progression, character
development, and so on. It claims 32,768 Òstory forms,Ó allows four different viewpoints on the story being
told (ÒthroughlinesÓ), and contains models of how plots develop, how character traits relate to one another,and how characters can respond to challenges. An intended side effect of this approach is that it forces the
user to consider certain aspects of structure, character, plot, and theme, claiming the benefits of Òexpandingyour creative potential.Ó  Without passing judgment on this particular tool, it is fair to note that its design
reflects different choicesÑan attempt to deeply embody domain knowledge, a focus on supporting higher-level detailsÑand, in fact, provides very limited editing operations such as copy and paste and virtuallyignores issues related to the surface appearance of text. It is intended to address a much narrower set of
tasks than a general-purpose word processing tool and, as such, would be of little use in writing a report
such as this one. Could a writer create a new kind of screenplay for a radically new kind of film using this
tool, or would such a creation be outside its scope?  Is it conceivable that a writer could push against the

boundaries created by such a tool, abuse its constructs in various ways, and produce something surprising
to the tools designers?  Does having these boundaries against which to push perhaps expand creative

potential even more than having structures within which to work?2Not enough is known about the deep impact of such design choices on users. However, it could provevery useful to explore, as an example, different kinds of word processors that could be designed, for instance,
based on radically different notions of what writing is about, or on some deep criticism of the underlying
assumptions embodied in typical word processors from the point of view of writers. The result could be
a meaningful intellectual shift in computer science, as well as a tool that is much more useful for writersÑand possibly for the rest of us as well.1This discussion is based on version 4.0 of Dramatica. See <http://www.dramatica.com/> for details.2Dramatica is intended as a tool for developing story lines, not for producing the screenplay document. However,it does interface with a more traditionally styled word processor, tailored to the unique needs of producing
screenplays. This is another example of the kind of choices made by a designer. Further research into innovative toolsfor supporting creative writing might make it possible to integrate both metaphors within a single tool.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INFLUENCE OF ART AND DESIGN ON COMPUTER SCIENCE R&D117But both the multidisciplinary and the transdisciplinary modelsmake clear that there is a continuing need to maintain the integrity of
the traditional disciplines, both in the arts and in the sciences. Without
a disciplinary frame, the richness of disciplinary practices, methodolo-
gies, and concepts can become lost, leaving an oversimplified cross-
disciplinary knowledge domain. This danger exists when any practice
is digitized in the absence of an appropriate model, as for example in
arts education when young people have become wedded to the pre-
scripted options of packaged applications and are only capable of
creating PhotoShop art. What Paul David and his co-authors fear
would become Òcut-price research motelsÓ in scientific research55 cor-responds closely to the degeneration of artistic quality that is possible
where electronic art forms (or media art or the modish Ònew mediaÓ)have been cut loose from their deep connections to older and richer art
practices.Finally, it should be noted that the transient, loose coupling oftransdisciplinary creativity runs an ever-present risk of premature
bureaucratization.56  A single successful outcome is a necessary but by
no means sufficient reason to continue cross-disciplinary work in the
same vein. In some cases, the outcome of a rich experimental device is
best evaluated and further developed in the separate but transformed
disciplines that contributed to it. In other cases, however, the commit-
tee has found persuasive evidence of the need for the sustained bridg-
ing of disciplines, involving the development of both individual prac-
tices and a community of researchers in the cross-disciplinary area
with correspondingly innovative institutional structures (and these
are discussed in Chapter 5).55David et al., 1999, ÒThe Research Network and the New Economics of Science,Ó p.334.56As one reviewer notes, there is much to learn from history. See Carolyn Marvin,1998, When Old Technologies Were New, Oxford University Press; Brian Winston, 1998,
Media Technology and Society, Routledge, London; and Paul N. Edwards, 1996, The ClosedWorld:  Computers and the Politics of Discourse in Cold War America,
 MIT Press, Cambridge,
Mass. But much of ITCP history is undocumented or otherwise not very accessible, andtherefore, it is unteachable in an organized way. As a result, practitioners are unawareof precedents and relevant prior research, and they constantly reinvent the wheel.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118
ˇndividuals and groups involved with information tech-nology and creative practices (ITCP) benefit from partici-
pating in venues that support, motivate, and display this
type of work. Such venues may occupy physical or virtualspaces, vary widely in scale and scope, range from loosely organized
collectives to formal programs, and be either free-standing or con-
nected to established institutions. They can offer important benefits
such as access to tools, information resources, work spaces, funding,1and opportunities for communication among practitioners, those who
fund and display ITCP work, and audiences. This chapter describes
and analyzes the evolution and characteristics of these venues for the
purpose of providing guidance for the design of future ones.The first section provides a historical perspective on studio-labo-ratories, which bring together different domains of knowledge, re-
search, and practiceÑthus combining the artistÕs (or designerÕs) stu-
dio with the scientistÕs (or engineerÕs) laboratory. This section also
introduces the three classes of modern studio-laboratories: multifac-
eted new-media art and design2 organizations (typically non-profit),
mechanisms for public display, and applied research activities in cor-
porations. The remainder of the chapter discusses examples of these
types of organizations and activities and draws distinctions between
patterns in the United States and those abroad. Programs associated
with academic institutions are an important special case and are dis-
cussed in Chapter 6.1Funding issues are discussed primarily in Chapter 8.2New-media art (and design) can be loosely characterized as art (and design) thatuses IT in a significant way. Internet art (Net art) is a subset of new-media art, becausethe Internet is a subset of IT. Digital art is also a subset of new-media art, because newmedia could incorporate non-digital technologies or content.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VENUES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES119¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥STUDIO-LABORATORIES
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVEIn the evolution of creative work, the role of individuals in creat-ing new practices and of disciplines in providing tools and method-
ologies to be reworked is well understood. But the essential role that
institutions play in making it possible for individuals and disciplines
to come into contact and flourish can be more difficult to recognize.
An accurate history of 20th-century developments related to ITCP
would counter the widespread but false impression that there has
been a renaissance of creativity enabled uniquely by the computer,
and would make clear that a gradual development of new institutions,
especially the studio-laboratory, has also played a central role.The term Òrenaissance,Ó though, may in fact be appropriate, be-
cause the role of institutions in the last century parallels the central,
often unrecognized role that they played in the Renaissance. In 1950,
art historian Erwin Panofsky pointed out that the age of Leonardo and
Durer was one of turbulence, decompartmentalization, and in particu-
lar great social mobility after the cloistered separation of the Medieval
worlds of theory and practice. The great advances, he added, were
indeed made by the instrument makers, artists, and engineers, not the
professors. But what made this possible were new institutions, like the
academies, that served as Òtransmission beltsÓ between previously
separated domains of knowledge and practice. Perhaps blinded by the
brilliance of the rare figure of the da Vincian creator, one may lose
sight of the importance of the dilettanti who frequented the acad-
emiesÑpeople who were Òinterested in many things.Ó3 Today
Õs stu-dio-laboratories are similarly populated.If the current era is, like PanofskyÕs Renaissance, a period ofhybridity and interdisciplinarity, then it can also be described as a
period where, in many different, local places, experts of diverse kinds,
interested in Òmany things,Ó meet and learn from one another. The
late 20th century has generally been described as a period of post-
modernism, in which the stable values of the past were no longer
pertinent and were being replaced by a medley of ideas from different
sources. Instead of taking the general view that sees ideas as hope-
lessly jumbled together, one can look for the complex dynamics that
arise when specific ideas come into contact with each other at a variety
of local, concrete places. This perspective corresponds with recent
trends in social theory, in which there is less focus on the individualAn accuratehistory of the 20thcentury wouldcounter thewidespread butfalse impressionthat there hasbeen arenaissance ofcreativity enableduniquely by thecomputer.3Erwin Panofsky, 1952, ÒArtist, Scientist, Genius. Notes on the Renaissance Dam-merung,Ó The Renaissance: A Symposium, Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY120units of society and more on the complexity that results when theyinteract with each other. This allows us to move from thinking about
art/design and science/technology as two distinct, separate spheres,
and to look instead at how they interact with each other.4 From this
perspective, the studio-laboratory can be viewed as a hybrid institu-
tion where such interaction can occur. A useful demarcation point can
be found in the famous Bauhaus slogan Òart and technology, a newunity,Ó in the early 1920s. It is here that a cursory genealogy of the
studio-laboratory can begin. See Box 5.1.THREE CLASSES OF MODERNSTUDIO-LABORATORIESThere are three classes (or phases) in the development of modernstudio-laboratories: art/design-driven technology development, pub-
lic diffusion and critical debate, and industrially sponsored applied
research. Taken together, the three classes theoretically form a con-
tinuum involving upstream experimentation, public diffusion of re-
sults, and downstream development. These classes can easily be
merged into a single concern for more innovation and creativity in the
art-design-technology-science intersection. However, the reality is that
the three classes came into being at different times and are rarely in
close productive cooperation. Thus, it is not surprising that some
aspects of the continuum have been more successful than others,
leaving an overall impression of unevenness and some significant
gaps.Figure 5.1 conveys in broad outline the increasing frequency withwhich studio-laboratories were founded, especially after the 1960s. In
the first phase, research and production were oriented principally
toward the creation of singular, visionary artworks using technology
and little concerned with, or constrained by, wider application (or
usability) outside the immediate aesthetic context. In the second phase,
toward the end of the 1970s, specialized institutions were planned and
established to focus on the presentation of new technological art in
public arenas, and critical analysis and recognition of such work. The
third phase, beginning in the 1980s alongside the opening up of mass
markets for personal computers, packaged end-user applications, and
cultural commodities like musical instruments and video games, was
oriented toward applied research and development.Among the most oft-cited examples from the first phase was Ex-periments in Art and Technology (E.A.T.), founded by artist Robert4Karen Knorr-Cetina, 1999, Epistemic Cultures: How the Sciences Make Knowledge,Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass. ÒI also reject the notion that there is asharp distinction between technical (instrumental, productive, rational) activities andsymbolic processes. It is the exclusionary definition of the two that poses the problem.ÓBeyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VENUES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES121BOX 5.1The BauhausInfluenced by the 19th-century British arts and crafts movement, the Bauhaus is commonly thought ofprimarily in terms of the Modern design style with which it is usually associated, or in terms of its formative
influence in design education. But aside from its aesthetics, one of the basic issues the Bauhaus worked on
was the tension between commitments to research on basic artistic principles and to making saleable,
machine-reproducible objects. This tension dogged it through its brief but highly influential 14-year
existence. Constantly in turmoil, from its founding in the disastrous wake of World War I to suppression
by the Nazis, the Bauhaus was never a Òstable, communal, harmonious ensemble.Ó1An important example of the research made possible in the Bauhaus context was the work of the ÒpureÓartists who were employed to bring Òexact experimentalÓ methods to the realm of art.2 The painter Paul
Klee, for instance, created a substantial body of theoretical and pedagogical work at the Bauhaus, much of
it concerned with the problem of visual notation of dynamic form. This research-production was to a large
degree out of sync with the immediate problems of mass production and housing. However, KleeÕs sustained
investigation of visual form in terms of dynamics proved to have enormous influence on other fields outside
art, such as music composition and film animation, and on computer graphics decades later. All this work
was carried out using traditional means of drawing and painting, and was concerned not with directly
representing the Machine Age of the Bauhaus, but, more deeply, with the logical primitives needed for
visually representing dynamic relationships. KleeÕs work was deeply reflective of broader cultural issues of
its time, including the intoxication with speed, transportation, and new models of time. But it was also beyond
its time, in that it opened up a rich vein of Òexact intuitionsÓ (as Klee himself might have put it) whose
implications were directly applicable to later practitioners working with newer technologies.The Bauhaus ideal of an Òexperimental mini-cosmosÓ mutually shaped by art, engineering, science, andphilosophical concepts3 served as inspiration and template for subsequent organizations crossing the
boundaries between technology and culture. This occurred partly through people, as many of the Bauhaus
leaders immigrated to the United States. But, more generally, the idea of an institutional site for research
to which master artists would attach themselves, if provisionally, has been influential, continuously invoked
in the foundation of subsequent art/design and technology research centers since the 1960s. There were
other important influences from the early 20th-century avant-garde on more recent art-technology
movements. But the Bauhaus developed what sociologist Henri Lefebvre has called a Òspecific rationality,Ó
which was new to the cultural sphere.4 This specific rationalityÑcharacteristic of the studio-laboratoryÑ
was inclusive, refusing a sharp distinction between the techno-scientific and the symbolic-expressive realms.
For the modernist master composer Pierre Boulez in the 1970s, or the architectural theorist Heinrich Klotz
in the 1980s, or computer scientist Pelle Ehn in the 1990s, the Bauhaus model inspired a holistic approach
to co-development of new art and new technologies, both informed by theoretical research.51Elaine S. Hochman, 1997, Bauhaus: Crucible of Modernism, Fromm International, New York.2Paul Klee, 1928, ÒExact Experiments in the Realm of Art,Ó Paul Klee: The Thinking Eye, Notebooks of Paul KleeSpiller, ed., Lund Humphires, London.3Peter Galison, 1990, ÒAufbau/Bauhaus: Logical Positivism and Architectural Modernism,Ó Critical Inquiry 16(Summer): 709-752.4Henri Lefebvre, 1991 [1974], The Production of Space, Blackwell, Oxford.5Heinrich Klotz, 1990, The Center for Art and Media Technology Karlsruhe. An Architecture Competition, Okotogon,
Le mod‘le du Bauhaus. Points de rep‘re, Editions Seuil, Paris.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY122WeimarBauhausChicagoBauhausPhilipsWDRBell LabsExploratoriumWNETMIT-CAVSNRC-NFBEVL-ChicagoIRCAMARS ElectronicaFestivalArt + ComMIT Media LabBanff CentreV2ZKMPARC-PAIRI3AECenterGMDArtecCanonArtLabATR191819451960196619691970197719791980198519881990199119921995
NTT-CCE.A.TFIGURE 5.1 Studio-laboratories in the 20th century.AE CenterÑArs Electronica, AustriaATRÑATR Media Integration and Communications Systems Laboratories, Japan
E.A.T.Ñ Experiments in Art and TechnologyEVLÐChicagoÑElectronic Visualization Laboratory, University of Illinois, ChicagoGMDÑGerman Research Center for Information Technology
I3 networksÑIntelligent Information Interfaces, program of European Commission Fifth Framework for ResearchIRCAMÑInstitut de Recherche et Coordination en Acoustique et Musique (Institute of Research and Coordination inAcoustics and Music), ParisMITÐCAVSÑMassachusetts Institute of TechnologyÐCenter for Advanced Visual StudiesNRCÐNFBÑNational Research Council CanadaÐNational Film BoardNTTÐICCÑNippon Telegraph and Telephone InterCommunication Center, Tokyo
PARCÐPAIRÑXerox Palo Alto Research CenterÐArtist in Residence ProgramV2ÑV2_Organisation, Institute for the Unstable Media, RotterdamWDRÑWest German Broadcasting Network
WNETÑWNET Television Workshop Artist-in-Residence ProgramRauschenberg and Bell Labs physicist Billy Klver in New York in1966. The goal of E.A.T. was to establish Òan international network ofexperimental services and activities designed to catalyze the physical,
economic and social conditions necessary for cooperation between
artists, engineers and scientists.Ó The research role of the contempo-
rary artist was understood by E.A.T. as providing Òa unique source ofexperimentation and exploration for developing human environmentsBeyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VENUES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES123of the future.Ó5 At the same time, other Bell Labs scientists were also
engaged in collaborative research, in computer graphics and vision,
music, and acoustics.6 Also during the late 1960s, at MIT, the Hungar-
ian artist and Bauhaus affiliate Gyorgy Kepes founded the Center for
Advanced Visual Studies, providing a stable location for collaboration
between artists in residence and university-based scientists and engi-
neers. In the second phase, the earliest self-standing art-technology
centers appearedÑnotably the Institut de Recherche et Coordinationen Acoustique et Musique (IRCAM) in ParisÑwith a focus on theartistic rather than the industrial potential of information technology
(IT) and electronics. Composer Pierre Boulez launched the IRCAM
based on a conception of research/invention as the central activity of
contemporary musical creation; Boulez invoked the Òmodel of theBauhausÓ as cross-disciplinary inspiration for what he considered thenecessary and inevitable collaboration between musicians and scien-
tists.7 The modernist autonomy of the computer music research at
IRCAM did not prevent it from also orienting its program toward a
wider cultural public, aiming to put an otherwise forbidding musical
language in the context of the history of 20th-century music and
intellectual life.The second phase, which incorporated festivals, exhibitions, com-missions, and competitions of electronic art, marked an increased
commitment of both public administrations and private corporations
toward exposing the most radical media-based creativity to a wider
public. As festivals such as Ars Electronica became global in scope
beginning in the 1980s, so also plans were drawn up in most advanced
industrial countries to establish permanent centers able to incorporate
a dual research/development and public education mandate. Among
the most conspicuous were the Zentrum fr Kunst und Medien (ZKM)in Germany and the NTT InterCommunication Center in Japan.In the United States, there has been no investment at a comparablescale in active commissioning, exhibition, and public programming of
ITCP. Some smaller efforts have been made at a consistent level of
quality and commitment, notably in science museums, such as the
Exploratorium in San Francisco. New-media artists and techno-art
engineers speak with a common voice in lamenting the lack of well-
developed circuits for public exhibition, review, and systematic docu-
mentation. This was often expressed to the committee as the absence
of European-style institutions in the United States that combine re-5Experiments in Art and Technology (E.A.T.), 1969, Experiments in Art and TechnologyProceedings, E.A.T., New York.6Bell-Telephone, 1967, ÒArt and Science: Two Worlds Merge,Ó Bell Telephone Maga-zine, November/December. Also see Box 6.3 in Chapter 6.7Pierre Boulez, 1985, Le mod‘le du Bauhaus. Points de rep‘re, Editions Seuil, Paris. Interms of computer expertise, IRCAM depended heavily on the U.S. academic computermusic community, initially duplicating the computer system and software in use atStanford UniversityÕs Center for Computer Research in Music and Acoustics.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY124search in contemporary media arts with large collections and publicdisplays. Artists worry about a lack of contact with the American
public, and, more specifically, seek intelligent and informed responses
to created installations and wider professional and disciplinary asso-
ciations.Not that ZKM and other such centers are without critics. TheGerman philosopher and critic Florian Roetzer analyzed the media-
center bandwagon of the late 1980s, when he commented sardonically
that Òeverywhere there are plans to inaugurate media centres, in ordernot to lose the technological Ôconnection.Õ . . . This new attention is
supported by the diffuse intention to get on with ÔitÕ now, the contents
remaining rather arbitrary, so long as art, technology and science are
somehow joined in some more or less apparent affiliation with busi-
ness and commerce.Ó8 Roetzer was then not alone among critical
intellectuals in harboring a deep ambivalence about these institutional
developments, fearing that they would serve only to accelerate the
public acceptance of automation in everyday life, on the one hand, and
to co-opt artistsÑÒwith their purported creativityÓÑinto becomingcommercial application designers, on the other. As it turned out, ex-
plicitly designed linkages between art, research, and industrial inno-
vation developed a good deal beyond RoetzerÕs cynical prognostica-tions, and rather quickly became the basis for the third phase of the
contemporary studio-laboratory.The third phase was marked by the establishment of the MITMedia Laboratory. Many observers would probably count the MIT
Media Lab as the most successful, as well as widely imitated, model
for industrially sponsored research on art, design, and new-media
technologies. (Because of its connection to an academic institution, the
lab is discussed in Chapter 6.) The Media LabÕs large-scale,precompetitive industrial consortia are global in scope and have in-
spired a number of institutional responses in other countries. For
instance, the Swedish initiative of a network of six interactive insti-
tutes, loosely interacting but also differentiated according to technol-
ogy and artistic focus, grew in large measure out of a national initia-
tive to attract and retain a critical mass of researchers while still
decentralizing the activity to both large and small cities.9During the third phase, a number of technology companies at-tempted to harness artistic expertise to further corporate goals. For
example, Interval Research Corporation assembled an unusually di-
verse research staff, including artists and filmmakers as well as com-
puter and social scientists. Throughout the 1990s, Xerox Palo Alto
Research Center (PARC) supported an in-house artist-in-residenceThere is anabsence ofEuropean-styleinstitutions in theUnited States thatcombine researchin contemporarymedia arts withlarge collectionsand publicdisplays.8Florian Roetzer, 1989, ÒAesthetics of the Immaterial? Reflections on the RelationBetween the Fine Arts and the New Technologies,Ó Artware, catalog for the ÒKunst undElektronikÓ exhibition, Hannover, Germany.9See <http://www.interactiveinstitute.se>. Also see the discussion in the sectionÒHybrid Networks,Ó below.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VENUES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES125program, whose intent, according to PARC director John Seely Brown,was to serve as Òone of the ways that PARC seeks to maintain itself asan innovator, to keep its ground fertile and to stay relevant to the
needs to Xerox.Ó10 Some of these efforts have had positive aspects, but
few, if any, last very long. Much of the difficulty seems to be how to
justify them in the corporate context, especially in difficult economic
times. Interval Research is closed and PARCÕs work is increasinglyoutside the ITCP domain.11MULTIFACETED NEW-MEDIA ART
AND DESIGN ORGANIZATIONS
This section reviews a few of the best-known examples of new-media art and design organizations, based mostly in Europe (given
the lack of such organizations in the United States), in two categories:
standalone centers and hybrid networks.12 Some of these examples
might serve as learning experiences for the future establishment of
similar U.S.-based organizations.STANDALONE CENTERSAmong the most prominent standalone centers is the ZKM13 (a
collection of commonly housed institutions involved in new-media
art), which encompasses research and development institutes, a media
art library, a media art museum, and a modern art museum. The ZKM
regularly hosts talks, workshops, and conferences on issues in art
history, technology policy, and cultural criticism of technology. A
North American version of this model is the Banff Centre in Canada,
although the scope of the Banff Centre extends beyond new-media
work and its exhibition programs are limited. Other centers include
Ars Electronica in Austria, the Center for Culture and Communication
(C3) Foundation in Hungary, and the Waag Society in the Nether-
lands.Established in 1988, the ZKM (Center for Art and Media) is aninfluential institution that plays an important role in the German
cultural scene (ZKM has hosted the Bambis, for example, the German
equivalent of the Emmy awards). Founded on the idea that giving¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥10John Seely Brown, 1999, ÒIntroduction,Ó p. xi in 
Art and Innovation: The Xerox PARCArtist-in-Residence Program, Craig Harris, ed., MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.11See the section ÒCorporate Experiences with Information Technology and CreativePracticesÓ below in this chapter for further discussion of corporate initiatives.12Also see the discussion of funding organizations within the international context inChapter 8.13See <http://www.zkm.de/>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY126artists access to all of the hardware and software tools and program-mers they need to realize their creative vision, ZKMÕs research insti-tutes maintain cutting-edge hardware and software and a staff of
programmers and designers. Because of the depth of resources avail-
able to individuals who have a commission or residence at ZKM,
artists are encouraged to experiment. The rarity of a (relatively) non-
resource-constrained environment being offered by such an organiza-
tion has resulted in ZKM attracting many established and well-known
new-media artists. In addition to supporting art-oriented work, ZKM
established two institutes with other fociÑone institute with a focuson basic research and another with a focus on socioeconomic research.Located within the mountains of Alberta, Canada, the Banff Cen-tre hosts work that ranges from the visual arts to theater to music to
media. An elaborate resource to facilitate creative thinking and pro-
duction, the center provides artists with access to studios, technical
resources, and trained and skilled production interns. When support-
ing a project, the center has sometimes been able to supply an artist
with a highly trained collaborative team, which includes program-
mers and designers, to work with the artist until his/her project is
completed.14 Using repeat invitations, Banff has a policy of develop-
ing relationships with people over time, and this has become a posi-
tive and even essential component of the centerÕs atmosphere. Theenvironment is intense and intimate; in the mountains, people tend to
hang out together, working, eating, and socializing. The downside of
the residency experience tends to be stretched resources, both human
and economic, that make it difficult to create continuous work flow.
Technical team members are often working on multiple projects, some-
times making it very difficult to move a project forward and keep it
coherent. In addition, the time limits on residencies mean that work
must fit within the allotted time rather than developing and resolving
at its own rate. How credit is given in teams has also become an issue,
as there can be an unfortunate tendency to treat technical collaborators
as a kind of service crew. Like ZKM, the Banff Centre has a history of
intellectually stimulating seminars and conferences that bring together

a broad variety of people from both the non-profit and commercial
sectors of new media. At Banff these are often the top people in the
field, and the center has become known for the cross-pollination among
disciplines that it offers.Ars Electronica,15 which is located in Austria, has a rich history of
promoting collaborations involving art, technology, and society.
14The Art and Virtual Environments seminar, for instance, included eight projectsexperimenting with virtual reality tools. As an example, one virtual reality installation
was a murder mystery entitled ÒArcheology of a Mother TongueÓ that involved a
collaboration between Michael Mackenzie, a playwright and director working inMontr”al, and Toni Dove, an artist based in New York (and a committee member). SeeMary Anne Moser and Douglas MacLeod, eds., 1996, Immersed in Technology: Art andVirtual Environments, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.15For more information, see <http://www.aec.at/>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VENUES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES127Through a series of ventures dating back as far as 1979, it has estab-lished itself as a model for other organizations to follow. Ars Electronica
consists of four major activities: the Ars Electronica Center, a media
center showcasing art and technology projects; Futurelab, the centerÕsresearch and development arm; Festival, an annual festival focusing
on the convergence of art and technology; and Prix, an international
competition for Òcyberarts.ÓThe Center for Culture and Communication (C3) Foundation16 in
Budapest bills itself as an institution whose main focus is fostering
cooperation among the spheres of art, science, and technology, as well
as providing a space for innovative experiments and developments
related to communication, culture, and open society. Begun in 1996 as
a 3-year pilot project, C3 is the result of a cooperative effort of the
Soros Foundation Hungary, Silicon Graphics Hungary, and Mat⁄v (aHungarian telecommunications company). In November 1999, C3Ñwith the cooperation of its foundersÑbecame an independent, non-profit institution. One of C3Õs goals has been to assist with the integra-tion of new technologies into HungaryÕs social and cultural tradition.Along those lines, C3 has been involved in efforts to provide Internet
access to many individuals and non-government organizations, as
well as operating a free Internet caf” and offering free courses regard-ing how to use the Internet.The Waag Society17 was established in 1994 in Amsterdam as afoundation whose research program is focused on the ways in which
people express themselves through new and old media. The society
has four distinct programs: creative learning, interfacing access, public
research, and sensing presence. In addition, the society is also cooper-
ating with partners from industry on several projects. Among these is
PILOOT, a communications environment for people with mental dis-
abilities.Standalone new-media arts and design centers possess uniquestrengths and face special challenges. Among their strengths, they can
offer both stability and freedom to creative people who need work
space and technical support. But most such centers are small and
resource-constrained. Many centers are based on artist-in-residence
programs or colonies with a short-term orientation, and the accumula-
tion of discrete projects with targeted, limited-time funding forms the
research agenda. As people and money come and go, organizations
may have difficulty sustaining long-term intellectual agendas and
pursuing topics iteratively in a way that leads to new insights; there-
fore, they seldom are viewed as knowledge-building entities like cor-
porations or university departments. They also may have difficultly in
acquiring innovative (often expensive, at least for the budgets of many
non-profits) technological capabilities. It is possible and desirable, but
difficult, for centers to have real research programs with multiyear16For more information, see <http://www.c3.hu/>.17For more information, see <http://www.waag.org/>.Standalone new-media arts anddesign centerspossess uniquestrengths and facespecialchallenges.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY128funding. One approach is to obtain sponsorship from the IT industry;another is to develop durable research partnerships with universities
and corporations. Short-term partnerships (on a project basis) some-
times have been successful, as when corporations provide significant
resources in a co-development project.The optimal research strategy is not clear. Short-term programscan be valuable. ArtistsÕ residencies are important as a way of democ-ratizing access to technologies and networks of expertise that many
artists might not otherwise be able to acquire.18 But an agenda domi-
nated by discrete projects does not encourage the development of
work with depth and richness. The other extreme of very rigid, long-
term research agendas is likely no better, because such agendas pre-
sume that ITCP work can be clearly defined years in advanceÑaproblematic assumption. At the level of the individual, as noted in
Chapter 2, there is a tension between the time needed for playful
exploration and conceptualization and the pressure for production. If
standalone centers can strike the right balance among these competing
pressures, they can fill unique ecological niches where ideas and new
art forms are incubated successfully. Moreover, standalone centers
assume greater importance in the overall scheme of studio-laborato-
ries in light of the difficulties faced by applied ITCP activities in
corporations, which are discussed in the last section of this chapter.19HYBRID NETWORKSThe term Òhybrid networks,Ó which has become popular in some
parts of the ITCP community, refers to consortia of diverse organiza-
tions. These networks are a means of supporting cooperation and
collaboration across disciplines and communitiesÑif they can over-come the communication problems, varying criteria for success, and
other difficulties inherent in ITCP collaborations (as outlined in Chap-
ter 2). In Europe, as well as in Canada, hybrid networks have sought to
assemble a critical mass of ITCP workers, coupled to industrial spon-
sors and public policy usually aiming to develop regional innovation18Despite the lack of multifaceted new-media arts organizations in the United States,there are artistsÕ residency programs within academia, such as at Arizona State Univer-sity and the University of New Mexico, and smaller organizations such as Harvestworksin New York City. There are also local programs in many cities that provide access on a
more limited basis to computers, skilled teachers, and other resources.19New investments in physical infrastructures have recently been announced, thoughit is by no means certain how far some of them will be curtailed by economic cycles. In
New York City, the Eyebeam Atelier (<www.eyebeam.org>) proposes a venue like theArs Electronica Center. At Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, a $150-million-scale Experi-mental Media and Performing Art Center has been announced. The Presidio develop-
ment in San Francisco is negotiating a transfer of space to LucasFilm for mixed-useÒhigh tech cultural development.Ó See 
ÒOpen LetterÓ to create an Arts Lab
Ña hybrid artcenter and research facilityÑat the San Francisco Presidio, available online at <http://www.naimark.net/writing/artslab.html>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VENUES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES129clusters in creative industries. The decentralized network oftechnocultural centers supported by the federal government in Canada
during the 1990s included the Banff Centre (discussed above), which
used this support to initiate its significant investigation of virtual
environments in partnership with university researchers and industry
sponsors.20 The European Commission
Õs first round of hybrid re-search networks was focused on intelligent information interfaces (I3)
and linked art centers, corporations, and national laboratories; contin-
ued work is being planned to support high-quality digital content and
cultural-heritage preservation efforts.21The I3 networks attempt to join art, product design, and academicresearch and development with corporate product development and
market research. In addition, research networks for digital arts began
to appear in the 1990s, consistent with a turn away from the stovepipe
separation of R&D and commercialization. The concept is captured in
the European CommissionÕs Fifth Framework Programme, which em-phasizes cross-disciplinary work and features as a theme the ÒUser-Friendly Information Society.Ó22 The European Cultural Backbone
(ECB) mediates between the commercial, government, education, and
the cultural sectors, facilitating cross-disciplinary projects by serving
as an incubator. The ECB can act as a brokerage structure for mutual
support and collaboration to bring together complementary initia-
tives, drawing upon and connecting local and regional networks of its
members in Europe.23In North America, the idea of consortia, networks, and sustainedcollaboration of this type is attracting greater attention. Examples
include the U.S. federal governmentÕs Digital Libraries Initiative Phase224 and Internet2 project (both of which include some aspects of ITCP
work); the Ford Foundation study in progress, ÒArt Technology Net-workÓ (grant to the Kitchen in New York for a feasibility study, 2001);
the activities of the National Alliance for Media Arts and Culture
(NAMAC), dedicated to encouraging film, video, audio, and online/
multimedia arts and promoting the collaborations of individual media
artists;25 and, at the regional scale, the BRIDGES Consortium (Univer-
sity of Southern California with the Banff Centre). The Canadian gov-
ernment is also supporting regional innovation networks to be admin-20Moser and MacLeod, eds., 1996, Immersed in Technology.21See <http://www.cordis.lu/ist>.22For information on the Fifth Framework, see <http://www.cordis.lu/fp5/home.html>. For further discussion, see Paul David, Dominique Foray, and W. EdwardSteinmueller, 1999, ÒThe Research Network and the New Economics of Science: FromMetaphors to Organizational Behaviors,Ó The Organization of Economic Innovation inEurope, Alfonso Gambardella and Franco Malerba, eds., Cambridge University Press,Cambridge, U.K., and New York.23See <http://www.e-c-b.net/>.24See Chapter 8 and <http://www.dli2.nsf.gov>.25See <http://www.namac.org>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY130istered by CANARIE.26 Clearly there are opportunities to advance this
concept further.The establishment of additional collaborative networks is one wayto increase connections between existing activity in experimental arts
and design, cultural and presenting institutions, and the IT indus-
tries.27 But multiple projects are likely to be needed, stressing vari-
ously the mobility of people, exchange of know-how, circulation of art
and design works, and transfer of technology. Furthermore, all of the
institutions involved in such networks need an awareness of the kind
of research-application/art-design-technology hybridity exemplified
by the Bauhaus.28OTHER VENUES FOR PRACTITIONERSIn addition to multifaceted new-media arts and design organiza-tions, ITCP practitioners can access supportive resources through sev-
eral mechanisms, principally virtual-space-based strategies and pro-
fessional conferences.29 It is interesting to note that traditional arts and
design organizationsÑmuseums, galleries, art and design fairs, maga-zines, and so onÑare not the prime movers of these efforts. Rather, apatchwork of diverse entities has organized and funded the virtual
strategies, and scientific and technical communities organize a num-
ber of the conferences.VIRTUAL-SPACE-BASED STRATEGIESA virtual-support infrastructure came into existence in recent years
to assist individuals in accessing creative tools and communities, en-
able communication of various types, and provide shared space for
collaboration and file storage and exchange. These organizations have
been the most focused of any institutions on leveraging IT to achieve
their goals. They tend to be not-for-profit cultural establishments.26CANARIE Inc. is CanadaÕs advanced Internet development organization. It is anot-for-profit corporation supported by its members, project partners, and the nationalgovernment of Canada. CANARIEÕs mission is to accelerate CanadaÕs advanced Internetdevelopment and use by facilitating the widespread adoption of faster, more efficient
networks and by enabling the next generation of advanced products, applications, andservices to run on them. See <http://www.canarie.ca/about/about.html>.27See <www.thekitchen.org/FordFinal.pdf> for the basis for such a network designproposal.28However, physical proximity still matters, and so hybrid networks that are con-strained to a confined geographic area have advantages. See Chapter 7 for further
discussion.29And, of course, they have some access to organizations associated with academicinstitutions; see Chapter 6 for a discussion.¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VENUES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES131A particular strength of these organizations is that they offer peopleaccess to spatially decentralized communities. The result is small,
sharply focused groups with low overhead. Some of the better-funded
organizations also try to host small offline events for members in an
effort to strengthen the online community.These organizations draw from a common pool of tools to supportelectronic communication. In general, they use widely available IT,
such as directories, databases, online chat programs, discussion boards,

and listservs, rather than specialized or state-of-the-art tools. The cre-
ation and support of e-mail listservs constitute a common mechanism
for organizations that seek to foster community. These tools support,
ultimately on a widespread basis, the online equivalent of the gallery,
workshop, community center, and coffeehouse, sometimes simulta-
neously.Internet-based environments for supporting creative work takemany forms, including archives, portals, communities of practice, and
virtual galleries. The Internet has made it much easier for grassroots
organizations to identify, filter, and collect creative work.30 Directories
(or portals or indexes), usually implemented through Web sites, ag-
gregate pointers to a broad set of resources connected with a domain.
Organizations pull together these pointers and then, using a taxonomy
they have developed, sort them into categories from which Web pages
are then made. For example, the Digital Arts Source (DAS),31 aÒcuratedÓ index to new-media art, divides its site into 16 
Òdepart-mentsÓ with titles such as digital art, sound, software, and tools. By
entering one of these departments, a user opens a page to a listing of
links to resources; links are opened within a new browser window,
leaving the DAS site open in the background.An example of a not-for-profit organization that leverages the useof IT to promote communication between professional and amateur
new-media artists is Rhizome.org. Using the Internet as its primary
medium, Rhizome carries out its mission of presenting artwork by
new-media artists, providing a forum for critics and curators to foster
critical dialogue, and archiving new-media art.32 The Rhizome ArtBase
project provides selected Internet artists with dual-purpose server
space to store their electronic art as well as the space to make it
available for online viewing. Creating a taxonomy using metadata33 to
tag the art based on its type, genre, and the technology used in its
production, Rhizome has organized an extensive library of digital art.A particularstrength ofnot-for-profitculturalestablishmentsis that they offerpeople access tospatiallydecentralizedcommunities.30These mechanisms can aid in validating and recognizing quality work (see thediscussion in Chapter 7).31See <http://www.digitalartsource.com>.32See Òwhat we doÓ at the Rhizome site, <http://rhizome.org/info>.33Metadata are data about data. In information science, metadata are definitionaldata that provide information about, or documentation of, other data managed withinan application or environment.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY132The communication and information capabilities of the Internethave allowed Rhizome to break down barriers caused by distance and
to build the Rhizome community to more than 13,000 members repre-
senting more than 118 countries. To facilitate communication within
such a large and diverse group, Rhizome provides a series of moder-
ated and member-supervised digital resources that support many-to-
many communication. Internet art news is made available to not-for-
profit organizations that seek to provide a news service to their users
but do not have the internal resources to do so.34The principal mechanism used by Rhizome to promote asynchro-nous communication is to push information to individuals by using e-
mail listservsÑThe Rhizome Digest and the Rhizome Raw list (equiva-
lent to a conference call that lasts all day every day, this list is unfiltered
and enables subscribers to exchange virtually an infinite number of
messages almost in real time; messages are stored in a searchable
archive). Nettime,35 a completely virtual service provided by Public
NetBase t0, also consists of a series of e-mail lists, most notably Nettime-
L. The organizationÕs goal is to provide space for the discussion of newcommunication technologies and their social implications. Formed in
1995, the listserv has resulted in a conference in 1997 and a book,
Readme: ASCII Culture and the Revenge of Knowledge, published in 1999.A number of online communities assist practitioners in ITCP-related fields in locating resources. For example, the Museum Com-
puter Network36 is a non-profit organization dedicated to fostering
the cultural aims of museums through the use of computer technolo-
gies. It serves individuals and institutions wishing to improve their
means of developing, managing, and conveying museum information
through the use of automation. It has hosted conferences with titles
such as ÒReal Life: Virtual Experiences, New Connections for MuseumVisitors.Ó The ArtSci project has led to an online resource called the
ArtSci Index, intended to create a rich global database of resources
and requests for individuals wishing to collaborate, barter, research,
or fund collaborative projects involving science and art. A ÒmatchingÓfunction assists with the filtering of data relevant to the userÕs needs.In the architecture arena, ArchNet37 is designed as an online commu-
nity for architects, planners, urban designers, landscape architects,
architectural historians, scholars, and students, with a special focus on
the Islamic world.34A syndication model is used in which an Internet art news ÒmoduleÓ is added to
Web sites for free. This module contains an introduction to a top story and a link to the
Rhizome Web site, where the complete story is located. Through the use of HTML to calla JavaScript procedure on the Rhizome Web server, the top story changes daily on thesyndicatorÕs Web site without the need for manual interference.35See <http://www.nettime.org/>.36See <http://www.mcn.edu/>.37See <http://archnet.org>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VENUES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES133Some of the organizations providing these services are for-profit.The Thing, an organization similar to Nettime, started operation in
1991 as an electronic bulletin-board system (BBS) for artists and has
since evolved into a full-fledged telecommunications company while
still maintaining its focus on art and artists. The Thing continues to
provide BBS services, functioning as an Internet service provider (ISP)
and maintaining and supporting radar, a selective calendar of NewYork art, performance, digital, video, and film events. Individuals and
organizations from the art community of New York City contribute
submissions to radar.It is possible even for smaller centers and not-for-profit commu-nity organizations to access networked technologies that allow for
multisite performance. Innovative uses of the Internet and desktop
computer technology are producing an explosion of creativity in this
area. Funding for smaller grassroots organizations allows the acquisi-
tion of both a basic level of technology such as desktop computers,
software, and broadband connection possibilities, and the expertise to
begin to bring skills to a new population of independent producers.
Harvestworks Inc. in New York City is a small, not-for-profit organi-
zation with a sound studio, multimedia facilities for production, and
classes in a broad area of new technology tools. It runs a Web-based
composerÕs database, a CD magazine, and an artistsÕ residence pro-
gram that encourages experimental projects and helps to implement
them. It has sponsored and supported a number of experiments in
multisite performance that have accessed networking tools through
collaborations with universities on Internet2 or through smaller the-
ater and performance centers with more modest equipment.PROFESSIONAL CONFERENCESProfessional conferences are another means of communicatingand displaying the results of ITCP work and may be an ideal way to
bring together cross-disciplinary groups of scientists, artists, design-

ers, technical researchers, and others whose paths might not otherwise
intersect. There are international symposia that touch upon ITCP, such
as ArtSci,38 which explores how the discoveries of scientific research
can combine with the powerful metaphors of art to influence society.
Multimedia presentations have featured collaborative projects such as
brain waves transmitted via the Internet; the presenters also have
discussed issues relevant to ITCP, such as the opportunities and pit-
falls of collaborating across disciplines.
39 Another example is the Inter-
national Computer Music Conference (ICMC), an annual conference38See <http://www.asci.org/ArtSci2001/introduction.html>.39The symposium is co-produced by Art & Science Collaborations Inc. and severalprograms and departments of the City University of New York, with support from theRockefeller Foundation, AT&T, Leonardo journal, and Nature magazine.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY134(since 1974) of the International Computer Music Association.40 The
ICMC includes composers, performers, scientists, and engineers on a
roughly equal footing and typically has technical sessions and two or
more concerts every day. Papers are selected by peer review, and
music is selected by a jury of peers. The 2002 Dokumenta conference
included many works that use projective technologies and involved a
number of participants from developing countries.In addition to conferences such as ArtSci, ICMC, and Dokumenta,professional conferences that are relevant to ITCP are also rooted in
scientific and technical disciplines. In computer science, the core group
of conferences, many of them cross-disciplinary, are organized by
professional societies, notably the Association for Computing Machin-
ery (ACM) and the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers,
including its Computer Society.41 Of particular relevance are the ACM
Õsannual conferences for the Special Interest Group on Computer Graph-
ics and Interactive Techniques (SIGGRAPH) and Special Interest Group
on Computer-Human Interaction (SIGCHI). See Box 5.2. Specialized
conferences related to ITCP are also held under the auspices of techni-
cal societies, such as the Creativity and Cognition conference held
every third year at Loughborough University, an ACM SIGCHI inter-
national conference.42A macro-level approach to communicating and promoting workthat crosses disciplinary boundaries is exemplified by the U.S. Na-
tional AcademiesÕ Frontiers of Science and Frontiers of Engineering
conferences. The former series, for example, brings together the best
young scientists from a variety of fields to discuss cutting-edge re-
search in ways that are accessible to colleagues outside their fields.
The idea is to fertilize cross-disciplinary understanding and inspira-
tion by exploring parallels and divergences between different research
programs and protocols. One can envision a new venture based on
this model called Frontiers in Creativity.There are also a number of ad hoc conferences sponsored byprofessional organizations and universities aimed at bringing together
scientists, humanists, artists, designers, and engineers to address top-
ics related to IT. Examples include the First and Second Iteration
Conferences sponsored by the School of Computer Science and Soft-
ware Engineering at Monash University in Melbourne, Australia, a
juried competition that brought together musicians, artists, and hu-
manists with computer scientists, physical scientists, and engineers to
discuss projects recognized for their achievements in using digital
technologies creatively.43 Oriented more toward research, the Na-
tional Science Foundation, the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, and40See <http://www.computermusic.org>.41There are also specialized professional societies that host relevant conferences,such as the American Association for Artificial Intelligence.42See <http://creative.lboro.ac.uk/ccrs/CC02.htm>.43See <http://www.csse.monash.edu.au/~iterate/>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VENUES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES135BOX 5.2Selected ConferencesSpecial Interest Group on Computer Graphics and Interactive TechniquesFounded as a special-interest committee in the mid-1960s by Andries van Dam of Brown Universityand Sam Matsa of IBM, the Special Interest Group on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques
(SIGGRAPH) was officially formed as a special-interest group of the Association for Computing Machinery
in 1969.1 The SIGGRAPH
Õs premier event, its annual conference and exhibition, brings together artists,scientists, academics, and researchers from around the world working at the intersection of computer
science and graphics. The conference has become an important venue, especially for companies producing
products that assist the creative process (such as animation software and graphics acceleration cards). One
of the more popular experiences is the SIGGRAPH Art Show, a place within the conference where new-
media artwork is available for perusal by conference attendees.2Special Interest Group on Computer-Human InteractionThe Special Interest Group on Computer-Human Interaction (SIGCHI) is an international group ofalmost 5,000 specialists working in a variety of disciplines including human-computer interaction, education,
usability, interaction design, and computer-supported cooperative work.3 Of special interest to members
of SIGCHI is the intersection of such fields as user interface design, implementation and evaluation, human
factors, cognitive science, social science, psychology, anthropology, design, aesthetics, and graphics. A key
element of SIGCHIÕs strategy is the organization and support of a series of cross-disciplinary conferences,many occurring annually. In addition to its main conference, ÒCHI: Human Factors in Computing SystemsÓ(held annually since 1983), SIGCHI also sponsors conferences in areas such as creativity and cognition
(annually since 1999), hypertext and hypermedia (annually since 1987), multimedia (annually since 1993), the
design of interactive systems (annually since 1995), virtual reality software and technology (in conjunction
with SIGGRAPH and occurring annually since 1997), and other areas where the hardware and software
engineering of interactive systems, the structure of communication between human and machine,
characterization and contexts of use for interactive systems, methodology of design, and new designs
coexist.1Information adapted from the SIGGRAPH Web site at <http://www.siggraph.org/>.2While in some respects SIGGRAPH is undeniably successful (e.g., it attracts tens of thousands of attendees to itsannual conference), several reviewers and committee members observed that the status of ITCP work and of artistsrelative to technologists at the conference is ambivalent and perhaps declining.3Information adapted from the SIGCHI Web site at <http://sigchi.org/>. For a photo history of SIGCHI dating backto 1982, see <http://sigchi.org/photohistory/>.Harvard University Art Museums jointly sponsored an invitationalworkshop in 2001 called ÒDigital Imagery for Works of Art.Ó44 The
44The final report of the workshop is available at <http://www.dli2.nsf.gov/mellon/report.html>. This Web page also contains a link to a comment form seeking feedback,
including links to ongoing efforts in the various areas emphasized in the report, as wellas pointers to resources (collections, tools, and so on) that may be useful for futurecollaborative work.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY136workshop was designed to bring together computer and imagingscientists who have been active in digital imagery research with a
particular group of end users, namely research scholars in the visual
arts, including art and architecture historians, art curators, conserva-
tors, and scholars and practitioners in closely related disciplines. The
purpose was to explore how the research and development agenda of
computing, information, and imaging scientists might more usefully
serve the research needs of research scholars in the visual arts. At the
same time, participants looked for opportunities where applications in
the art history domain might inform and push IT research in new and
useful directions. Other notable examples include the Millennial Open
Symposium on the Arts and Interdisciplinary Computing (MOSAIC)
2000 that brought together people interested in the relationship be-
tween mathematics and the arts and architecture;
45 the Archaeology of
Multimedia conference at Brown University in November 2000; the
Re: Play conference in November 1999;46 the International Symposium
on Electronic Art (ISEA);47 and the Doors of Perception conference.48PUBLIC DISPLAY VENUES
A variety of physical-place-based (or artifactual) and virtual-space-based techniques and strategies are used for the display of ITCP work
for access by public audiences. Exhibitions, performance festivals, and
presentations and lecture series seem to be the most common physi-

cal-place-based strategies. Museums, galleries, and other entities asso-
ciated with physical places have featured new-media art for several
years. In the United States, the promotion of this art form is guided by
many of the established and better-known museums. By construc-
tively adapting their space to include new-media art, both offline
inside conventional exhibition spaces and online through the Web,
and by commissioning work of this kind, these organizations are
experimenting with new frameworks for display and presentation.
For instance, since Internet art debuted at the 2000 Biennial, the Whitney
Museum in New York City49 has increasingly supported new media
inside its physical location (and on its Web site). Such efforts by
traditional art museums are not without critics, who point out the
limited allocation of resources or the artistic weaknesses of some
shows that may be presented primarily to keep up with trends. Still,
some strategies have proven to be both novel and artistically credible.45Held at the University of Washington, Seattle, in August 2000. See <http://www.cs.washington.edu/mosaic2000/>.46See <http://www.eyebeam.org/replay/>.47See <http://www.isea.jp/E/index.html>.48See <http://flow.doorsofperception.com/>.49See <http://whitney.org/>.¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VENUES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES137The New Museum of Contemporary Art50 in New York has
adapted place-based strategiesÑboth indoors and outdoorsÑto ac-commodate ITCP work. The museum features an entire floor where
visitors can drop in to read, think, talk, browse, and experience inter-
active art. Its Zenith Media Lounge is dedicated to the exhibition and
exploration of digital art, experimental video, and sound works. This
unique space, modest in physical size and budget, draws praise for its
adequate technology infrastructure (i.e., computers, projectors, wir-
ing, and so on) and staff support (i.e., system administrators, install-
ers, and others) as well as an artistic focus ensured by staff curators
bringing in guest curators to add new-media expertise. A group show,
ÒOpen_Source_Art_Hack,Ó which explored hacking practices, open
source ethics, and cultural production to provide commentary about
life in a networked culture, featured works such as an anti-war game,
a packet-sniffing application, and an Òad-bustingÓ project. The
museumÕs Education Department also organizes panel discussions,film and video series, and lectures to introduce challenging new con-
cepts to a broad public.Physical-place-based displays for ITCP work are also evident atpopular technology-oriented museums, such as the Tech Museum of
Innovation51 in San Jose, California. Visitors can make a digital movie
using the latest tricks in animation, for example, visit with the roam-
ing robot ZaZa, or engage in high-tech play in the Imagination Play-
ground. A short distance up the coast, Exploratorium: The Museum of
Science, Art, and Human Perception,52 housed in San Francisco
Õs Pal-ace of Fine Arts, is designed to create a culture of learning. A collage of
more than 650 blinking, beeping, buzzing exhibits invites visitors to
make their own discoveries about the world.The distinction between physical and virtual display approachescan be blurred in cases in which an organization uses both strategies,
and the projects are interconnectedÑa not uncommon scenario. Forexample, some museum and gallery exhibitions take advantage of
Web technology to enable fluid interchanges between virtual and real
spaces. At the exhibition Ò010101: Art in Technological TimesÓ at the
San Francisco Museum of Modern Art (SFMOMA)53 in 2001, physical
installation spaces were supplemented by computers at which gallery
visitors could access essays by artists and theorists. Other exhibitions
use virtual spaces as part of the artworks themselves, such as in
interactive dramas that combine responses by actors in the physical
space with online participants who collaborate to produce emergent
narratives. See Box 5.3.50See <http://www.newmuseum.org/>.51See <http://www.thetech.org/>.52See <http://www.exploratorium.edu>.53See <http://www.sfmoma.org/>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY138BOX 5.3Computer and Sensor-based Art InstallationTiffany HolmesÕs computer and sensor-based installation, Òamaze@getty.org,Ó relies on 
ÒlivewareÓÑthat is, real-world and real-time viewer collaborationÑnot just hardware. Created for the exhibitionÒDevices of Wonder: From the World in a Box to Images on a Screen,Ó1 this networked system consisted
of tiny spy cameras distributed throughout the gallery space to capture people looking at, and interacting
with, other works in the show (such as the multiplying spectacles, book camera obscura, Engelbrecht
Theater, and Mondo Nuovo peep show). The live video was ported using wireless technologies into a
computer that integrated the imagery into a large montage displayed on a plasma screen encountered as
one left the exhibition. The space around the plasma screen acted as the interface for the piece.In its resting state, with no viewer standing before it, the screen displays a panoramic image of RobertIrwinÕs garden lying just outside the museumÕs walls. When a viewer approaches the screen the animationchanges. Slowly, the video is fractured by small rectangles. As they multiply, the sweeping image of the garden
is replaced by even smaller images grabbed earlier by the hidden cameras. At the end of the piece, layers
and layers of imagery fuse and then are broken apart in a simple game of breakout. See Figure 5.3.1.Conceptually, the piece draws on the metaphor of armchair travel, moving from material terrain intodatasphere. The longer the viewer lingers in the gallery, the more she travels virtually, away from the
seemingly infinite landscape into a series of highly localized private spaces that ultimately incorporate the
watching subject into their confines. Unlike the hyper-illusionism of virtual reality, the experience makes the
viewer acutely aware of how visual technology structures perception and how we structure visual
technology.21Exhibited at the Getty Museum, Los Angeles, November 11, 2001, through February 3, 2002. See <www.getty.edu/art/exhibitions/devices/choice.html>.2See Barbara Maria Stafford, 2001, ÒRevealing Technologies/Magical Domains,Ó in Barbara Maria Stafford and
Frances Terpak, exhibit catalog, ÒDevices of Wonder: From the World in a Box to Images on a ScreenÓ in 
Cosmos in aPalm, Getty Museum Publications, Los Angeles.FIGURE 5.3.1 Screenshot fromthe ÒDevices of WonderÓ real-time animation in which a com-puter-controlled breakout
game removes the specific evi-dence of the localized surveil-lance imagery. Contributed by
Tiffany Holmes, School of theArt Institute of Chicago.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VENUES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES139Many organizations, from museums to professional associations,are eager to explore the possibilities that IT offers for communicating
their work to peers and/or public audiences. But until recently, tradi-
tional museums and galleries have been slow to provide technological
resources or exhibit space to creative talent whose primary medium is
the Internet. Their initial online efforts have often focused on support-
ing activity, such as the digitization of existing collections and the use
of the Internet as a medium for providing visitor information, promo-
tion, and virtual gift shops. With that experience and further observa-
tion of how artistic expression involving IT is evolving, these organi-
zations are rapidly becoming more open to exploring, supporting, and
extending the techniques by which Internet creativity is produced and
displayed. Increasingly, it is the strategies being tested, as opposed to
whether they are doing any ITCP work at all, that differentiates these
organizations from one another.Examples of such efforts include the Whitney MuseumÕs ArtPort,which provides a portal to digital art and art resources on the Internet
and also functions as an online gallery space for commissioned Internet
and new-media art.54 This approach creates a dual strategy of support-
ing artists directly by commissioning projects, but also promoting the
development of the Internet art domain in general by providing artists
with cataloged resources. The Dia Center for the Arts began commis-
sioning and exhibiting Web-based work in the mid-1990s.55 The
SFMOMA is expanding its presence on the Internet through the devel-
opment of its e¥space program.56 With projects dating back to 1996,
the e¥space initiative supports Internet art via commissions and exhi-bition. Functioning as a portal to other Internet art or providing a
gateway to resources is not one of the projectÕs main goals, althoughcollaboration is. A recent illustration is CrossFade, which concentrates
on the Web as a performance space for sound art, an international
collaboration involving SFMOMA, the Walker Art Center, the Goethe-
Institute, and ZKM.New-media art is also beginning to make inroads in mainstreamgalleries, led largely by Internet art and the macro-trend of conver-
gence among media and disciplines. Commercial galleries such as
Postmasters57 and Sandra Gering
58 are now showing and selling new-
media art. There is even a commercial gallery dedicated to new media:
Bitforms.59 For an alternate mechanism for matching up artists and
collectors, see Box 5.4.Until recently,traditionalmuseums andgalleries havebeen slow toprovidetechnologicalresources orexhibit space tocreative talentwhose primarymedium is theInternet.54See <http://whitney.org/artport/>.55See <http://www.diacenter.org/rooftop/webproj/index.html>.56See <http://www.sfmoma.org/espace/espace_overview.html>.57The Postmasters Gallery features the work of Perry Hoberman (see Chapter 2) andNatalie Jeremijenko (a committee member). See <http://www.thing.net/~pomaga/>.58The Sandra Gering Gallery presents the work of two individuals featured in thisreport: Karim Rashid and John Simon (see Chapter 2). Information about the gallery isavailable online at  <http://www.geringgallery.com/>.59See <http://www.bitforms.com>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY140It is important to recognize that ITCP work creates new demands,because the work is often experimental and non-standard, and be-
cause the nexus of IT and creativity involves at least a limited break-
down of the separation between audience and performer. Traditional
museums and galleries are often poor choices for the display of inter-
active and/or time-based work (e.g., narratives) because visitors stroll
in and out and are not prepared for an experience of duration, nor are
these spaces set up for specific start times. The rigidity of theaters with
seats bolted to the floor does not work well, either. As a result, gallery
spaces and performance and theater spaces need to be rethought to
accommodate a less defined and more flexible practice. Theaters with
flexible seating, movable partitions, projection systems with scalable,
reconfigurable screen systems, and other innovations along these lines
are making new work possible. Examples include the new-cinema
theater of the Daniel Langlois Foundation for Art, Science, and Tech-
nology (DLF) in Montr”al, where seats can be fixed or folded under toalter the more conventional cinema setup for special presentations and
which has a state-of-the-art digital projection system. The Schaubuehne
Theater in Berlin showcases another innovative design and is based on
flexibility of scale, audience organization, and media tools for presen-
tation. However, to a large degree, such innovations are not visible to
the general public when they visit movie theaters, playhouses or opera
houses, symphony halls, or other arts venues, which appear much as
they have for the past decades. There would seem to be a rich set of
opportunities for new approaches in these traditional venues. How-
ever, such new approaches do not replace traditional venues, whichBOX 5.4Mixed GreensThe for-profit organization Mixed Greens does not deal with new-mediaart specifically, but it has an interesting business model that might be extended
to other contexts. Describing itself as an organization that discovers,
supports, and promotes artists, this multimedia production company uses its
Web site to facilitate communication between artists and collectors. This
model allows collectors to get to know artists through a multimedia,
personality-based approach to exhibiting art. There are artist documentitos
(short videos about the artists), questions that users can answer to match
them up with artists, and ways for users to contact artists and learn more
about their work or perhaps start a discussion about anything from artistic
influences to commissioning a work.1 One result is The Mix, a Web-basedtool for constructing a personal environment for site members to get to
know the artists and their work that Mixed Greens supports.1See <http://www.mixedgreens.com>.ITCP work creates new demands,because the workis oftenexperimental andnon-standard, andbecause the nexus of IT and creativity involvesat least a limitedbreakdown of theseparationbetween audienceand performer.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VENUES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES141may well remain valuable places to experience ITCP work. For anexample of a distinctive non-traditional venue, see Box 5.5.Performance art is also going online. Franklin Furnace,60 a non-
profit arts organization that has long supported performance art and
other alternative practices in the downtown New York art scene, went
digital in the late 1990s and began supporting digital art through
commissions and residencies. Also in New York, as part of an exhibitBOX 5.5Burning ManIn contrast to much of the work done within research laboratories, academic departments, and artsorganizations, Burning Man1 is an intriguing example of art and technology hybridized outside an institutional
framework. In many ways, this event, held annually in the desolate environs of the Black Rock Desert in
Nevada, is a counterpoint to what happens in the formal context of grants and research budgets,
committees, and disciplines. The festival population, which in recent years has numbered almost 30,000
(mostly from the San Francisco Bay Area), includes thousands of engineers from Silicon Valley, from Cisco
programmers to old-school hardware hackers. It is also a homing beacon for the West CoastÕs ITCPcommunity. It is a large-scale undertaking, all coordinated through electronic mail by a self-organizing web
of techies, artists, lightning rods, and logistical magicians. The free-spiritedness of the event is belied by an
impressive degree of networked organization.In a matter of weeks, this group of visionaries, tinkerers, and geeks erects not only a small city, withits own roads, sanitation, medical facilities, and electrical grid (all of which are dismantled in a matter of
daysÑthese libertarians run their show like a military operation), but also an eye-popping assortment ofheavily technological artworks: towering amalgamations of metal and screens and sound feedback devices
running artificial-life code, huge and programmable lighting arrays, explosive spectacles, and laser contrap-
tions. Many of these art projects present unprecedented technical challenges, often requiring on-the-spot,
midstream innovation (somehow, there are always enough soldering irons, duct tape, fuses, and volunteer
laborers to go aroundÑmany of the larger installations combine the community effort of barn raising withthe specialized expertise of Mission Impossible). In a sense, Burning Man embodies the ÒgiftÓ economy that
drives open-source software, with regard to atoms as well as bits. Burning Man also serves as a combination
laboratory/audience for a grand techno-artistic experiment.Perhaps the most salient aspect of Burning Man, for technologists and artists within institutions, is theextent to which social capital can be leveraged at the intersection of technology and creative practices. What
Burning Man has in abundance is not financial resources or institutional support or even human capital, in
the sense that corporations do (i.e., salaried employees and administrative support). What it has, in
abundance, is social capitalÑthe relationships among people that give the event a reason to exist. BurningMan is a phenomenon that emerges from that network, a physical manifestation of the social and creative
ties that go back years, sometimes decades. As a way of manifesting the human relationships that bind art
and technology, and leveraging those relationships on a large scale, Burning Man is an object lesson for more
formal organizations, both in vision and implementation.1Detailed information about Burning Man can be found at <http://www.burningman.com>.60See <http://www.franklinfurnace.org>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY142associated with the New Museum, the Surveillance Camera Playersperformed in front of a Webcam; the audience could view the perfor-
mance in person at various locations, including the New Museum
window on Broadway, or online. The Brooklyn Academy of Music,61which gave its first performance in 1861 and has a reputation for
changing with the times, has hosted online interactive documentaries
that explore and offer insights into the ideological foundation and
creation of work presented on stage. For example, ÒUnder_score: NetArt, Sound and Essays from AustraliaÓ exhibits the works of nine
artists with portals to sonic experimentation. Thematically centered on
the body, these projects confront what it means to be sexed up, de-
sired, gendered, and identified under electronic conditions. Another
documentary chronicles the development of the work Love Songs by
choreographer David Rouss‘ve and his company REALITY, and pre-sented as part of BAMÕs 1999 Next Wave Festival. Users have access torehearsal footage, interviews with Rouss‘ve, company information,and discussions about the work.62Some experiments with art presentation provide venues for
Internet-based research that push the envelope in terms of how tech-
nology can be used to augment social environments. The Museum of
Modern Art (MOMA)63 in New York City has supported a number ofnew-media artists through commissions and has used the Internet to
engage artists to overcome obstacles linked to space and time. For
instance, its Conversations with Contemporary Artists program, origi-
nally presented offline, recently was replicated online. Projects con-
strained by time such as Time Capsule have been migrated online as
well.Similarly, the Walker Art Center is focusing not on how virtualspace enables the display of content, but rather on how it facilitates
information sharing and collaboration in the creation of artÑa kind ofInternet-based creative research and development.64 Built in 1971, thecenter concentrates on supporting the development and exhibition of
modern art. By supporting film/video, performing, and visual arts,
the center takes a global, cross-disciplinary, and diverse approach to
the creation, presentation, interpretation, collection, and preservation
of art.65 The new-media initiatives of the center seek to achieve two
goals: Its Gallery 9 project promotes project-driven exploration through
digital-based media, whereas the SmArt project concentrates on infor-
mation architecture and the role that it might play in facilitating access
to the collections and activities of the center.61See <http://www.bam.org>.62One reviewer, however, suggested that BAM is pulling back from such digitalinitiatives.63See <http://www.moma.org/>.64See <http://www.walkerart.org/jsindex.html>.65See <http://www.walkerart.org/generalinfo/>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VENUES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES143It is important to note that efforts to collect and display ITCP workrun into the formidable challenges posed by digital technology. (See
Chapter 7.) For instance, the likely inability to distinguish between an
original and a copy will have a profound effect on museums, one
rivaling the effect that photographic reproduction had on art.66 This
will cause a paradigm shift in how a museum views its holdings (as
pimarily unique original objects) and how it certifies their authentic-
ity. Conservationists will also have to shift from the paradigm of
repairing and saving a physical object to that of maintaining a set of
disembodied artistic content over time. Indeed, it has been said that
new-media art questions the most fundamental assumptions of muse-
ums: What is a work? How do you collect? What is preservation?
What is ownership?67CORPORATE EXPERIENCES WITH
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

AND CREATIVE PRACTICES
A number of industries depend heavily on, and derive substantialprofits from, ITCP activities. This may be most obvious in entertain-
ment, or Òcontent-basedÓ corporations. For example, filmmaking has
driven and adopted advances in both technical and creative achieve-
ment, and computer games would not exist at all without ITCP (the
collaborative nature of these industries is discussed in Chapter 2). Yet
technology companies seem to be less successful in importing and
applying art and design knowledge to their activities. Some compa-
nies have experimented with specialized arts centers, artist-in-resi-
dence programs, or short-term arts projects, with mixed results.Two less than successful initiatives were mentioned earlier in thischapter: Interval Research and Xerox PARCÕs Artist-in-Residence pro-gram. LucentÕs one-of-a-kind collaboration with the Brooklyn Acad-emy of Music, which produced the acclaimed Listening Post (de-
scribed in Chapter 2), is now defunct, a victim of the companyÕsfinancial woes. Tough economic times in 2001 and 2002 have led to the
downsizing of the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone InterCommuni-¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥66Walter Benjamin, 1969, ÒThe Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction,ÓIlluminations, Hannah Arendt, ed., Schochen Books, New York; Howard Besser, 1987,ÒDigital Images for Museums,Ó Museum Studies Journal 3(1): 74-78; Howard Besser, 1997,
ÒThe Changing Role of Photographic Collections with the Advent of Digitization,Ó TheWired Museum, Katherine Jones-Garmil, ed., American Association of Museums, Wash-ington, D.C., pp. 115-127.67As characterized by Jeremy Strike, director, Museum of Contemporary Art, LosAngeles, in Museums and New Media Art by Susan Morris, a research report commis-
sioned by the Rockefeller Foundation (mimeo), October 2001.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY144cation Center (ICC)
68 and folding of the Canon ArtLab,
69 both in
Tokyo.But some IT companies have experienced ventures into art anddesign that generate qualitative and tangible benefits. The Philips
Vision of the Future is one example of a large-scale, successful project
that integrated technology development with design practices and
human-centered disciplines such as anthropology.70 (See Box 5.6.)
Another example is IBM Corporation
Õs Computer Music Center (CMC),
which from 1993 to 2001 focused on the intersection of computer
science and music as a research testbed, beginning with an effort to
develop the underlying technology for KidRiffs, a consumer software
product that was eventually marketed and sold. Over time, the center
grew to focus on interactive music composition tools, seeking to un-
derstand the special demands that large-scale creative endeavors, such
as film scoring, place on software. Research on visual programming
languages, interactive graphics, real-time systems, and audio identifi-
cation provided a diverse backdrop for the core music composition
work. Although the CMC was ultimately closed, it contributed to
product development, public relations, and the companyÕs portfolio ofintellectual property.71 The QSketcher system, for example, developed
in close collaboration with faculty and composers affiliated with the
Berklee College of Music, pioneered several HCI mechanisms.72 The
68Established in 1997, ICC sought to Òencourage the dialogue between technologyand the arts using a core theme of ÔcommunicationÕÓ and 
Òto become a network thatlinks artists and scientists worldwide, as well as a center for information exchange.ÓBoth a museum open to the public and a research lab, ICC was a place for the
conceptualization, introduction, and testing of advanced media art communication
technologies. But ICC was more than just a setting where artists and technologistscongregated to create media art to be displayed in a museum or gallery. Offeringworkshops, performances, symposiums, and publishing, the center went beyond ex-
ploring the possibilities of new forms of communication to attempt to educate andexpose the public to the capabilities of the art and technology intersection. See <http://www.ntticc.or.jp>.69ArtLab was a corporate lab focused on the integration of the arts and sciences,primarily by encouraging new artistic practices using digital imaging technologies. TheÒfactoryÓ (laboratory) employed computer engineers using Canon digital products in
interaction with artists in residence to produce new digital art works. The studio portionof the program has presented exhibitions of the works developed in-house. In 1995,seeking to introduce multimedia works to the general public, the ArtLab began its
Prospect Exhibitions program, which also provides access to the work of multimediaartists and creators outside the ArtLab. Workshops and lectures on new communica-tions technologies and practices were also organized on an ad hoc basis and are both
national and international in scope. See <http://www.canon.co.jp/cast/artlab/index.html>.70See <http://www.design.philips.com/vof/toc1/home.htm>.71Sometime prior to the closure of the center, IBM determined that a venture into themusic software tools market was unlikely but continued to support the center as afundamental research effort.72See Steven Abrams, Joe Smith, Ralph Bellofatto, Robert Fuhrer, Daniel Oppenheim,James Wright, Richard Boulanger, Neil Leonard, David Mash, and Michael Rendish,2002, ÒQSketcher: An Environment for Composing Music for Film,Ó pp. 157-164 in
Proceedings of the Fourth Conference on Creativity and Cognition, Loughborough Univer-sity, U.K., ACM Press, New York.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VENUES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES145center hosted well-known musicians, served as a recruiting tool, andcontributed to education and outreach programs. The venture also
produced a stream of inventions, including 16 patents filed over the
centerÕs last 4 years.73Such interactions can also be valuable from the artistsÕ perspec-
tive. For example, AT&TÕs Bell Labs, later partly spun off with Lucent,never had a formal artist-in-residence program, but Bell Labs had
some informal arrangements with musicians and filmmakers who
were invited to try out software programs, collaborate on specific
projects, and provide consulting or video documentation services. No
money was provided for music and art projects, although film produc-
tion expenses were sometimes covered by the parent company (AT&T
or Lucent) or outside grants. A committee member who participated
in these activities, Lillian Schwartz, recalls that the artists were thrilled
to have the chance to work with great minds and unique technologies,
and the scientists were inspired by the interactions to produce new
and enhanced hardware and software such as a hands-free telephone.
In addition, such interactions afford artists and designers with the
possibility to have wide-scale impact, by affecting the design of prod-
ucts used on a mass-market scale.Whether the types of benefits detailed here are sufficient to con-vince technology companies to initiate and retain artistic/design pro-
grams is open to debate. Within a for-profit corporation, there is an
understanding that initiatives have to justify their own resource com-
mitments in an expected financial return in terms of some measure
such as productivity improvement, cost savings, or increased revenue.
Unfortunately, ITCP work, like corporate R&D more generally, does
not lend itself very easily to calculations of return on investment or net
present value.74Nonetheless, these programs can be evaluated, and their impactascertained, in a qualitative fashion, much as the impact of an em-
ployee can often be ascertained in a qualitative fashion. The questions
include the following: Did this project enhance the capabilities of the
organization? Did it prompt useful discussion and action? Did it mat-
ter to anyone other than the artist or designer? If so, how? If the project
is undertaken as a strategic exercise, rather than a public relations
exercise, then it has to demonstrate some relevance, even if it does not
directly result in a commercial product (as most R&D projects do not).73The discussion of the IBM Computer Music Center is based on the personalaccount of a committee member.74As an aside, it is worth noting that basic researchÑin the sciences or otherwiseÑisalso very difficult to describe in terms of quantitative benefits, inasmuch as the benefitsmay become apparent after a considerable lag or may be realized outside the perform-
ing unit. Although some companies (e.g., IBM, Lucent Technologies) use counts ofoutputs such as patents, and most companies measure how much they spend onresearch-related activities (usually development), such indicators are still primitive and
incomplete when it comes to assessing the value of the work.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY146BOX 5.6A Vision of the Future Pays Off in New Knowledge and ProductsThe goal of the 1995 Vision of the Future, a project in the design division of a large electronicscorporation, was to incorporate quality-of-life considerations into the design of new technological products.
Participants created conceptual designs for electronic consumer products, based on scenarios sketching out
technological and cultural changes likely to happen in the near future. Although IT products are often driven
largely by technical considerations, Philips hoped to demonstrate that its products are intended to improve
quality of life;1 enhance creativity within the Philips organization; use an integrated technical and socioculturalperspective as an opportunity to create new, unique types of products; and demonstrate that a focus on
quality of life could have tangible benefits in the form of new product design.The project created concrete instantiationsÑmodels, simulations, and moviesÑof scenarios devel-oped by cross-disciplinary teams whose members ranged from anthropologists to engineers to graphics
designers, based on trends identified by futurists and engineers. These instantiations were used to get user
feedback through an exhibition, book, video, and Web site, and to influence the design of future products.FIGURE 5.6.1 ÒEmotion containersÓ come in various personalized, aesthetically pleasing forms that contain smells,
sounds, and images and can be given as sensuous and emotionally meaningful presents. Images contributed by Philips
Design.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VENUES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES147For example, in the future-home scenario, technology is largely invisible, made transparent by beingintegrated directly into the home and its contents. Screens, for example, disappear, replaced by ÒlivingwallpaperÓÑwall-size, flat displays that could present anything from static or moving decoration toinformation to entertainment. Electronic objects no longer look Òtechie,Ó instead featuring sculptural shapes
and aesthetically chosen forms that can be personalized to the user. There is an emphasis on technologies
that support social connections; an example is Remote EyesÑsmall, wireless video cameras that can beplaced anywhere, allowing people to share images from their daily lives and supporting a variety of playful
uses. Environmental values are reflected in technology such as the Intelligent Garbage Can, which
automatically sorts trash for recycling, compacts it, and removes its smell.The Vision of the Future was clearly a design successÑit has achieved wide recognition, including the1996 Design Distinction for Concept Design by I.D. Magazine (U.S.). But what about its impact on technology
products? According to the Philips Web site, in the last 6 years Ò60% of all concepts envisioned in The Visionof the Future became actual solutions.Ó Wearable electronics, for example, which were envisioned in the
project, are now being produced and marketed in the Industrial Clothing Division line, a partnership
between Philips and Nike. The value of the methodology for the company itself is reflected in the
development of a series of follow-on projects including the Home of the Near Future (1999), Connected
Pl@net (2000), and Smart Connections (2001), each of which analyzes different technologies and application
domains using the Strategic Futures methodology pioneered by the Vision of the Future. The value to Philips
seems clear.At the same time, the question of the broader value of human-centered input from anthropologists,futurists, and designers for IT product development remains open. The projectÕs claim of supporting theenvironment seems to be belied by future scenarios describing the proliferation of inessential consumer
goods and personalized (and hence nonreusable) products. At the same time, critics like Genevieve Bell and
Joseph Kaye argue that the human values embodied in the Vision of the Future products are not substantially
different from those of previous productsÑthat the Vision of the Future manifestoÕs claim that human valuesmatter more than efficiency is violated by many of the resulting efficiency-focused products, from the Shiva
personal organizer to interactive jewelry that connects wearers to agendas and reminds them of
appointments.2 In fact, in describing products specifically intended to promote quality of life, the firstattribute of this quality is said to be Òwhen products or services reduce the time or amount of tasks neededto be performed.Ó3 Issues such as these underscore the need to negotiate the tension between the
constraints on Philips as a company in the marketplaceÑthe need to sell more products to consumers thatare recognizable to them as consumable objectsÑand the humanist vision of the designers, ethnographers,and other participants in the project. In the end, claims to be able to shape culture in positive ways cannot
be truly evaluated until the products have entered peopleÕs homes and daily lives. Clearly, the Vision of theFuture is good for the Philips Corporation; it remains to be seen if it will be good for society.1For this project, quality of life was understood with respect to two broad issues. The first issue was sustainability,in terms of both environmental sustainability (for example, the materials out of which the products were made) andsocial sustainability, or the support of an individualÕs social and emotional needs within society. The second issue wasgeneral quality-of-life issues, with a focus on values and aesthetics over efficiency, a traditional focus of electronic
appliance design (see, for example, Figure 5.6.1).2See Genevieve Bell and Joseph ÒJofishÓ Kaye, 2002, 
ÒDesigning Technology for Domestic Spaces: A KitchenManifesto,Ó Gastronomica 2(2): 46-62.3See <http://www.design.philips.com/vof/vofsite6/index.htm>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY148Even if it stirs controversy, or galvanizes opposition (some would saythis is a sign of success), the project has to have an impact on the
corporate discourse. If it is acclaimed outside the organization and
ignored within, that, too, is a point of departure for the institution.Thus, the argument for introducing outsiders, such as artists, writ-ers, independent designers, directors, curators, activists, anthropolo-
gists, and the like, into an IT corporation must be made in the absence
of specific supporting empirical evidence. When would such outside
perspectives be most valuable? The motivations of outside artists and
designers, in the right context, can drive technology forward in unex-
pected ways. Artists reconfigure unlikely materials for unexpected
purposes.75 Designers understand that commercial products alone donot determine their value as professionals; they often sustain elaborate
extracurricular work to demonstrate their creativity. The opportunity
cost of risk is tiny in the realm of cultural production, compared with
the corporate sphere. And the rewards for risky new ideas are high.
These drivers create a strong set of incentives to break new ground by
confronting emerging issues,76 not the least of which is the form,
function, and significance of new technologies, and the practices and
assumptions that drive technology-oriented organizations. Essentially,
the corporation that engages outsiders leverages incentives outside
the economic sphere to generate intellectual capital that might not
otherwise take root inside the organization.77The primary value of this engagement, from the corporate per-spective, is not the production of a better mousetrapÑcorporate R&Ddoes a good job of optimizing mousetrapsÑbut the discovery of newrelevance for the mousetrap.78 The engagement of outsiders can gen-
erate value from the design of more stylish, usable, and aesthetically75See, for example, Vicki Goldberg, 2001, ÒIndustry and Art: A Long Embrace,Ó NewYork Times, April 22, available online at <http://query.nytimes.com/search/abstract?res=F20A17FB3D540C718EDDAD0894D9404482>.76The incentives are intellectual and socialÑcuriosity and gloryÑrather than com-mercial. The rewards in this context are overwhelmingly about status, rather thanmoneyÑan artistÕs career is, for better or worse, measured by and dependent onawards, inclusion in public and private collections and in museum and gallery exhibits,and critical attention. Architects and designers sometimes earn as much (or more)acclaim for their conceptual designs as for commercial products and real-world build-
ings.77As economist Richard Caves has argued, ÒCreative goods and services, the pro-cesses of their production, and the preferences or tastes of creative artists differ in
substantial and systematic (if not universal) ways from their counterparts in the rest ofthe economy where creativity plays a lesser (if seldom negligible) role.Ó See Richard E.
Caves, 2000, Creative Industries: Contracts Between Art and Commerce, Harvard UniversityPress, Cambridge, Mass., p. 2.78New relevance may emerge over time. For example, British Petroleum has begunto investigate applications in medicine for the visualization and virtual reality tools it
developed for oil and gas exploration. And a reviewer noted that Schlumberger was thefirst oil company to get into the medical business as it applied its knowledge of capillaryaction on another scale.Outside artistsand designers, inthe right context,can drivetechnologyforward inunexpected ways.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VENUES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES149pleasing products, if indeed it is true that technology has advancedsufficiently that the major differences among products discerned by
consumers seldom are based on technological capability per se.79 The
economic payoff of creative practice tends to be at the design levelÑfor example, design has been so important at such companies as Apple
Computer and Nike as to be a core competency.80 Moreover, current
trends in ITCP suggest the potential for creative practice to shape IT
that is more usable and better integrated with its users than has often
been the caseÑwhether among companies that focus on producing ITor on its intense use.The crux of the argument to bring in outsiders is that theorganizationÕs regular staff is unable, on its own, to avail itself of theopportunities articulated above. Outsiders can help to challenge the
status quo,81 to foster cognitive diversity.
82 Resistance to change or
inertia often derives from an organizationÕs culture and legacy prod-uctsÑthere are proven ways to achieve success, and so it is under-standable that the organizationÕs employees can be ambivalent aboutpursuing unproven avenues. And, indeed, the purpose of many orga-
nizations is to perform particular tasks repeatedly, gaining competi-
tive advantage and providing value to the consumer through cost
economies.83Some corporations have initiated artist-in-residence programs thathave tended to operate at the periphery of the organization. Such
programs may produce greater benefits if they are managed as serious
endeavors aimed at core functions that can yield important results
across the enterprise.84 (Companies that have terminated programs
that operated on the periphery may have had unrealistic expectations
for them.)79See Vikas Bajaj, 2002, ÒMakers of Electronics Begin to Emphasize Style,Ó DallasMorning News, May 2.80Of course, the contribution of designers reflects the work of artists, much as thecontribution of engineers reflects the work of scientists.81One criterion for the selection of artists or designers in this role is that they will bewilling to engage corporate staffs actively. They must not be aloof.82See Dorothy Leonard-Barton, 1995, Wellsprings of Knowledge: Building and Sustain-ing the Sources of Innovation, Harvard Business School Press, Boston, Mass.83Whether an organization bakes bread, manufactures automobiles, teaches stu-dents, or provides hotel accommodations, what some might construe to be organiza-
tional (or structural) inertia may be characterized as core competence by others. Moreon this point can be found in the literature on organizational ecology; for example, seeMichael T. Hannan and John Freeman, 1989, Organizational Ecology, Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, Mass; and Glenn R. Carroll and Michael T. Hannan, 1992, Dynamics ofOrganizational Populations, Oxford University Press, New York.84One comparison might be to the efforts of companies such as Apple Computer todesignate roaming specialists as evangelists, such as its use at one time of BruceTognazzini as its Evangelist to Human Interface to promote attention to usability acrossthe company.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY150There could be irresistible pressure to institutionalize outsidersinto an organizationÑespecially if the outsiders are successful. Formalstructures, titles, budgets, and other processes may evolve. Such de-
velopments may be essential to some degree, but this institutionaliza-
tion would have to be monitored carefully. Formalization may under-
cut the effectiveness of the outsiders if priorities shift toward the
protection of budgets and outsiders are enculturated to become insid-
ers. To ensure fresh perspectives, it may be that the tenure of outsiders
should be limited to a relatively short period of time.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.151chools of art and design, colleges, and universities arefertile ground for fostering work in information technol-
ogy and creative practices (ITCP). As sources of knowl-
edge, education, and training, they facilitate the acquisi-tion of new and different skills and insights. In addition to providing a
place for exploring new types of activities and new mixes of skills and
knowledge, they bridge old and new knowledge and techniques and
ways of thinking and doing, providing a place to see (and study) how
the new builds onÑand differs fromÑthe old. As the institutional
home for students, they provide a ready source of talented and moti-
vated labor to support work in ITCPÑa practical reality that encour-
ages some ITCP practitioners to be involved with such institutions.1Academic environments are designed to enable broad, deep, andlong-term creative explorations, but how they embrace change, whether
within a discipline or in a multi- or transdisciplinary activity, varies
enormously. Some generate new programs and embrace new areas
readily, while others find programmatic and structural change more
difficult, given the challenges and/or inertia in leadership, institu-
tional culture, and the allocation of resources. Approaches to cross-
disciplinary opportunitiesÑwhich today come from many directionsÑ
vary, depending on the institutionÕs relative emphasis on research or
teaching, the seniority and size of its faculty, and faculty membersÕ
willingness and ability to collaborate across disciplinary boundaries.ITCP activities have begun to proliferate in academiaÑmore vis-ibly and vigorously in departments of art and design than in computer1This observation was made by briefers to the committee and is consistent with theexperience of some committee members as well.2Computational science involves the application of computer science to study scien-tific problems, which often involves high-performance computing.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY152science departments. This imbalance of interest is not necessarily bad;it is analogous to the linkage of computational science2 programs to
other sciences (e.g., computational physics or chemistry) rather than to
computer science. In particular, ITCP can be seen in the emergence of
various new-media (or digital media or digital arts) activities. These
activities relate to ITCP in name, but they appear to vary greatly in
their intellectual rigor and vigor and in their impact on preexisting
programs in the arts and design.This chapter begins with a presentation of the specific organiza-tional mechanisms that directly support and promote work in ITCP.
Efforts within the mainstream schools and departmentsÑof computerscience, art, and designÑto advance ITCP work are then discussed.The chapter concludes with cross-cutting observations and implica-
tions.3ORGANIZATIONAL MODELS FOR
SUPPORTING WORK
There are three broad categories of academic ITCP organizations:specialized centers, workshops, and service units. Specialized centers
are of the greatest interest in the present context because they tend to
produce work that balances and integrates disciplines at the deepest
levels and for the longest periods of time. However, workshops and
service units can also make valuable contributions by working or
fostering work across disciplines, as detailed below.SPECIALIZED CENTERSThe specialized center is the most visible model for academicwork in ITCP. The (relatively) standalone type operates largely au-
tonomously from mainstream academic departments, and the deriva-
tive type obtains significant funding from one or more mainstream
academic departments within one or more universities. And, of course,
there are various gradations of specialized centers between standalone¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥3Although this chapter focuses on higher education, the committee does not intendto suggest that ITCP work occurs only in higher education and/or that preparation forITCP work in colleges and universities cannot begin earlier at the K-12 level. While it
neither possessed the credentials to speak authoritatively on K-12 education nor heardtestimony from K-12 researchers or educators, the committee does wish to record itssense that ITCP work could have a considerable, positive influence on the curricula of
primary and secondary schools. Moreover, rich offerings in the arts and design areas, inaddition to mathematics and science, in K-12 education can serve as an importantbaseline for ITCP thinking and work in the undergraduate years.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCHOOLS, COLLEGES, AND UNIVERSITIES153and derivative. Representing points along a spectrum, the specializedcenters described here are often positioned according to their links to
their host academic communities. Specialized centers can serve as a
cooperating unit for joint appointments of faculty and staff in main-
stream departments, which can encourage intellectual cross-fertiliza-
tion.In contrast with more decentralized attempts to evolve existingacademic units or to incorporate ITCP elements within traditional
units, the standalone center aims to focus on ITCP work from the
outset. Experts skilled in one or more areas are convened in a single
organizational unit to conduct work in ITCP. Many of the concepts
and principles of studio-laboratories apply to academic standalone
centers,4 although the context is different.
The Media Lab at MIT may be the best-known example of astandalone ITCP research center, at least within the United States. It
opened its doors in 1985, growing steadily from an interest in compu-
tation at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology School of Architec-
ture and Planning and expanding its scope to include multiple arts
and rather different fields, such as materials science, which it incorpo-
rates through its own hiring as well as joint appointments. It has
become both one of the largest centers focused on ITCP5 and the
subject of discussions about whether it should be considered a model,
given the mixed success of larger, enduring organizations in the ITCP
space in general6 and some of the specific problems it has encountered
in its own growth.7 Areas of interest include the computational prop-
erties of physical systems of all types; the overlay of digital informa-
tion on the physical world (e.g., tangible media, discussed in Chapter
4); and global outreach, especially to developing nations.8 The chal-
lenge for the Media Lab is to sustain a high level of energy and success
as it continues to mature and grow, and to avoid losing its edge by
allowing past successes to dominate plans for the future. At present,
the model has attracted interest in other countries (e.g., India), where
sister facilities are contemplated.An example of a derivative center is the newly established Centerfor Research in Interactive, Telematic, and Immersive Culture (CRITIC)
at the University of California at Irvine, a cross-disciplinary graduate
program in the arts, computation, and engineering that is jointly sup-
ported by the School of the Arts, the School of Engineering, and theITCP activitieshave begun toproliferatemore visibly andvigorously indepartments ofart and designthan in computersciencedepartments.4See Chapter 5 for a discussion of studio-laboratories.5As of 2003, the Media Lab has about 30 faculty members and senior research staff,170 graduate students (somewhat evenly divided in masterÕs and doctoral programs),and about 150 undergraduate students.6See Chapter 5.7For further commentary on the Media Lab, see David H. Freedman, 2000, ÒTheMedia Lab at a Crossroads,Ó Technology Review 103(5): 70-79, available online at <http://www.technologyreview.com/articles/freedman0900.asp>.8For additional information about the Media Lab, a unit of the School of Architectureand Planning at MIT, see <http://www.media.mit.edu>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY154(soon to be) School of Information and Computer Science, with addi-tional support from the School of Humanities. Course materials are
printed with the disclaimer Òmay cause permanent damage to axiom-atic assumptions.Ó9The CRITIC will be complemented by a research program in across-disciplinary, multientity project, the California Institute for Tele-
communications and Information Technology (Cal-(IT)2).10 Although
centered on science and technology, Cal-(IT)2 has hooks into the arts
and social sciences, and accordingly, it has a range of institutional
links. A New Media Arts Òstrategic applicationÓ component11 focuseson computer games and visualization environments Òto provide cre-ative research challenges likely to have impact on distance learning,
collaborative work environments, and understanding large complex
data sets.Ó12 It, in turn, involves the Center for Research in Computing
and the Arts (CRCA) at the University of California at San Diego, an
Òorganized Research Unit . . . whose mission is to foster advancedresearch and production at the crossroads between digital technology
and new art forms.Ó13 CRCA activities include interactive networked
multimedia, virtual reality, computer-spatialized audio, and live per-
formance techniques for computer music and graphics; it also explores
artistsÕ software systems. Cal-(IT)
2 is an ambitious experiment in ho-
lism and maximal crossdisciplinary effort. Like other large and multi-
faceted academic centers that build on preexisting components, it is
hard, especially at the early stages, to understand how much true
substantive integration is actually being achieved.Whereas Cal-(IT)2 spans two universities in one state, other de-rivative centers have broader geographical reach (although this re-
mains uncommon). An example is the Graphics and Visualization
Center that involved Brown University, the California Institute of
Technology, Cornell University, the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, and the University of Utah. One of the earliest National
Science Foundation-supported science and technology centers for IT,
the now-defunct center explored options for future interactive graphi-
cal environments, from algorithms to user interfaces, and it was itself a
laboratory for tools to support remote collaboration. Additional spe-
cialized ITCP centers are described briefly in Box 6.1 to further illus-
trate the nature of these centers.149As described to the committee by the centerÕs founder, Simon Penny.10See <http://www.calit2.net/research/index.html>.11Within Cal-(IT)2, this component has a special name, ÒArts Layer.Ó12See <http://www.calit2.net/art/index.html>.13See <http://www.crca.ucsd.edu/>.14One important dimension that can be used to characterize specialized centers iswhether one world view is dominant (and if so, which one). For example, the Electronic
Visualization Laboratory is closer to the computer science field than to the arts or designworld, while the Institute for the Study of the Arts is closer to the arts and design worldthan to the field of computer science.The standalonecenter aims tofocus on ITCPwork from theoutset.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCHOOLS, COLLEGES, AND UNIVERSITIES155WORKSHOPSFlexible, informal means of promoting truly creative practices areneeded, because any institution designed to support some particular
conception of creative practice (such as a specialized center) will dis-
courage movement beyond that paradigm, increasingly so as the insti-
tution becomes more established. In many universities, workshops,
seminars, and other ad hoc convenings provide a quasi-informal meet-
ing ground for testing multi- and transdisciplinary work focused on a
knotty problem or a complex area. Such flexible, low-cost mechanisms
for bringing disparate people together are inherently bottom-up, inti-
mate, and conversational; typically, drafts of papers are read and
discussed, and students, faculty, and visitors mingle across disciplin-
ary divides. At the University of California at Los Angeles, for ex-

ample, an cross-disciplinary initiative with the acronym SINAPSE
(Social Interfaces and Networks in Advanced Programmable Simula-
tions and Environments) provides a variety of forums to encourage
discussion and debate of IT issues. This approach has proved effective
in encouraging conversations among humanists, scientists, and artists.There is also much potential for ITCP in a different type of work-shop, harking back to the medieval, hands-on space for technological
experimentation and testing of thoughts. Part alchemical laboratory,
part well-stocked high-tech site, a media lab is the less formal, less
expensive correlate to the full-fledged research center. It offers faculty
and students a dedicated place for experimentation and an opportu-
nity to produce the kinds of results that can happen only with new
media. Media labs may be constituted temporarily, perhaps based on
a theme, for periods of 3 to 6 weeksÑlong enough to permit doingnew intellectual and technical work and to support identifying viable
problems and projects, but still without imposing the burdenÑandriskÑof making permanent institutional arrangements. Participantscan sign up and work anonymously and/or collaboratively, but with-
out fanfareÑmuch as members of the academic community, in thedays before the personal computer, flocked to shared computing cen-
ters. McMaster UniversityÕs Multimedia program offers such a facilityfor faculty and, with the aid of a large grant, is in the process of
developing open-source software with collaborative input from a vari-
ety of faculty at McMaster and other Canadian institutions. The Uni-
versity of California at Santa Barbara, in conjunction with its Tran-
scriptions project, has also established a high-tech meeting place to
encourage collaborative and creative work on curriculum and re-
search projects that incorporate IT.15Workshops andother ad hocconveningsprovide a quasi-informal meetingground for testingmulti- andtransdisciplinarywork focused ona knotty problemor a complexarea.15From the project Web site (<http://transcriptions.english.ucsb.edu/about/index.asp#concept>): ÒThe goal of [Transcriptions] is to demonstrate a paradigmÑatonce theoretical, instructional, and technicalÑfor integrating new information mediaand technology within the core work of a traditional humanities discipline. Transcrip-tions seeks to ÔtranscribeÕ between past and present understandings of what it means to
be a literate, educated, and humane person.ÓBeyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY156BOX 6.1 Selected Specialized Centers¥The Electronic Visualization Laboratory (EVL) at the University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC), created in1973, is a graduate research laboratory specializing in virtual reality and real-time interactive computer
graphics. EVLÕs current research areas include scientific visualization, new methodologies for informal
science and engineering education, paradigms for information display, distributed computing, sonification,
human-computer interfaces, every-citizen interfaces, and abstract mathematical visualization. A joint effort
of UICÕs College of Engineering and School of Art and Design, EVL offers graduate degrees (M.F.A., M.S.,
Ph.D.) in electronic visualization. For more information, see <http://www.evl.uic.edu/>.¥The Institute for Studies in the Arts (ISA) at Arizona State University (ASU; Herberger College of FineArts) supports individual inquiry and collaboration among artists, scholars, and technologists. The ISA
sponsors both faculty and student research as well as residencies for visiting artists and scholars. In the fall
of 2002, the ISA began offering two new training programs, Interdisciplinary Digital Media and Performance
(IDMP) and Signal Processing and Programming for the Arts (SPP). The IDMP program features Òsurvey,
lecture and laboratory exposure to the uses of technology as an essential part of cross-disciplinary art and
the principles of collaborative art making through collaboration between creative artists and technologists.Ó
The SSP program focuses on tools for digital and media arts, incorporating basic signal-processing technical
concepts taught for non-science majors. Overall, the ISA program offers as research environments digital
imaging, audio, and intelligent stage laboratories, as well as a technology development studio, a collaboration
with ASUÕs College of Electrical Engineering. For more information, see <http://isa.asu.edu/flash_home.html>.
¥The Institute for Creative Technologies at the University of Southern California (USC) draws on USCÕsSchool of Cinema-TV, the School of Engineering and its Information Sciences Institute (ISI) and Integrated
Media Systems Center (IMSC), and the Annenberg School of Communication. The institute has a specific
missionÑmeeting the ArmyÕs interests in better tools for immersive training and simulation, which may
prove to constrain its approaches as well as its projects in terms of ITCP work. It is an experiment in both
cross-disciplinary exploration and academic engagement in meeting military needs.1 Its assumptions are that
Ò[t]he entertainment industry brings expertise in story, character, visual effects, gaming and production.
 . . . In addition the computer science community brings innovation in networking, artificial intelligence, and

virtual reality technology.Ó For more information, see <http://www.ict.usc.edu/>.¥The Center for Advanced Technology (CAT) at New York University draws from a larger state program
of support for centers of advanced technology. Its mission involves support for New YorkÕs new-media
industryÑthe development and licensing of technologies relevant to that industry is a goal. Graphics (and
related computer science) is central to the ITCP work undertaken. A committee member associated with
CAT joined with another committee member to initiate a local lecture series inspired by this project,
MeAoW! (Media Art or Whatever), to facilitate artistsÕ engagement with technologies and technologists.
For more information, see <http://www.nystar.state.ny.us/nyu.htm> and <http://cat.nyu.edu>.1Another program that addresses military needs is the MOVES Institute, based at the Naval Postgraduate School,which is a cross-disciplinary department dedicated to education and research in all areas of modeling, virtualenvironments, and simulation. See <http://www.movesinstitute.org>.Fortunately, the costs of most such efforts to promote creativepractices tend to be modest. At the low end (e.g., to support a seminar
series), the incremental costs might involve little more than refresh-
ments, photocopying, and a quarter-time graduate student assistant;
to provide the well-stocked high-tech site described above would,
though, involve hardware, software, networking, facilities, and tech-
nical support costs.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCHOOLS, COLLEGES, AND UNIVERSITIES157SERVICE UNITSAs is true across society, academic environments depend on ITtools and infrastructure for their day-to-day activities in general and
also for the support of ITCP work specifically. As such, supporting
services are valuableÑindeed essentialÑto the work of todayÕs uni-versity. For this discussion, though, the question of interest is how (or
whether) such supporting services can directly affect the rise of new
intellectual activity aimed at understanding what IT itself could be-
come and how it can be integrated with elements from the arts and
design world to represent and explore ideas in different ways. Whether
the assistance takes the form of consultation with a database software
expert in a centralized IT department or is provided through a service
course (e.g., ÒIntroduction to Programming for HumanistsÓ), the sup-port provided by service units does not usually lead directly to deep
insight into ITÑhow IT is developed, how it works, how it could bemeaningfully incorporated into other work, and how it could be ex-
tended in support of new explorations and objectives. Mastery of a
new set of IT-based tools16 is only the first step for artists and design-
ers involved in such efforts, as it has been for scientists. It is not clear
that there is in the arts and design an analogue to the IT service unit,
other than the selective use of artists or designers, who tend to be
incorporated as needed into technical projects rather than centralized
in a service unit.Service organizations can be important in stimulating ITCP workin environments where such explorations are otherwise difficult to
launch. In addition to the classical IT service unit, a libraryÑalready anexus of multiple disciplines that embodies IT in its daily practicesÑcould help foster ITÕs introduction into arts and design-oriented de-partments, especially in institutions without engineering schools or
computational science programs. The transformation of both libraries
and the schools that prepare library professionals illustrates a funda-
mental attention to IT as a tool for and means of cross-disciplinary
exploration.17 For example, specialized digital libraries such as the
Perseus Digital Library at Tufts University can simplify access to
disparate literatures and thus help enable work based on multiple
disciplines.18 Physical spaces are also evolving, such as Vassar
Õs Me-16Understanding how information technology works has been called IT fluency. SeeComputer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, 1999,Being Fluent with Information Technology, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.17Two institutions of higher education that were previously more narrowly focusedon library science and now have a much broader, social science and policy-rich curriculaare the University of MichiganÕs School of Information and the University of Californiaat BerkeleyÕs School of Information Management and Systems.  See <http://www.si.
umich.edu> and <http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/>.18See <http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/>. A general resource on collaborative facili-ties for academic environments is under development as a project that is hosted byDartmouth College and sponsored by the Coalition for Networked Information. See<http://www.dartmouth.edu/~collab>.Serviceorganizationscan be importantin stimulatingITCP work inenvironmentswhere suchexplorations areotherwisedifficult tolaunch.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY158dia Cloisters, a collaborative space in the collegeÕs main library that isequipped with state-of-the-art technology,19 and the Media Union at
the University of Michigan, which brings together information re-
sources, information technology, production studios, and the com-
bined talents of information professionals from across campus units to
facilitate cross-disciplinary collaboration as well as integrative learn-
ing and exploration.20FOSTERING ITCP WORK WITHINMAINSTREAM DEPARTMENTS

AND DISCIPLINESCOMPUTER SCIENCEComputer science is a young discipline (departments and degreesin the field emerged in the 1960s) with roots in mathematics and
electrical engineering. Although it drew from other disciplines, and as
what Herbert Simon called an Òartificial scienceÓ21 would seem to
have inherent flexibility, its recent history of cross-disciplinary inter-
actionÑthat is, in the period when ITCP has been emergingÑhas beenmixed. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, for example, attention to
applications of computer science was sometimes questioned in the
computer science community, in part because of concern about the
potential for diversion of resources to other fields using computing.22As applications have proliferated, respect by the field for research in
computer science has most often been accorded to work defined as
contributing to advances in the science and engineering that are fun-
damental to the field itself, whether or not an application problem has
inspired the activity. Collaboration with, or engagement of, any field
is judged within computer science by that criterionÑwhich is a reflec-tion of the basic view that good work in the field advances the field.23¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥19See <http://mediacloisters.vassar.edu>.20See <http://www.ummu.umich.edu/intro.html>.21Herbert A. Simon, 1996, The Sciences of the Artificial, Third Ed., MIT Press, Cam-bridge, Mass.22Although CSTBÕs 1992 report Computing the Future: A Broader Agenda for ComputerScience and Engineering (Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National
Research Council, Juris Hartmanis and Herbert Lin, eds., National Academy Press,Washington, D.C.) had as a first recommendation sustaining the core of the field, itsrecommendation that the field look to application areas for inspiration was controver-
sial when published.23For example, collaborations with psychologists and sociologists have been routinein work on usability and human-computer interaction, including in particular the area
of computer-supported cooperative work. Because research in these areas involvesstudying how people use technology and draws on those insights to improve the designof hardware and software, such collaborations have had some direct appeal, as reflected
in professional society, conference, and journal activities and in the composition ofresearch teams.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCHOOLS, COLLEGES, AND UNIVERSITIES159This somewhat limited focus, however, is not conducive to the explo-ration of new relationships called for in ITCP work.Examples of ITCP WorkThere are computer science faculty members pursuing ITCPwork,24 although the number is relatively low, in the committee
Õsestimation, compared to the number of art and design faculty who
pursue ITCP work.25 For example, Ken Goldberg, a professor of indus-
trial engineering and operations research at the University of Califor-
nia at Berkeley, explores ITCP through robotics, including telerobotics
(operated over the Internet), which he has extended into
telepistemology (see Box 6.2 for a description of his work). For about
15 years he has been Òusing art work as a way of challengingÑquestioning, critiquingÑthis world that I was operating in, the worldof robotics and engineering.Ó His work has attempted to explore the
human and philosophical side of issues in control technologies. He
observed that the engineer/researcher in him wants to discuss opera-
tions, steps, and motives very precisely, whereas the artist in him is
both skeptical about and has an appreciation for the benefits of saying
less.As described in Chapter 2, Michael Mateas, a new faculty memberat the Georgia Institute of Technology, uses the term Òexpressive AIÓfor his combination of art studio practice and artificial intelligence (AI)
research practice; he uses AI to build interactivity into cultural arti-
facts, applying technology to enable a Ònegotiation of meaning be-tween the artist and the audience.Ó In describing his work to the
committee,26 Mateas sketched out the principal schools of thought in
AI and then differentiated what he did from them, explaining differ-
ences in the goals of art or cultural production and AI research and in
the ability to shape the internal workings of a device as they relate to
the audience experience.27 In sum, 
Òthere is new AI technology beinginvented that would not be invented or discovered or even thought
about by someone doing AI research whoÕs not interested in art. But itis focused on art practice.Ó24They include David Salesin at the University of Washington and Roger Dannenbergat Carnegie Mellon University, members of the committee. Also see the program of theconference MOSAIC 2000, available online at <http://www.cs.washington.edu/mosaic2000/program.html>.25The committee does not have specific quantitative evidence to support this claim,which reflects the committeeÕs expert judgment, based on professional networking byits members.26In January 2001, when he was a doctoral student at Carnegie Mellon University.27Conventional AI, as with other computer science, focuses on quick and efficientcompletion of a task, whereas cultural production focuses on poetics and rich possibili-
ties for interpretation by an audience; AI is concerned with generalities (principles),whereas cultural production focuses on the potential of a specific work, per se; and AIaims at realism while cultural production aims at abstraction, which may exaggerate or
change a part of the world. Also see Box 2.3.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY160BOX 6.2TeleroboticsThe study of knowledge acquired at a distance, telepistemology, tries to comprehend how epistemol-ogy can inform the understanding of robotics, and to what extent telerobots can furnish new insight into
classical questions about the nature and possibility of knowledge. Ken Goldberg, the editor of The Robot inthe Garden,1 sees a fine line between how people perceive traditional virtual reality, where interactions take
place in synthetic space, and telematic reality, where there is a physical space but it is distant. How people
interact in telematic reality is a central concern of telepistemology, and it raises important technical and
moral questions. Technical questions include whether telerobotics provides access to real knowledge and
the degree to which telerobotic experiences are equivalent to proximal experiences. Moral questions
concern how people should act in telerobotically mediated environments and to what degree technological
mediation affects human values.One of GoldbergÕs telerobotic art projects, Telegarden (Figure 6.2.1), tries to provide insight into someof these questions by focusing on how information arises from live interaction with remote physical
environments. Goldberg describes Telegarden, which has been housed at the Ars Electronica Center inAustria since 1995, as a telerobotic art installation on the Internet where remote users direct a robot to
plant and water seeds in a real garden. The Telegarden receives, on average, more than 1500 hits a day.2Based on the feedback received from visitors to the Telegarden site, Goldberg and his colleagues have been
able to reflect on how perception, knowledge, and agency, important principles of telepistemology, are being
defined in telerobotic interaction. For example, they have found that people are skeptical of the experience,
often wondering whether the Telegarden is real in the physical sense or a digital simulacrum.3FIGURE 6.2.1 Telegarden. Image courtesy of Ken Goldberg.1Ken Goldberg, ed., 2001, The Robot in the Garden: Telerobotics and Telepistemology in the Age of the Internet, MIT
Press, Cambridge, Mass., and London.2At its peak, the site attracted on the order of 15,000 hits per day.3Ken Goldberg briefed the committee at its meeting in January 2001 at Stanford University. For further informationconcerning his work, see <http://www.ieor.berkeley.edu/~goldberg>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCHOOLS, COLLEGES, AND UNIVERSITIES161Different institutions may be culturally better suited to differentmodels of ITCP work. For example, committee membersÕ experiences,
and testimony to the committee, suggest that Carnegie Mellon Univer-
sity (CMU) generates cross-disciplinary activities in various forms
with relative frequency and success as compared to many other uni-
versities. In the CMU culture, it is generally acceptable to work in any
discipline from a basis in any other, an unusually open posture (albeit
bounded by expectations for performance that can be evaluated within
the home discipline28). Work in different disciplines is accepted, too:There is a separate history of computer scientists with academic ap-
pointments who are also significant creative artists, namely compos-
ers. One can speculate that such a development took place because
composers were more likely to program computers than were other
artists or designers.Regardless of setting, a key element of success is effective training;more than talking about opportunities is needed. In the early days of a
new area of study, people put in a lot of time to educate themselves in
the new domain. Time matters, and accordingly, so does institutional
support for the investment of time necessary for learning.What goes on within the walls of academia is only part of the ITCPstory, however. Computer science laboratories and departments have
both official programs of activities and a panoply of unofficial activi-
tiesÑa penumbraÑthat extends the interface between the academicand the non-academic, both feeding and drawing from popular inter-
ests off campus. Comparisons might be drawn to the intellectual fringe
around industries that deal with pop culture, or the marginal art
production feeding off the core, which serves as a magnet. It is impor-
tant to sustain that penumbra (supporting such activities as short-
animation/student festivals, for example) as it relates to part of a
strategy of nurturing academic ITCP on the computer science side.
This is the arena in which collaborations with independent artists may
be achieved.Among the most notable of such interactionsÑand the most vis-ibleÑwere the computer graphics and computer music collaborationsamong computer scientists and artists and designers dating back to
the early years of the computer science field. Computer graphics
evolved in part through interactions with scientific (and other) users
whose needs for visualizing complex processes could be met with this
technology.29 See Box 6.3.28Also note the further comments on criteria for tenure in the section ÒChallenges inComputer Science Departments,Ó below.29Scientific visualization has itself evolved with computational power in ways thatreinforce the values of an artistic approach to making sense of growing quantities ofdata. Thus, for example, artist Donna Cox was an early employee of the National Centerfor Supercomputing Applications at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
where she has collaborated with computer scientists and other scientists on the chal-lenge of visualizing the processes for which supercomputing generates enormous vol-umes of data.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY162BOX 6.3Beyond Academia: Computer Science Reaches Out to the CommunityThe development of computer music and computer graphics collaborations among computer scientistsand artists dates back to the early years of computer science. Computer graphics emerged from computer
science research in the 1960s, spurred by vigorous Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA;
then ARPA) funding,1 but it also grew up in a variety of pockets of filmmakers working in close association
with both academic and industry-based laboratories. Computer music also took a variety of paths, linked
to corporate research programs as well as university computer centers.Much of the foundational work in computer-generated sound occurred at Bell Labs, under theleadership of Max Mathews and John Pierce, who from the earliest days employed qualified composers to
collaborate in the study of both the acoustics of instruments and the design of high-level languages for
composition.2 Links to computer science departments were highly visible as well. Stanford University
ÕsCenter for Computer Research in Music and Acoustics, which leverages computer technology as an artistic
medium and research tool,3 grew out of the Stanford Artificial Intelligence Lab, and centers for hybrid analog-
digital computer music were located at Princeton University, the University of Toronto, and Columbia
University in the 1960s. (The formal properties of avant-garde music were well suited to procedural
representation even earlier than this, as exemplified by the work of Xenakis in the 1950s, who worked with
IBM researchers in France to devise stochastic composition under computer control.4) As smaller systemscame within reach of independent composers and more academic music departments in the 1970s,
composers themselves tended to take the lead in devising both hardware and software components. By the
1980s, easily programmable commodity hardware became affordable, and a communication protocolÑthemusical instrument digital interface (MIDI)Ñmade it possible for both researchers and commercialpractitioners to adapt the cumulative know-how in languages and synthesis techniques across a broad
spectrum of musical styles. Indeed, an unanticipated consequence of this widely adopted protocol was an
important factor in enabling the growth of new-media art forms, such as interactive installation and
performance art: The musical event-generator could as easily talk to image-making, lighting, motion-
detection, or robotic machinery as to synthesizers or sound-processing devices.Challenges in Computer ScienceDepartmentsOne of the biggest challenges to be addressed in departments ofcomputer science seems to be a culture that discourages ITCP workÑalthough sometimes subtly. Committee members and briefers to the
committee recounted personal stories of their art and design interests
generally not being viewed as productive. As one individual explained,
ÒA faculty member told me that it was a complete waste of time andthat I should stop doing the ÔflakyÕ stuff. That caused me to go under-ground.Ó This person decided to limit conversations with other techni-
cal colleagues about artistic work and did not include the work in the
case for promotion, observing that relevant activities such as seminars
were treated as over and above conventional responsibilities. Another
briefer characterized the departmentÕs reaction to art and design workas Òfriendly toleration.ÓBeyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCHOOLS, COLLEGES, AND UNIVERSITIES163In computer graphics, the technical issues addressed in the 1960s by the DARPA contractors(Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Stanford University, Carnegie Mellon University, University of
Utah) dealt primarily with the problems of three-dimensional modeling and simulationÑfueling the decades-long quest for the Holy Grail of immersive photo-realistic virtual environments.5 Important contributions
were made to the commercial motion picture industry by university laboratories in the 1970sÑnotably theNew York Institute of TechnologyÑwhich sustained the core set of early DARPA researchers before priceand performance factors leaped forward in the 1980s and made a market for commercial graphics a reality.
The National Film Board (NFB) of Canada collaborated with the Canadian National Research Council in
producing some of the most widely viewed and convincing artistic computer animations before 1975. This
collaboration was decisive for the NFBÕs early adoption of digital techniques, and it fostered a communityof advanced users with strong links to the academic work in Canadian labs (at the Universities of Waterloo,
Toronto, and Montr”al) that helped to underwrite the knowledge base feeding the successful cluster ofCanadian graphics software firmsÑAlias, SoftImage, Sideffects, and Discrete Logic.The scientific and entertainment graphics community coalesced around the professional organizationSIGGRAPH (the Special Interest Group on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques of the
Association for Computing Machinery), which has been successively extending its scope to include other
scientific specialties, such as human-computer interaction, and media genres, such as computer games. It is
perceived as emphasizing commercial applications, which have games as a driver for computer graphics.1See Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, 1999, Funding a Revolution:Government Support for Computing Research, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.2Pierce worked with Claude Shannon on pulse-code modulation, and Mathews followed up with the analysis oftransmission systems using picture-processing algorithms. They had an abiding interest in audio and visual; Mathewsworked closely with Lillian Schwartz, a computer artist at Bell Labs beginning in the late 1960s who was also associatedthere with A. Michael Noll and Ken Knowlton, who pioneered certain graphics and animation programs.3See <http://ccrma-www.stanford.edu/>.4Iannis Xenakis, 1992, Formalized Music, Pendragon Press, Stuyvesant, N.Y. (first published in 1963 as MusiquesFormelles, Editions Richard-Masse, Paris).5See the chapter ÒVirtual Reality Comes of AgeÓ in Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, 1999,
Funding a Revolution.The criteria for tenure in computer science tend to reinforce suchnegative attitudes toward ITCP work. Although they vary among
computer science departments, criteria for tenure at a research univer-
sity typically include the ability to win a strong endorsement in confi-
dential assessments by subject experts at other institutions and the
quality and quantity of published research, as well as the quality of the
candidateÕs research program, supervision of doctoral students, andgeneral teaching record. If the subject experts on a tenure committee
do not include anyone familiar with ITCP work, or if that ITCP work
does not produce a bounty of published research in major technical
journals, efforts devoted to ITCP work may not advance a computer
scientistÕs career within the department.Another challenge is related to the rise of computing and datacommunications across the board in academic environments, with
elements of computer science increasingly being taught in other de-
partmentsÑa situation that makes some computer scientists skepticalBeyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY164about collaborating with colleagues who may be viewed as lacking thecredentials to be hired in the computer science department itself.
When computer science is taught as a service course to meet specific
needs, other departments may be less motivated to reach out to com-
puter scientists for help with deeper, challenging problems in comput-
ing and communications. The computer science diaspora in academia
has typically focused on developing skills of immediate application in
another field, whether programming (at the more sophisticated level)
or the use of common software tools (at the less generic user level).
Whether they are expected to teach computer science (CS) courses for
majors in other departments or whether those departments internalize
such courses, computer scientists tend to see such activity as some-
thing less than Òdoing real computer science.Ó Also, the emphasis of
such courses on meeting immediate needs and delivering a targeted
service is not conducive to thinking about collaborations.The willingness and ability of academic computer scientists toengage with artists and designers depends on institutional support, as
noted above, and on other particulars of a given departmentÑwhether,for example, the department is in a school of engineering, whether a
bachelor of arts degree is an option, and so on. Recently, to improve
the richness of its cross-disciplinary interactions, the CS department at
MIT planned to make about half of its new appointments joint with
another unit at MIT:30 One course per year would be taught in each
department, salary and promotion decisions would be made jointly,
and the research expected from the new faculty member would appeal
to each department, with selection standards the same as for core
(non-joint) faculty. The first person hired in the CS department under
this plan was a physical chemist, and the partnering department was
bioengineering. It was expected that he would be exposed to new
methods in computer science and in turn would contribute to new
problems demanding new CS solutionsÑand thus motivating fruitfulcross-disciplinary interaction. How this departmentÕs open-ended planfor cross-fertilization is realized and whether it will contribute to ITCP
will depend, in part, on whether artists (for instance) can also be hired.
That prospect is uncertain, in part because of questions about how to
assess candidates who are so different from computer scientists and
how to compensate people who span departments with substantially
different salary structures.31Whatever the mechanism for forming collaborations for ITCPacross departments and disciplines, they must include researchers
working with shared goals and must address intellectually challeng-30Briefing to the committee by John Guttag, chair of the Electrical Engineering andComputer Science Department at MIT, May 31, 2001.31On the other hand, the differences might make artists and humanists more attrac-tive than social scientists, who bear the Òsoft scienceÓ stigma among some computer
scientists because of perceived contrasts in the quantitative and analytical elements ofthe fields. At MIT, the point may be moot, because the Media Lab already provides a
vehicle for exploring ITCP.One of thebiggestchallenges to beaddressed indepartments ofcomputer scienceseems to be aculture thatdiscourages ITCPworkÑalthoughsometimes subtly.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCHOOLS, COLLEGES, AND UNIVERSITIES165ing computer science problems. One approach to ascertaining whethera project is intellectually challenging might be to ask whether it could
lead to a suitable computer science doctoral thesis. Computer science
faculty tend to value work that advances the state of the art in com-
puter science. For dual appointments, the issue may be whether the
work helps to redefine computer science for the future or to create a
new field.One approach to establishing credibility for, and perhaps encour-aging, ITCP work and programs within computer science depart-
ments would be to appoint a senior researcher as the leader of cross-
disciplinary activities. Sending such a signal may be even more

important for collaborations that would include a field traditionally
regarded as far from computer science. In addition, institutional paths
are needed that allow faculty members to break out of narrow special-
izations and that encourage cross-disciplinary Ph.D. programs,
although market realities may argue for a ÒhomeÓ department in
computer science or another technical area. Programs with cross-disci-
plinary minors could also be established or expanded. Cross-depart-
mental activities such as distinguished lecture series and topical study
groups or seminars could also be adopted.A key criterion in assessing specific options for cross-disciplinaryappointments will be their potential to advance the interests of gradu-
ate students, who are the backbone of a computer science departmentÕsresearch program. It will be necessary to frame interesting new, cross-
disciplinary problems that provide appropriate entr”es to careers forgraduate students (perhaps more at the masterÕs than at the doctorallevel).ART PRACTICE AND DESIGNWithin the academic environment, the arts range broadly fromtraditional fine artsÑthe visual arts, music, drama, dance, photogra-phy, film and video, and so onÑto design, architecture, crafts, and thehistory and criticism of the arts.32 The rise of IT has touched all of these
areas, some more than others, blurring some of the traditional distinc-
tions among them. The emphasis of arts programs varies with the
institution: Some take a more humanities-based approach, teaching
artistic expression and critical theory as a way of understanding cul-
tural problems, or a more theoretical approach, studying the fine artsÕinterrelationships with all aspects of contemporary culture; others
prepare students for careers in commercial graphics design, fashion,
or animation and special effects. And some academic art environ-

ments have a broader range of exposure to IT than others.32The rise of IT in the 1990s is viewed as an important cultural phenomenon with far-reaching implications for visual artists who wish to interact with, and represent, theworld in which they live.One approach toestablishingcredibility forITCP work andprograms withincomputer sciencedepartmentswould be toappoint a seniorresearcher as theleader of cross-disciplinaryactivities.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY166The outreach from the arts to information technology, like thatfrom the humanities,33 echoes the sciences
Õ earlier reaching out to IT.
Computational science has been dominated by people and activity
based on one or another science, although new, hybrid programsÑacademic programs, industrial and academic laboratoriesÑhaveemerged. Within the field of computer science, computational science
has tended to be viewed as an outside(rsÕ) activity, in part because themajority of the impetus came from the various sciences that saw in
computer science useful tools. This is part of the previously noted
computer science diaspora. Response from within computer science
required recognition that the field could gain inspiration from these
other fields, rather than serve only the one-way function of supplying
those fields. Similar concerns and patterns shape academic ITCP, still
embryonic. Further complicating the picture is the fact that ITCP may
involve more than the pairing of arts with computer science (or electri-
cal engineering). This is illustrated in particular by the recent trend to
involve as well ideas and activities from the life sciences, given grow-
ing use of IT in that domain and the visual or music performance
potential that results.34Some arts programs have embraced IT, even creating independentareas of study; many have simply broadened their current programs
by adding courses in various software packages, thereby treating IT as
another tool. Arts programs are increasingly encouraging intermedia
and cross-disciplinary artwork as IT tools blur the distinctions be-
tween traditional art disciplines. Some art schools are more skeptical
of ITÕs potential as Ònew mediaÓ and argue that computers and soft-
ware, input devices such as digital cameras and scanners, and dis-
plays such as LED screens and projectors are nothing more than tools
that replicate and simulate traditional media without presenting any
new problems in visual theory.33See Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, 1997, ÒComputing and theHumanities: Summary of a Roundtable Meeting,Ó ACLS Occasional Paper 41, American
Council of Learned Societies, New York, N.Y., available online at <http://www.acls.org/
op41-toc.htm>.34Take the case of the artist as creator of new life forms. Eduardo Kac, of fluorescentgreen-bunny fame (see his Web site at <http://www.ekac.org>; see also Eduardo Kac,1998, ÒTransgenic Art,Ó Leonardo Electronic Almanac 6(11): 289-296), in another project,
biblically titled ÒGenesis,Ó mutated 
E. coli bacteria into genesis bacteria. What is of
specific interest from the perspective of IT is that the genomic code was translated intoMorse code, which was then converted into DNA base pairs. The complicated produc-tion of this synthetic gene is not the concern here. What is significant, however, is that
these cultured fluorescent bacteria remain invisible until IT intervenes. A microscopewith an internal ultraviolet (UV) light source, a Web server, and an over-life-size videoprojection make visible the separation and interaction processes of these newly created
entities. Both the onsite and the online observer can intervene in the procedure ofbacteria transformation by manipulating the UV light source. A further aspect of thisinstallation (shown at the Ars Electronica conference in 1999) is the DNA-Music-Synthe-
sisÑturning the physiology of the DNA into a musical parameter. The real as well as theonline viewer is influential here, too, since she can control the rate of mutation and thesequencing.Arts programs areincreasinglyencouragingintermedia andcross-disciplinaryartwork as ITtools blur thedistinctionsbetweentraditional artdisciplines.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCHOOLS, COLLEGES, AND UNIVERSITIES167SCHOOLS OF ART AND DESIGNTo understand the emergence of ITCP from the academic artsperspective, it is helpful to consider how major schools of art and
design approach IT. The Rhode Island School of Design (RISD), for
example, observes that Òcomputers are natural allies in the creativeprocess, with the emphasis on using new technologies to express
artistic vision. Breakthroughs in digital media have transformed virtu-
ally every discipline taught here.Ó35 Indeed, IT has influenced the
development of RISD programs in graphic design, apparel, ceramics,
architecture, photography, film, animation, video, and illustrationÑproviding new ways to address a shared concern in visual literacy and
creative problem solving.RISDÕs integration of digital media into its more traditional coursework follows the typical pattern of the integration of IT into arts
educationÑthe first and most natural step in the process is to usesoftware to create a model of a potential artwork before the work is
realized in a traditional medium, such as paint or marble. Applica-
tions such as Adobe PhotoShop, and any number of three-dimen-
sional modeling applications, allow students to experiment with im-
age composites and collage, placement of colors, and general
composition before working with physical materials. However, in
2002, RISD announced a new graduate department to explore innova-
tive approaches to digital media. Expanding on a media art focus, the
vision of the new department is to provide a diverse environment for
multidisciplinary and transdisciplinary exploration of digital media.Schools such as the California Institute of the Arts (CalArts36)have focused on preparing undergraduates for professional careers in
art, design, film, music, and theater. Information technology has been
wholeheartedly incorporated into all of the above programs, and a
new, cross-disciplinary study option has been created. Graduate stu-
dents have the option of undertaking a new concentration in Inte-
grated Media, designed for students who are fluent with (or want to
be fluent with) computer programming and digital technologies as
basic elements in their artwork. Programming is taught to increase

mastery of IT (beyond learning how to use an existing package).New YorkÕs School of Visual Art (SVA) boasts an impressive list oftechnical courses in its M.F.A. program in computer art, including
C++ programming, UNIX, interactive multimedia, interface design,
and soundÑa list that shows a range from key skills development(e.g., programming) to explorations in applying those skills. The SVAÕscomputer art M.F.A. was the first of its kind, established in 1987.3735RISDÕs Web site even features a technology statement. See <http://www.risd.edu/technology.cfm>.36See <http://www.calarts.edu>.37Information on the School of Visual Arts is available online at <http://www.sva.edu/mfacad/facilities.html>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY168A course called ÒPublic Art/Private SpacesÓ in CMU
Õs College ofFine Arts explores ITÕs effect on the notion of public space, and itdirects students toward the creation of a public artwork that addresses
these issues. ÒWith the ubiquity of advertising, cell phones, surveil-lance cameras and wireless computers it is increasingly difficult to
define the parameters of public space. In this course, students will
consider how visual artwork and performance are incorporated into
what is considered Ôpublic space.ÕÓ38 Carnegie Mellon
Õs M.F.A. pro-gram is rooted in critical theory and a conceptual approach to art
making, and consequently has incorporated IT into its broader cul-
tural concerns as well as into the practical aspects of streamlining the
art-making process and working in new media. Also see Box 6.4 for an
example of a program in electronic literature.The Department of the Arts at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute(RPI) provides a contrasting model to CMU, as it operates as the sole
creative arts department within the School of Humanities and Social
Sciences. Stressing Òintegrated electronic artsÓ in the wider context of
a technological university, the Arts Department at RPI offers both a
concentrated graduate masterÕs degree in electronic arts practice andan undergraduate dual degree in electronic media, art, and communi-
cation. Without the richness of creative resources and disciplinary
specialties found in colleges or faculties of fine arts, RPIÕs faculty ofprimarily electronic artists must attempt to cater to both the high end
of experimental, research-oriented graduate ITCP practice, as well as a
large and ever growing undergraduate demand for a hybrid bachelorÕsdegree. After experiencing rapid growth in the late 1990s, the RPI Arts
Department is now poised to become the anchor academic partner for
the new Experimental Media and Performing Arts Center, which will
provide exhibition and performance venues for both locally devel-
oped and internationally curated ITCP work.The arts and design departments and colleges have generallyembraced information technology as a new tool to accomplish work.
However, somewhat fewer programs in the practice of arts and design
have focused on ITCP workÑto examine how IT may be able to enablenew forms of art and design and new ways of making such work
available, as well as how IT may be able to change profoundly the
practice within traditional art and design categories. In some respects,
art and design departments were challenged just as society at large to
identify how advances in IT could be used beneficially. In one sense,
expectations are higher for arts and design departments than for com-
puter science departments: Most people would readily conclude that
some kind of profound development in the arts and design should
emerge from advanced IT capability. By contrast, it is somewhat less
clear how ITCP could and should affect computer science depart-
ments and whether the nature of this influence should be minor or
major.3938See <http://www-art.cfa.cmu.edu/academic/descriptions.html>.39The committee argues for a major impactÑsee the discussion in Chapter 4.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCHOOLS, COLLEGES, AND UNIVERSITIES169BOX 6.4School of Literature, Communication, and Culture at theGeorgia Institute of TechnologyAbout 15 years ago, the English Department of the Georgia Institute of Technology (Georgia Tech)received a large institutional grant from the National Endowment for the Humanities to transform itself. The
department broadened its scope to include electronic media, leading to the adoption of a new name: the
School of Literature, Communication, and Culture (LCC). Aggressive recruitment for media arts faculty
followed, and with a number of new members secured, the school began to focus on growth. First an M.A.
program in information design and technology was created. Then a series of workshops were convened at
corporate sites, which proved to be an excellent financial resource as the workshops soon raised more than
$1 million in discretionary funds. This revenue went toward the purchase of up-to-date equipment and to
fund traditional courses, research, and projects in literary studies. Today, the LCC is widely recognized as
one of the premier programs in electronic literature.The transformation of a traditional English Department into a non-traditional electronic media schoolhas resulted in both advantages and obstacles. The success and prestige that the school enjoys within Georgia
Tech and the new-media community at large have created visibility that would have been unavailable if it had
remained a traditional English department. With the help of creative campaigning by the LCC, the engineers
and scientists of Georgia Tech, faculty members who hold the majority of clout within the university, have
had little trouble understanding the benefits and advantages of a program in digital media. The school offers
two graduate programs, continuing education programs, and an undergraduate major, two minors, and
three certificate programs.1The changes also have created tensions. The new focus involves commercial considerations to a muchgreater extent than one finds in a traditional English departmentÑperhaps welcomed by some faculty, buttroubling to others. Related to this tension is the concern that the department might be morphing into a
fancy kind of trade school, away from an established place in the world of scholarshipÑin other words, thatteaching highly marketable electronic skills might come at the expense of intellectual and scholarly inquiry.
One solution may be to approach electronic literacy as a rhetorical practice, rather than a skill.1See the LCC mission statement at <http://www.lcc.gatech.edu/index.html>.As departments within universities, art practice and design pro-grams must adhere to the same general guidelines for tenure as com-
puter science departments. However, there are some important differ-
ences attributable to the discipline and profession. Perhaps the central
difference involves what constitutes a publication. In both cases, com-
pleted work must be made public in some way. Computer science
emphasizes the publication of articles and technical reports (and books
to a lesser extent). Publication in the arts and design may occur through
exhibition, performance, or other means; there can be a scholarly
publication associated with a completed work, but not necessarily
(and in computer science, there may be a prototype or working system
that corresponds to a scholarly article, but not necessarily).4040Experimental computer science focuses on demonstrations, somewhat analogousto exhibition or performance in the arts and design world, in which the primary focus ison systems that operate, not on articles describing systems.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY170CROSS-CUTTING ISSUESAcademic organizations can beÑand often areÑincubators fornew fields that emerge from the interstices of the old ones. That was
the case for computer scienceÑand for the study of film and video, forexample. Both of those arenas, however, illustrate how emerging fields
of study have to struggle to gain respect in the academic community.
This struggle implies that at early stages, resources and institutional
policies can constrain potential.HIRING FACULTYAt first glance, co-hires (appointments with nearly 50 percent ineach departmentÑin computer science and the arts and design) mayseem to be an attractive prospect. The co-hire becomes steeped in
diverse settings related to ITCP and can draw on a tremendous range
of expertise and resources. However, entering into a joint appoint-
ment or major collaboration across disciplines introduces challenges
and risk, especially for junior faculty who have yet to attain tenure,
inasmuch as decisions about their promotion and tenure may depend
on assessments by people accustomed to more traditional avenues.
The demands of the tenure process may be one reason that venturing
into new and cross-disciplinary areas seems more suitable to senior
faculty41Ñbut it is often the young who show more interest in newareas, especially those involving IT in a new context.Thus, the committee believes that faculty should have their pri-mary home in one department. This home departmentÕs criteria areused for tenure and promotion decisions. The faculty member would
attend the home departmentÕs faculty meetings and seek mentorshipfrom the ranks of this department. In some instances, a minority
appointment in a second department can be desirable to encourage
cross-departmental ITCP research and teaching (which may result, for
example, in teaching a course in the second department occasionally,
perhaps jointly with another faculty member whose primary appoint-
ment is in the second department). The utility of zero-percent appoint-
ments42 is questionable, especially if the reality is that the faculty
member seldom becomes involved in any way with the second de-
partment.¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥At first glance, co-hires in computerscience and thearts and designmay seem tobe an attractiveprospect.41With a focus on computer science, this observation was discussed in CSTBÕsMaking IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet SocietyÕs Needs (Com-puter Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, 2000, Na-tional Academy Press, Washington, D.C.).42Zero-percent appointments provide faculty members with formal recognition andselected privileges (which may include attending and voting at faculty meetings, theopportunity to supervise doctoral students, and so on) within a department, eventhough that department does not provide any of the faculty memberÕs salary.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCHOOLS, COLLEGES, AND UNIVERSITIES171One alternative is to create voluntary clusters of interested peoplewithin an art, design, or computer science department who would
teach material on the edge of the respective department. For example,
there could be an art/IT group within an art department. It is impor-
tant to locate IT quasi-formally within all fields simultaneouslyÑevenif it is only at a voluntary cluster level at first. This parallel existence
would serve to familiarize larger groups of faculty and students with
ITCP possibilities and help to increase the awareness of ITCP work.
The idea of voluntary clusters could also be enabled and bolstered by
the workshop concept (see the section ÒWorkshopsÓ above).Some programs in ITCP areas depend on adjunct faculty. As inother domains, the limited use of adjunct faculty can be quite benefi-
cial in bringing different perspectives (often from areas in the relevant
practitioner community) into academia. However, dependence on ad-
junct faculty in ITCP centers as a cost-savings measure is a flawed
long-run strategy, although budget pragmatics may offer no alterna-
tive in the short-run in some instances. A large cadre of adjunct faculty
jeopardizes sufficient stability among the faculty to develop the deeper

insights that can derive from projects that extend beyond one term or
one academic year. Furthermore, a large cadre of adjunct faculty pro-
motes the idea of second-class citizenship in the academic community
for those who pursue ITCP work.ENCOURAGING MULTISKILLED INDIVIDUALS ANDCOLLABORATIONSAcademic environments feature metamorphosis in core disci-plinesÑcomputer science, various arts and designÑand more or lessindependent cross-disciplinary activities, which aim to generate
multiskilled people and support their work. Both individuals with
skills from multiple disciplines and people willing and able to collabo-
rate across disciplines appear important for sustaining cross-disciplin-
ary programs.43 Suitable training and institutional support for either
category are still emerging.A challenge is to overcome the tendency of the communities withinthe ITCP realm to fear becoming marginalized in collaborations, to
fear being treated as technicians in support of anotherÕs work. Ensur-ing sharing of responsibility and recognition is prerequisite for col-
laboration and for acquisition of cross-disciplinary skills. That chal-
lenge may be greatest on the computer science side, from which ITCP
has to be able to draw to achieve its full potential.Because the best collaborations seem to be modest-sized effortsthat grow from the bottom up (graduate students often may be theA large cadre ofadjunct facultypromotes the ideaof second-classcitizenship in theacademiccommunity forthose who pursueITCP work.43See Veronica Boix Mansilla, Dan Dillon, and Kaley Middlebrooks, 2002, ÒBuildingBridges Across Disciplines: Organizational and Individual Qualities of Exemplary In-terdisciplinary Work,Ó review draft, Project Zero, Harvard Graduate School of Educa-
tion, Cambridge, Mass.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY172ones to make and promote connections across boundaries becausethey are not yet fully invested in the models and norms of a particular
field), broader exposure and effective evangelism may be needed to
overcome the disciplinary inertia that can militate against interactions
with people who seem very different. Administrators need to recog-
nize that effective cross-disciplinary activity is harder and can involve
more work than traditional intradisciplinary efforts.44 Accordingly,
they should provide incentives for people from different disciplines to
work together and should make it easy to get started by minimizing
the red tape, while maintaining perspective on academic goals and on
how best to structure the means toward those ends. Investments are
needed in planning and preparation and in guidance for students. For
example, the tendency for fellowships to be attached to departments
may limit flexibility. Further complications stem from differences across
disciplines and departments in compensation, teaching load, graduate
student culture (e.g., autonomy in dissertation selection, expectations
for authorship credit on published work, and career expectations be-
yond the terminal degree), and support (i.e., it is not unusual for
computer science graduate students to receive research assistantships
during much of their course of study, but this is much less common in
the arts and design fields). Although these differences can be found in
comparisons between any pairs of fields, they are greater in cases
involving major historical, cultural, and resource disparities, such as
those between the arts and design on the one hand and information
technology and computer science on the other (see Chapter 8 for
further discussion).45Some universities such as Carnegie Mellon can draw on strengthsin both computer science and art, both of which attract a critical mass
of talent from which interactions may flow. The case of CMU illus-
trates the benefits that can accrue from large scale, which is a circum-
stance that may not be broadly transferable. For example, the Human-
Computer Interaction Institute at CMU has organized a series of
lunches engaging people from the computer science and design de-
partments, and a recent course drew from both the robotics and art
departments to explore robotic art. Few institutions could bring to-
gether on a regular basis audiences with such a wealth of expertise44See Catherine Sentman and Samuel Hope, 1994, ÒDisciplines in Combination:Interdisciplinary, Multidisciplinary, and Other Collaborative Programs of Study,Ó brief-
ing paper of the Council of Arts Accrediting Associations, Reston, Va., March.45An imbalance in resources can have a significant effect on the nature of collabora-tions pursued. Suppose that two professorsÑone in the arts and one in computerscienceÑwish to pursue a joint project. Further suppose that the project will requirehardware and software that cost $150,000 and four half-time research assistants over the
course of several years. To the extent that a resource imbalance exists, such projects mayhave to be funded primarily by the computer science participant (introducing a powerasymmetry into the collaboration) or not be pursued.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCHOOLS, COLLEGES, AND UNIVERSITIES173and experience, but those able to do it have a significant advantage inthe support of ITCP work.Administrators also have to resist the urge to direct large sums ofmoney to anything digital. A new organization, for example, is not
necessarily the best solution, at least in the beginning. And they also
need to beware of the faddism that can accompany identification of
cross-disciplinary opportunities. In particular, university administra-
tors may feel tension about their institutions being perceived as (or
becoming) fancy trade schools if programs lack a recognized research
base.However, in the long run, the creation of a specialized center isdesirable to consolidate common interests as demonstrated by the
initiatives of individual faculty members. ITCP work must develop its
own world view, and while that will necessarily be built largely from
the parent disciplines, a more neutral context is required so that the
inherent problems and contradictions can be negotiated.DESIGNING CURRICULAQuestions arise about kinds of degree programs and how theyshould relate to skills. There is an art to evolving coursesÑin com-puter science and in the arts and humanitiesÑto promote cross-fertili-zation, and it is not clear that there are replicable models. Different
approaches will be needed where the emphasis is on increasing breadth
versus depth of knowledge. On the arts side, a challenge is to move
beyond treating IT as black-box tools and to enable more exploration
of the workings of IT, to foster deeper integration of art and IT. On the
computer science side, a big constraint is the already tight engineering
curriculum that shapes most degree programs (though most programs
include some social science and humanities courses as a part of a
general education requirement). The challenges begin with delivering
arts and humanities (or social science) courses in ways that make clear
the relevance to computer science students, and computer science
courses in ways that link to other issues and contexts, thereby opening
the doors to cross-disciplinary inquiry. The next level of challenge
pertains to curriculum. As Sentman and Hope ask,Is there a common, clearly defined concept of what studentsshould know and be able to do after completing a program that
combines work in two or more disciplines? How do collaborative
programs aid in the development of knowledge and skills both in
the component disciplines and in intellectual approaches and
techniques for making connections?4646Sentman and Hope, 1994, ÒDisciplines in Combination,Ó p. 6.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY174One illustration of how curriculum design is thought through isprovided by the standards for joint accreditation by the National
Association of Schools of Music and the Accreditation Board for Engi-
neering and Technology of baccalaureate degree programs combining
studies of music and electrical engineering. Addressing admission,
faculty, facilities and equipment, library facilities, curricular structure,
specific course requirements by category, and essential competencies,
experiences, and opportunities, the standards spell out what would
and would not be acceptable for joint accreditation, and they provide
guidelines for the operation of Òcombination degree programsÓ in
music and electrical engineering.47 That effort illustrates implementa-tion that responds to fundamental concerns raised by Sentman and
Hope: ÒConnect the work of the arts unit to professional work in otherdisciplines. Teach by example the interconnections of the arts profes-
sions with other intellectual and professional activities . . . .Ó48Of concern to the committee is the narrowness or shallowness ofsome of the new offerings, which seem little more than venues for
learning and applying skills in certain software packages (e.g.,
PhotoShop), and the observation that in some contexts, the rise of new
activities involving IT seems to dominate preexisting programs (with
the acquiescence of those in charge of such programs), with question-
able results for curricula and degree programs. While initial interest
may begin with superficial use of IT, there is a need to think through,
in the long run, the emphasis of academic activities on intellectual
content relative to process: Generating in-depth knowledge, skills,
and competence requires intellectual content, not just method.Truly good curricula that support ITCP work are difficult to de-sign, because they must reflect a sufficiently broad scope of learning
and inquiry while also incorporating the core of some body of knowl-
edge. Graduates are best served by gaining both exposure to ITCP
work and grounding in some discipline.49 The practical realities of the
employment marketplaceÑwhich tends to reward specialization anddegree name recognitionÑsuggest that jettisoning any attempt at spe-cialization is perilous for the student.The time is ripe for academic experimentation with ITCP, givenbroad trends among disciplines. It is a time when disciplines are
fragmenting or have become so porous as to lose their former shape
and identity. First formulated in the early 19th century in HegelÕs47See Handbook of the National Association of Schools of Music, 1995, National Associa-
tion of Schools of Music, Reston, Va. There is apparently only one program, at theUniversity of Miami, that conforms to the guidelines at this time.48Sentman and Hope, 1994, ÒDisciplines in Combination,Ó p. 7.49Under ideal conditions, students would master two bodies of knowledge: com-puter science and a field within the arts or design. However, such a course of study isprobably time (and cost) prohibitive for most students and universities.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCHOOLS, COLLEGES, AND UNIVERSITIES175Berlin, the now classic university fields and professions are undergo-ing a complex process of reconceptualization and restructuring. Just as
the opposition between brain and body is being rethought, so, too, is
the binary model separating the arts from the sciences, culture from
nature, and biological from engineered systems.5050For the last quarter of a century, philosophers, cognitive scientists, and culturalhistorians have been delving into the problem of human knowing and consciousness.George Lakoff and Mark Johnson summed up this turn toward neuro-inquiry as Òphi-losophy in the fleshÓ (George Lakoff and Mark Johnson, 1999, 
Philosophy in the Flesh: TheEmbodied Mind and Its Challenge to Western Thought, Basic Books, New York). In light of
recent developments in AI, robotics, biotechnology, IT, and the exponential expansion
of the Internet, can one still claim, however, that Òour reality is shaped by the patterns ofour bodily movement, the contours of our spatial and temporal orientation, and theforms of our interaction with objectsÓ (p. xix)?Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.176any of the opportunities and challenges associatedwith work in information technology and creative
practices (ITCP) are presented in the preceding chap-
ters. Chapters 3 and 4 focus on substanceÑthe subjectareas that merit attentionÑwhereas Chapters 2, 5, and 6 focus on the
processes and places that directly support ITCP work. There are also
global factors that can indirectly promote or deter ITCP work that
extend beyond the intellectual agenda and specific mechanisms and
support structures previously described. Attention is focused here on
the four relevant global issues on which committee members have
informed commentary to offer: digital copyright, digital archiving and
preservation, validation and recognition structures, and the geogra-
phy of ITCP.In these four areas, ITCP work could benefit from some type ofconcerted actionÑby government agencies; legislatures; courts; in-
dustries; colleges and universities; professional, scholarly, and trade
associations; and other interest groups. First, the ongoing copyright
debates on the use and re-use of digital information have important
immediate and future consequences for the conduct of ITCP work.
Second, the archiving and preservation of digital content for the ben-
efit of future generationsÑto support both future enjoyment and to
serve as a baseline for future ITCP workÑrequires action now before
many digital works become lost. Third, new recognition and valida-
tion structures may be needed to evaluate and reward ITCP work that
is notably different from mainstream information technology (IT) or
arts and design work. And fourth, regional development policies and
practices can encourage or discourage the evolution of environmentsBeyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES AND PUBLIC POLICY177¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥conducive to ITCP work. The issue of funding from governments andprivate philanthropy is discussed in Chapter 8.1DIGITAL COPYRIGHT
ITCP work builds on the cumulative record of social and culturaldiscourse, scholarship, and scientific debate and discovery. Simple
and direct access to this record can greatly facilitate the production of
creative work. Governments recognize the importance of this depen-
dence in cultural, artistic, technical, and/or scholarly accomplishment.
Intellectual property laws are fashioned with a careful balance of
interests in mindÑa balance that includes the interests of those whoproduce creative and intellectual work, those who wish access to it,
and those who mediate between the producers and the users.However, the advent of digital content and networks has upsetthis balance, which was crafted substantially for a world of physical
artifacts, not electronic bits (see Box 7.1). Some suggest that the bal-
ance is skewed, and, in particular, that the balance has shifted in favor
of commercial interests. Whether this shift has indeed taken hold can
be debated,2 but no one can deny that the interests of commercial
content producers and distributors are well represented and highly
visible in the public debate. Recently, however, other viewpoints are
gaining prominence, through the work of scholars such as Lawrence
Lessig.3Capability in the creative use of IT needs to be understood asgrowing from the fertile soil of a common culture containing past
creativity, ever more encoded in digital artifacts, and the nurturing of
social processes, ever more mediated through IT networks, that make
deep knowledge of this past creativity possible. The real choices avail-
able to individual ITCP practitioners in defining how their work circu-
lates socially constitute an effective dimension of their creative free-
dom.4 However, the mediation by networks raises new questions
1There are, of course, other public policy issues that have varying impact on ITCPwork, such as the concentration of the mass-media industries and the role and impact ofinternational organizations (some of which is discussed in Chapter 8 under the rubric offunding). The committee focused its attention on the set of public policy issues that it
sees as most important to ITCP work and for which the committee is capable ofproviding specific commentary.2See Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National ResearchCouncil (NRC), 2000, The Digital Dilemma: Intellectual Property in the Information Age
,National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.3See, for example, Lawrence Lessig, 2001, The Future of Ideas, Random House, New
York.4Michael Shapiro makes the important argument that while Americans usually donot think of their nation as having a cultural policy (since it prefers private over public
funding models), in fact intellectual property regulation is precisely thatÑa politicallyBeyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY178BOX 7.1What Changed in the Balance of Copyright Protections?¥Deterioration in the effectiveness of the natural inhibitors to copying. Magazines, oil paintings, and mostother physical objects involve non-trivial costs to copy, and in some instances, the costs can be prohibitive.
Digital information largely overcomes these natural physical deterrents; copying bits is very inexpensive and
typically only requires access to commonplace computer systems. The proliferation of digital information
and networks makes it possible to produce and distribute many exact copies rapidly for nearly zero cost.¥Deterioration in the effectiveness of the natural inhibitors to modification. Similarly, modifying physicallybased objects often involves non-trivial costs (e.g., modifying a copy of a book), and the modifications may
often be obvious once made. Modifications of digital information can usually be accomplished at very low
cost and often are virtually undetectable.¥Use of information technology to lock up digital information in ways that were previously impractical.Information contained within physical objects (e.g., books) could not be reasonably controlled once
distributed; by contrast, content-protection technologies could control access to some digital information
indefinitely.¥From display to publication? The use of the Web to make work accessible can raise questions thatdid not arise previously. For example, consider a physical work of art that incorporates ordinary household
items that are protected under copyright.1 Copyright permission is not required to incorporate a soup can
or soft drink container into an artwork. However, developing the comparable work for access on the Web
may constitute publication and may therefore necessitate permission from the copyright holder (which also
may involve the payment of a fee) before such work can be made publicly available.¥Digital archiving and preservation involves copyright law in an intimate way. As described in the sectionÒDigital Archiving and Preservation,Ó archiving and preserving digital works often involves making a copy of
the original (and possibly modifying it) and providing access to the copied work. Archiving of physical objects
such as sculpture or books rarely involved such concerns.¥Technology facilitates reuse of information, but the legal and economic infrastructure does not. Networksand digital information can enable the development of extraordinary information technology (IT) and
creative practices (ITCP) work that draws on many other works from around the world. IT facilitates
integrative, improvisational approaches. However, the infrastructure to secure the legal rights to use other
works is a long way from supporting many such projects and is a deterrent to the creative process.¥Increasing use of contract law (licenses) instead of some provisions of copyright law. One provision ofparticular importance in the conduct of ITCP work, especially work that incorporates small portions of
other works, is the fair use doctrine.2 If licensing increasingly replaces fair use, ITCP work can be inhibited
because of difficulties in securing permissions, as discussed above. Cost is also an issue. The fair use doctrine
was included in the copyright law as a part of the deal in copyright protection in support of the public
interestÑthat is, protection is granted, but the copyright holder agrees to limited free access. Insofar as the
increasing use of licenses implies increased cost, ITCP work is deterred.NOTE: The content of this box is derived from (1) two commissioned papers of the Art, Technology, andIntellectual Property Project of the American Assembly: ÒLooking Backward and ForwardÓ by Michael Shapiro, 2001,and ÒPublic Policy at the Intersection of the ArtsÓ by Margaret Wyszomirski, 2001, available online at <http://www.americanassembly.org/ac/atip_p_cp.htm>; (2) the final report of the Art, Technology, and Intellectual Property
Project of the American Assembly, 2002, available online at <http://www.americanassembly.org/ac/atip_na_fr.htm>;and (3) Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, 2000, 
The Digital Dilemma:Intellectual Property in the Information Age, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.1For some items, trademark law might be more applicable. Nevertheless, the basic point still applies.2The fair use doctrine relates to a provision in U.S. copyright law that permits limited copying and use of worksprotected by copyright to be undertaken without the explicit permission of the copyright holder. The scope of
ÒlimitedÓ is too complex to be addressed here; see Chapter 4 of The Digital Dilemma.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES AND PUBLIC POLICY179about rights and responsibilities that, depending on how law andnorms evolve, could chill some explorations.
5 Thus, future stakes
include access to and protection of content as well as the shaping of
platforms for cultural expression.The openness of some software communities to the free exchangeof software-code components and the designation of digital art objects
as common property for reuse have become a contentious aspect of
digital culture in the past decade. Code sharing, especially for research
and education, characterized the early years of computer science;
restrictions on sharing grew with proprietary, commercial interests;
and the Òopen sourceÓ (for open access to source code) movement
arose as an attempt to reset the balance and foster alternatives to
closed, commercial systems. Notwithstanding the partial origins of
the open-source movement in the quest for highly reliable generic
computing resources, like operating systems or file transfer services,6there are similar incentives for individual creators to contribute to a
common art or design platform.7 Such a platform can permit a rising
tide of community performance in particular domains, such as com-
puter animation or interactive art, while still preserving the ability of
individuals to create their own works. Similarly, an open-source ap-
proach may enable development of tools specialized for art or design
uses that would not themselves justify commercial development. Thus,
as the case of the Max programming language8 shows on a small scale,
ecologically diverse mixtures of proprietary and free components have
appeared with growing frequency in large, industrial-strength appli-
cations offered by vendors such as AliasWavefront, SoftImage, and
AutoDesk. This phenomenon, and the interest in ITCP communities in
open source, illustrate how creativity is a process combining coopera-
tion and competition. More thoughtful approaches are needed thanshaped framework for cultural development. In this framework, citizensÕ knowledge of
their creative rights and responsibilities becomes a core capability within an informa-
tion society. By analogy to the rise of environmental consciousness, public policydefining such capabilities should no more be delegated to private media corporationspecial interests than should the setting of environmental policy be dominated by either
the Sierra Club or General Motors. See Michael Shapiro, 2001, ÒCopyright as CulturalPolicy,Ó Center for Arts and Culture, Washington, D.C.5For a concrete example, consider the robotic plants of Ken Goldberg (described inChapter 6), or any other participatory work that is enabled by the Internet. Who retainsthe copyright for each individual contribution? If the answer is Òeach individual,Ó then
use of the work and the collective individual contributions could require copyright
approval (or a licensing agreement) from each participant.6For further information, see <http://www.gnu.org/>.7Emblematic was the organizing of the ÒInternational Conference on Collaborationand Ownership in the Digital EconomyÓ (known as CODE) held in Cambridge, En-
gland, in April 2001. See <http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/CODE/>.8See the discussion in Chapter 3.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY180simply to discourage or criminalize the copying of digital content.9And (longitudinal) study is needed to understand what, in fact, is theimpact of open source on creativity.Creators of all types, from economically marginal or folk produc-ers to professional commercial artists, need to become aware of the
range of licensing options and permissions already available to them
within current legal frameworks. One of these is, of course, to choose
to place works in the public domain to facilitate reuse, or to pool them
as part of intellectual property conservancies.10 There are initiatives to
assess the options available for balancing individual creative incen-
tives with the legitimate needs of citizens to share and cooperate in the
building of a common digital culture.11 For example, the American
AssemblyÕs Art, Technology and Intellectual Property (ATIP) projectis a national effort by a non-partisan, public policy institution to ad-
dress the impacts, challenges, and opportunities resulting from tech-
nological advances that are confronting the arts.12 Case Western Re-
serve University has established the new Center for Law, Technology,
and the Arts.13 Continuing efforts are needed, particularly those that
can offer new and bold ideas that are commensurate with the effects
on copyright law and practice attributable to the shift from analog to
digital information. The development of specific proposals that could
be implemented deserves priority over general philosophical and con-
ceptual discussions of the impact of copyright law on the conduct of
ITCP work.The brief discussion above on this very complex and importanttopic can only begin to outline the many facets of digital copyright and
especially those facets that have the most impact on ITCP, which
embrace the use, control, distribution, ownership, and creation of
ITCP work. A more complete examination would extend to other
aspects of intellectual property rightsÑpatents and trademarks. Thus,the purpose of this section is not to provide a comprehensive analysis9The Digital Dilemma (CSTB, NRC, 2000) documents the debates about how to framethe commonly agreed upon importance of public education about intellectual property.The Future of Ideas (Lessig, 2001) leads the charge in articulating the counter-productiveeffects on the public welfare from imposing stringent intellectual property protection bymaking copyright valid for longer periods.10Based on a presentation by Rick Prelinger, Prelinger Archives, at the committeeÕsJanuary 2001 meeting at Stanford University.11CreativeCommons.org has launched a set of tools and templates for guiding cre-ators in the ÒspecializedÓ licensing of their work
Ñsuggesting intermediate solutionsbetween the monopoly status of copyright and the uncertain and sometimes inappro-priate status of general public licenses and other comparable mechanisms. ÒThe projectwill make use of one of the techniques employed by digital rights management sys-
temsÑspecifically, the concept of a rights expression languageÑbut with the primarygoal of releasing (rather than reserving and enforcing) intellectual property rightsÓ(private communication, Molly Shaffer Van Houweling, University of Michigan Law
School, April 15, 2002).12See <http://www.americanassembly.org/ac>.13See <http://lawwww.cwru.edu/academic/lta/introduction.htm>.Copyright issuesgreatly influencethe nature ofITCP work, andsuch issuesdeserve furtherexamination andaction.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES AND PUBLIC POLICY181of the copyright issues relevant to ITCP work, but to convey to thereader the message that copyright issues greatly influence the nature
of ITCP work and that such issues deserve further examination and
action. For detailed discussions, the reader is advised to review the
works referred to in this section.DIGITAL ARCHIVING AND
PRESERVATION
In theory, digital information is perfectly reproducible and there-fore potentially eternalÑbut practically speaking, this is far from thecase. Instead, art and memories that are committed to digital media
put the cultural heritage of the nation and the world at risk. Collection
and exhibition must necessarily evolve into something that looks and
feels like stewardship, not mere storage. As concluded in previous
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board reports, new tech-
nical infrastructures are required to archive and preserve digital con-
tent,14 or when feasible, to incorporate provisions for long-term pres-
ervation into ITCP work as an integral component of initial design.
The challenge of digital archiving and preservation is formidable and
cannot be addressed fully in this report. There are no easy answers.
However, some of the most pressing problems can be outlined here,
underscored by the committeeÕs sense that urgent action is needed.15Physical artifacts, although they require environmental controlsand secure storage, can be preserved more easily than digital informa-
tion because their formats do not become obsolete over timeÑa paint-ing or sculpture remains ÒreadableÓ for centuries into the future.
Digital content, on the other hand, can become difficult to read in a
matter of a decade (or even less) as formats and systems for digital
content evolve.16¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥14For detailed treatments on digital archiving in general, see Computer Science andTelecommunications Board, National Research Council, 2001, LC21: A Digital Strategyfor the Library of Congress, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.; CSTB, NRC, 2000,
The Digital Dilemma; and the forthcoming report of the Committee on Digital Archivingand the National Archives and Records Administration (for further information, see
<http://www.cstb.org/project_nara.html>).15The next three paragraphs are based largely on Howard BesserÕs ÒLongevity ofElectronic Art,Ó February 2001, available online at <http://www.gseis.ucla.edu/
~howard/Papers/elect-art-longevity.html>.16Try to find the hardware to read a Multimate (word processor) file on a 5.25-inchfloppy disk saved using the CP/M operating system. Howard Besser characterizes this
situation as Òthe viewing problemÓÑthat is, Òthe default for electronic objects is tobecome inaccessible unless someone takes an immediate pro-active role to save them.ÓSee Besser, 2001, ÒLongevity of Electronic Art.ÓBeyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY182Files can be moved from one physical medium to another (calledrefreshing) in an effort to avoid ending up with files that are increas-
ingly difficult to read because of technological obsolescence or physical
decay of the medium. Refreshing does help, but it does not address the
problem of evolving file formats. Refreshing files in obsolete formats
(e.g., Wordstar word processing files) still leaves the problem of being
able to read the obsolete format. The problem of obsolete formats
becomes more difficult with multimedia information, as the different
modes (sound, text, images, and so on) are represented using different
formats.As a file of bits, the physical rendition of an electronic work is notfixed. ITCP works may be viewed on a personal computer with an
Internet Explorer or Netscape browser today, but might be viewed
using very different hardware in the future (or even the present)Ñwith each configuration of hardware and software offering a different
user experience, though based on the Òsame work.Ó For example,
faster hardware and networks can cause works to operate at a more
rapid pace than intended by their creators and, ultimately, as hard-
ware and networks become orders of magnitude faster, the userÕsexperience could change markedly. Curators and conservators will
need to identify those characteristics of the enabling information tech-
nology that are integral to a work.Even the definition of a work can be problematic. A work may linkto other works (that may belong to the same creator or not), and those
other works may be live works themselves, that is, changing over time
in response to usersÕ actions, be they descriptive or structural in effect.
Capturing everything necessary to preserve works that link to other
works can be quite difficultÑin a technological and institutionalsense.17 Determining whether a work is authentic also becomes more
challenging: The changing of a few bits within a work (whether by
accident or design) can alter a work in a substantial way and can be
extremely difficult to detect.18Some ITCP works are created to interact with peopleÑsuch worksare alive in the sense that a sculpture or painting is notÑand thereforethese works can change over time by intent, presenting the problem of
how to archive and preserve multiple versions of ostensibly the same
work. In this way, ITCP work can be more challenging to archive and
preserve than some other forms of digital content that are, for instance,
fixed (e.g., electronic versions of printed scholarly journals).17There are also legal questions. Although one may link to the work of another,copying another work as an integral step in the preservation of a given work (whichpresumably will be made accessible to various people in the future) may well violatecopyright law (for works under copyright protection), at least in the United States. See
the section ÒDigital CopyrightÓ above in this chapter for further discussion.18For example, consider a computer game in which several key parameters arechanged. In terms of how the game looks and plays, all may seem as usual, except to an
enthusiast who has played the game many times and can detect that Òsomething doesnot feel rightÓ or that it seems a lot harder to achieve some particular goal than
previously.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES AND PUBLIC POLICY183It is not uncommon for ITCP-based work to end its life with theclose of the original project and exhibition, much before the challenges
of obsolete hardware, software, and file formats become relevant.
Therefore, archiving and preservation of ITCP work depend at least in
part on the status of new-media art within curatorial institutions. For
example, digital works that enter a permanent collection presumably
will be properly maintained and migrated to new digital formats as
necessary to ensure that the work remains accessible using reasonably
available information technology. Jon Ippolito, associate curator of
media art at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, said, ÒThe objec-tive is both to demonstrate our conviction that these forms of cultural
expression deserve to be safeguarded for the future and also to dem-
onstrate a method for doing it,Ó when commenting on the
GuggenheimÕs acquisition of its first two works of Internet-based artfor its permanent collection19 in the beginning of 2002.
20 Another
recent initiative is the project Archiving the Avant Garde, which in-
tends to establish guidelines for museums, galleries, and artists for
preserving art that incorporates information technology in significant
ways.21 Other notable archiving initiatives include the Conceptual and
Intermedia Arts Online project (CIAO)22 and the Variable Media Net-work.23 The Daniel Langlois Foundation houses the Centre for Re-
search and Documentation, which has created an online database of
artifacts that documents the history, artworks, and practices associ-
ated with digital media arts and then makes the information available
to researchers and the general public.24Electronic literature provides a good example of the problems andpossibilities. The practice of literature and literary criticism would be
almost unthinkable without the rich resources of the codex archive,
stretching back to early print books and beyond that to manuscript
culture. Recognizing its crucial importance, major institutions have
devoted significant resources to the preservation and accessibility of
this archive, including great public and private libraries such as the
British Museum Library, the Getty Research Library, and the Beinecke19The works are net.flag by Mark Napier and Unfolding Object by John F. Simon, Jr.,available online at <http://www.guggenheim.org/internetart>.20Derived from Matthew Mirapaul, 2002, ÒGetting Tangible Dollars for an IntangibleCreation,Ó New York Times, February 18, p. B2.21Participants in the Archiving the Avant Garde project include the Walker ArtCenter, Cleveland Performance Art Festival and Archive, Solomon R. GuggenheimMuseum, Franklin Furnace Archive, Berkeley Art Museum and Pacific Film Archive,
and Rhizome.org; see <http://www.bampfa.berkeley.edu/ciao/avant_garde.html>.Also see Scott Carlson, 2002, ÒMuseums Seek Methods for Preserving Digital Art,ÓChronicle of Higher Education, May 28, available online at <http://chronicle.com/free/2002/05/2002052802t.htm>; and Kendra Mayfield, 2002, ÒHow to Preserve Digital Art,ÓWired, July 23, available online at <http://www.wired.com/news/print/0,1294,53712,00.html>.22See <http://www.bampfa.berkeley.edu/ciao/>.23See <http://www.guggenheim.org/press_releases/newmedia_pr.html>.24See <http://www.fondation-langlois.org/>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY184Rare Rook and Manuscript Library at Yale University. But there is asyet no national program for the archiving and preservation of elec-
tronic literature and art. As indicated above, the Guggenheim has
begun to explore the problem as it applies to electronic art, but there is
as yet no consensus on what and how to archive these works. Solu-
tions include a migration strategy, which would require periodic up-
dating and translation of works to ensure that they can be imple-
mented on contemporary software and hardware. Emulation focuses
on the development of software that can read and interpret files in
older formats. Another possibility is archiving of the machines and
software on which the works run, an approach that would require
continuing maintenance that becomes increasingly problematic as the
machines age, as well as increasing amounts of storage room and
accessibility. Yet another possibility is to identify an extensible coding
language, such as the extensible markup language (XML), and publish
standards that writers and artists would be encouraged to follow if
they wanted to make their works as accessible as possible for archiving.
In this case, concerns include securing the equivalent of electronic
museums on the Web, where works could continue to be updated and
made accessible to users as the coding languages continue to evolve.
The Electronic Literature Organization25 is exploring all these possi-
bilities, but again no consensus has yet emerged that is likely to win
support from the relevant stakeholders.VALIDATION AND RECOGNITION
STRUCTURESValidation and recognition structures are needed to encourage theproduction of good work in ITCP, to offer reliable indications of
quality to users, the public, and funders, and in academia, to support
decisions on hiring, tenure, and promotion.26 The nature of the output
(consider the clich”, Òbut is it art?Ó) and the nature of the methodology(i.e., the actions taken to integrate IT into art or art into computer
science) may raise questions among reviewers.A successful artist must satisfy two audiences: a public audienceand the elite circle of critics, theorists, dealers, curators, and collec-¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥25The mission of the Electronic Literature Organization is to Òfacilitate and promotethe writing, publishing, and reading of literature in electronic media.Ó See <http://
www.eliterature.org>.26As one reviewer put it: ÒThe new mediaÑand simulations of the oldÑthat com-puters can create allow immense novelty. But it would be surprising if the ideas on these
fringes are less mediocre than most ideas elsewhere. In fact, one might expect theopposite: that it will be very difficult for most who are trying to express through thecomputer to find and invent genres that can carry real content expressed in new and
important ways.ÓThere is as yet nonational programfor the archivingand preservationof electronicliterature and art.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES AND PUBLIC POLICY185tors.27 If an art piece gets into juried competitions because jurors like it,
and then gets into galleries where many viewers see it and like it, then
a verbal and written discourse is generated that renders a judgment.
Critical acclaim is a strong motivator and criterion for success for
much cultural production.28 More prosaic criteria are also applicable:
access measurements such as exhibition attendance or Web site hits or
commercial success of artists. Designers engaged in ITCP represent a
kind of hybrid of artists and information technologistsÑmarket ap-peal is a criterion of success, but so is positive feedback from the circle
of elites. Although there may be a discrepancy between popular and
elite appraisal at any time, either or both may become more positive
well after a work has been made public, even after the creator has
died.Computer scientists (information technologists) who are employedby industryÑor leverage their results by starting up a new businessÑmay rely on market feedback. The late-1990s surge in entrepreneurial
activity by computer science faculty suggests a swing toward market
acceptance as a validating factor in that time period, although com-
puter scientists continue to view academia as the locus of fundamental
research and idea generation and industry (the dot-coms and other
businesses) as the locus of the application of these ideasÑtheimplementers. Market acceptance may generate professional recogni-
tion in retrospect, as is clear in the history of both computer science
and the arts.On the arts side, analysts and criticsÑsuch as art historiansÑhavelong contributed to deeper understanding than mere access to artistic
artifacts provides. There appears to be a lag, however, in analytical
appreciation for ITCP. One reason is the prominence of fast-moving
popular culture, although the history of art shows that forms must be
stable for at least a while before they yield profound expression.
Another reason is the slow embrace in the arts-analytical commu-
nity;29 and a third reason is the undocumented nature of ITCP, whichconfounds scholarship. (As noted in the previous section, it may well
be that humanistic scholarship in this arena will be stalled until strong,
enduring alliances can be made with information scientists and com-27A reviewer explained this challenge, a kind of double standard, as follows: ÒIn thepopular imagination (and in the popular press) the work is no good unless it is acces-sible to the general public. But professional advancement is the result of approval
among the elite circle of critics, theorists, curators, dealers, and collectors. Imagine if acondition for the Nobel Prize for physics was that, in addition to being groundbreakingscience, Joe-on-the-street must understand and like it!Ó28A practical challenge for all parties addressing IT and creative practice is mainte-nance of a critical attitude toward the technology. This challenge is exacerbated by thesheer difficulty and time demands of developing, maintaining, and updating technical
skills, and of building reliably functioning technology. ArtistsÕ propensity for social
commentary can shape attitudes toward technology (and technologists).29This was remarked upon by several reviewers.There appears tobe a lag inanalyticalappreciation forITCP.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY186puter scientists, as these two groups become increasingly familiarwith the new properties of emergent digital cultural forms and thus
are able to help develop a scholarly apparatus appropriate to these
forms.) The lack of historical perspective among practitioners and
appraisers of ITCPÑthat is, the lack of an understanding of the dura-bility of new ideas and their long-term impact, and also of an under-
standing of how and when ideas emerged and evolvedÑcomplicatesvalidation and recognition and contributes to considerable wheel-
reinventing.Work in ITCP can sometimes be given acclaim as breakthroughsor as pioneering new forms of work. Being first to do something is
often valued in technical contexts but may obscure the artistic merits.
In this situation, the purpose of a work Òoften seems to lie outside theexperience of the artwork as actually encountered. Instead the caption
and illustration in the catalog, Web site, or newspaper seem to play a
far greater role in the projectÕs perceived success than the actual expe-rience it engenders. The labels and photographs seem to push the
artwork along every institutional step of the way: before, in grant
applications; during, for publicity; and after, to help memorialize the
work, readying it for its incorporation by curators, critics, and aca-
demics into a historical timeline.Ó30 Part of the problem lies in the
nature of IT, which confounds early identification of innovations that
will have a lasting impact: The computer (hardware plus software) is a
very plastic medium, inviting the creator to push the edge of the
current convention and side-step the current limits of the medium.
This is an invitation to move fast, to leave the past behind, and to go
explore a constantly new future. In this early period of experimenta-
tion, it is hard to tell what is really creative, what will end up being of
lasting value, what is passing novelty, and so on; too much is in flux to
sustain the usual critical feedback processes. This situation helps to
explain why it seems to take a long time to integrate a new technology
into making non-trivial art. Often in the past, it has been the children
who have grown up in a genre who have produced the most profound
expressions. The innovators have tended to be more awkward, even in
the so-called classical disciplines, while the second generation has
often gained the fluency to push the ideas the furthest. Most forms
that we make things fromÑwhether languages or materialsÑhavemore degrees of freedom than most of us can easily handle. This gives
tremendous freedom and range that have to be balanced with consid-
erable discernment, taste, and criticism, whether one is a painter,
composer, or computer scientist.In industry and in various design and art contexts, assessmentsmay be less rigid as compared with those in academia, inasmuch as
there are greater total numbers of jobs or other outlets for work. Even30In the words of a reviewer of this report.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES AND PUBLIC POLICY187so, evaluations vary based on whether a new idea is seen as ÒjustÓ an
application or an incremental advance rather than as a significant
innovationÑthe term ÒcreativeÓ is more likely to be used to describe
the latter. In both academic and other contexts, there may also be an
emphasis on whether an individual (or team) is the true originator of a
new idea. Mass-market acceptance of new ideas and output/products
(as opposed to acceptance by a community of peers) is not sufficient; it
may be acknowledged within and outside academia, but it is no guar-
antor of high professional or peer regard,31 although it may matter
more for some subdisciplines (e.g., design, computer graphics) than
others. Also, as explained by a member of the committee, ÒPopulariza-tion and elite curation, though seemingly opposed, actually work
together to produce stronger results than either alone could.ÓThe extant structures for computer scientists, artists, and design-ers are each based on the differing goals and motivations of the respec-
tive fields; the criteria used in validation and recognition structures
relevant to ITCP also differ by subdiscipline within those arenas; and
validation and recognition structures for ITCP work should reflect
multiple sets of goals and motivations. Differences within a field in
how people perform research or undertake specific practices are also
difficult to appreciate across disciplinary boundaries. This confounds
the appraisal of creative practices, or excellence. In computer science,
how does one judge whether a particular breakthrough is creative or
not?32 Even among the arts (or the sciences), it is no easy matter to
appraise creative practices across disciplines; one should not assume
that a painter would automatically recognize when a jazz pianist is
particularly creative, or that a network expert could easily discern a
creative advance in computer graphics.Review panels, whether associated with a conference, a profes-sional society or group, or a publication, tend to be composed of
evaluators with expertise in an established field, discipline, or profes-
sion. Since ITCP work often crosses established boundaries of exper-
tise, panels can be unprepared to conduct proper peer review of that
work, especially when it includes substantive technical and cultural,
critical, artistic, or design components. Alternate mechanisms for the
review of ITCP work are needed. For example, one possibility is to
establish small-scale independent workshops for this purpose under
the auspices of several prestigious organizations (to help establish
legitimacy and recognition) in diverse domains. Mechanisms to sup-
port self-organization among those pursuing ITCP work would also
be helpful.3331In a famous example, astronomer Carl Sagan (creator of the television seriesCosmos and the book and movie 
Contact) was probably the most popular science com-municator of his day, but he was not elected to the National Academy of Sciences.32An experiment by the committee, featuring a set of theoretical computer scienceexamples, yielded mixed reactions (at best) even among computer scientist reviewers.33See Chapter 5 for a discussion of possible mechanisms.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY188Ultimately, a set of distinctive goals and motivations may emergefor ITCP work, making it easier for leading practitioners to achieve the
recognition that they deserve. Maturation of appraisal criteria must
develop along with ITCP work, and a critical mass of critics suffi-
ciently sophisticated to evaluate ITCP work is needed. An important
factor in these developments will be the evolution of a language of
discourse. Achieving great art in the future, regardless of the medium,
implies finding enough stability in the language or media carriers of
the ideas for both creators and appreciators (including critics and
curators) to learn them. The evolving language of ITCP, of course,
must be one that bridges multiple disciplines, and that bridging will
have to acknowledge the different meanings attached by computer
science and the arts to such words as ÒabstractÓ or Òrepresentation.ÓPUBLICATIONPublication is important to both computer science and the arts anddesign (though probably more important to computer science), and
this activity is evolving along with the role of technology as both input
and output element. Publication vehicles vary in the extent to which
they are perceived as indicators of validation and recognition. The
gold standard for academiaÑand the criterion most easily understoodby parties outside a given subdisciplineÑis the so-called archivaljournal (often published by scholarly or professional societies) that
involves considerable editorial selection plus prepublication review
and revision, which function as a screening system for quality. But the
long lead time for such publications poses problems for subdisciplines
in which timelinessÑquickly getting an idea into the fieldÑmatters.In experimental computer science, for example, the need for speed has
led to an emphasis on conference publications for disseminating new
ideas (journal articles are preferred for summarizing and consolidat-
ing a long-term body of work, and they are more amenable to longer
write-ups). Conference proceedings offer greater speed of publication
at the expense of broader audiences, stronger refereeing, and recogni-
tion associated with archival journals. Yet the prestige associated with
presentations at major conferences actually makes some of them more
selective than journals, especially in computer science.Outside of academia, the range of relevant publications increasesmarkedly. Publications can range from Wired and 
RES to
 Artforum
 and
Vogue. Anthologies, surveys, and monographs cover the work of art-ists. Catalogs are created from museum exhibitions, film festivals, and
gallery shows. Works that are performed or displayed publicly may
be reviewed by critics, providing a public forum of validation and
recognition.34 Such reviews can appear in specialized professional or
trade periodicals or in the popular pressÑfrom the New York Times to
a small-town newspaper.34In contrast to the peer review process that often provides anonymous feedback.Maturation ofappraisal criteriamust developalong with ITCPwork.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES AND PUBLIC POLICY189Broadening use of the Internet has spawned new online publica-tions and induced changes in journals. Many print journals have now
gone to electronic format, either to supplant or to complement print
editions. These journals typically adhere to the same gate-keeping
mechanisms, including peer review, that they developed for print.
Some journals that publish exclusively in electronic form, for example
Postmodern Culture,35 also have gate-keeping mechanisms equivalent
to those for print. Others occupy a position midway between self-
publishing and reliance on peer review, having submissions reviewed
by the editors but not by outside readers. As long as editorial policies
are clear to users, these electronic journals, whether partially or fully
reviewed, can perform valuable services. Similar observations can be
made about Òtechnical reportsÓ in computer science, which are usu-
ally published by the researcherÕs organization and typically do notinvolve peer review. Web sites published through individual initia-
tives, lacking any validation mechanism, can have content that ranges
widely from the authoritative to the misleading.CURATORIAL WEB SITESFor IT-informed literary ventures and other forms of creative ex-pression, Web-specific practices are needed for carrying out some of
the reviewing functions that have developed over three or four centu-
ries for artistic production. This is especially important given the
surge in volume of material associated with the enabling of creative
efforts by amateurs. One way this concept is being implemented is
through curated Web sites that screen large amounts of material,
evaluate the products, and then feature only those deemed to be the
best. These sites combine traditional reviewing functions with the
collection functions served by galleries and museums, where visitors
can be assured that they will be able to see several pieces gathered
together in a single physical location. As curated Web sites gradually
gain credibility, they serve as important display sites for audiences
interested in electronic art but unsure where to find it. Existing sites of
this type include those curated by Marjorie Luesebrink, Jennifer Ley,
and Carolyn Guertin that assemble the best of Web-specific electronic
literature: ÒProgressive Dinner PartyÓ and 
ÒJumpin at the Diner.Ó36ÒBest of the Web: Museums and the Web,Ó a juried competition coor-
dinated by Maria Economou, identifies museum winners in the cat-
egories of online exhibition, museumÕs professional site, educationaluse, and research site.37 Even individually curated sites can provide
valuable recognition; for example, the Digital Libarian site38 produced
35See <http://www.iath.virginia.edu/pmc/contents.all.html>.36For further information, see <http://califia.hispeed.com/RM/predinner.htm> and
<http://califia.hispeed.com/Jumpin/>.37See <http://www.archimuse.com/mw99/best>.38See <http://www.digital-librarian.com>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY190by Margaret Vail Anderson, a professional librarian, recommends awide range of library resources.Other organizations are using the traditional commission andcuratorial model for determining which individuals will receive elec-
tronic archive and display space. Although this strategy may limit the
number of digital pieces available for presentation on a site, it does,
through the commission function, provide the financial assistance
needed to construct the work. Organizations using this strategy in-
clude Turbulence,39 a Web site sponsored by New Radio and Perform-
ing Arts Inc., and The Alternative Museum (TAM).40 Using a peer-
review process, Turbulence selects up to 20 Internet art projects per
year to commission and display on its Web site. In return for provid-
ing the commission and display space, Turbulence retains exclusive
rights to display of the work for 3 years. Similarly, through its Web
site, TAM sponsors the Digital Media Commissions program. Each
year, with the help of a select committee of professionals from arts and
technology fields, TAM chooses artists for whom it provides technical
and financial support for the production of Internet art. Once com-
pleted, the projects are displayed together as an online exhibition.Community-based, grass-roots approaches to filtering for content,quality, and relevance are made much more feasible by the Internet.
Such approaches are discussed in Chapter 5.AWARDS AND PRIZESThe value of awards and prizes as a means to recognize outstand-ing achievements and stimulate further creativity in research is well
known, but the numbers of prizes available are unevenly distributed
across disciplines. Awards and prizes can be based on recognitionÑaccorded for past accomplishmentÑor can be offered to motivate thecreation of new work (e.g., an award based on the best entry at an
exhibition). Some fields, such as chemistry and literature, have a num-
ber of prizes awarded by professional organizations,41 whereas other
areasÑincluding computer scienceÑhave relatively few. This situa-tion places an extra premium on the ability to secure funding (e.g.,
grants, employment in a suitable job), a process that, under contempo-
rary conditions, can inhibit risk taking. Especially needed in the present
climate are awards specifically recognizing creativity in both artistic
and technical areas. Noteworthy in this regard are the Electronic Lit-
erature OrganizationÕs awards for the best work of electronic fictionand electronic poetry, which in 2001 provided substantial prizes of
$10,000 each. Also exemplary is the Lyman Award, recently funded by
the Rockefeller Foundation and administered by the National Center39See <http://www.turbulence.org/>.40See <http://www.alternativemuseum.org/>.41In addition, these established fields (and some others) derive further legitimacythrough awards such as the Nobel Prize, the National Medal of Arts, the National Medalof Science, and the Pulitzer Prize.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES AND PUBLIC POLICY191for the Humanities, recognizing the creative use of information tech-nologies in the humanities, with a prize amount of $25,000. In 2001, the
Prix Ars Electronica competition celebrated its 15th anniversary; it is a
highlight of the Ars Electronica Festival program. From 1987 to 2001,
169 of these prizes with a total value of approximately $1.2 million
were awarded.42 However, such opportunities for recognition in the
digital arts remain rare. See Chapter 8 for a discussion of awards and
prizes as a means of financial support for ITCP practitioners.THE GEOGRAPHY OF INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE

PRACTICESParticular geographic configurations can support creative work inprofound ways, even with information networks linking remote par-
ties. There are hot spots of scientific, technological, scholarly, and
artistic creativity, as exemplified by ancient Athens and Renaissance
Florence, just as there are large areas where very little activity of this
sort takes place. The explanations for this uneven spatial and temporal
distribution are far from simple. As Harry Lime provocatively (and no
doubt unfairly) observed in The Third Man, ÒIn Italy, for thirty yearsunder the Borgias, they had warfare, terror, murder and bloodshed.
But they produced Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci, and the Renais-
sance. In Switzerland they had brotherly love. They had five hundred
years of democracy and peace. And what did that produce? The
cuckoo clock.Ó43However, Peter Hall has convincingly made a case, in Cities inCivilization,44 that creativity flourishes mostly in urban settings. Cities
allow the specialized division of labor that is necessary for intellectual
exploration and innovation. They can support specialized facilities,
such as libraries, that creative work frequently demands. And they
provide the conditions for effective collaboration among specialists.45¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥42See <http://www.aec.at/> for further details. The Prix Ars Electronica competi-tion attracted controversy in 2000 when the writer Neal Stephenson won in the Internet
category, even though he did not enter the competition. See Matthew Mirapaul, 2001,ÒAnd the Best Internet Art Is . . . Virtually Anything,Ó New York Times, September 3, p.B2.43From the 1949 movie produced by Carol Reed.44Sir Peter Hall, 1998, Cities in Civilization, Pantheon Books, New York. RichardCaves has also examined arts clusters in specific cities. See Richard E. Caves, 2000,
Creative Industries: Contracts Between Art and Commerce, Harvard University Press, Cam-bridge, Mass.45State arts agencies track grants awarded to rural artists and organizations, whichare an order of magnitude less (in dollars) than those going to urban areas. See StateArts Agencies, 2002, ÒState Arts Agency Funding and Grant Making,Ó National Assem-
bly of State Arts Agencies, February.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY192Information technology has changed the established geography ofcreativity in two ways. First, it has produced hot spots, such as Silicon
Valley, that are clearly fueled by IT itself. Second, it has supported
specialized division of labor on a global scale; made libraries and other
facilities available online rather than at specific, privileged locations;
and enabled geographically distributed remote collaboration. These
geographical factors have implications for future progress in ITCP.INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY HOT SPOTSThe emergence of IT hot spots, in areas such as CaliforniaÕs SantaClara Valley, BostonÕs Route 128 corridor, and the Austin (Texas)vicinity, is a special case of the general phenomenon of industrial
clustering. There are many examples of this. The automobile industry
is clustered intensively (though not, of course, exclusively) in Detroit;
the film and music industries in Southern California; the publishing
industry, arts and design communities, and museums in New York
City; the biotechnology industry in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and so
on. However, it is worth noting that growth occurs both within and
beyond the clusters.Once a cluster is firmly established, it is not difficult to see how itcreates a regional advantage. Silicon Valley has become a magnet for
IT talent from all over the world. It provides specialized facilities and
opportunities that are not available elsewhere. The concentration of
talent and activity within a relatively small area produces valuable
knowledge-spillover effects. And the talent and resource pool avail-
able in the area makes it relatively easy to put together cross-disciplin-
ary collaborations to innovate. The classic conditions for creativity are
in place.46The formation of such clusters is a more mysterious process, and itoften seems highly dependent on unique circumstances at particular
locationsÑwith one thing building on another.47 In Silicon Valley, the
story began with a tradition of technological innovation in the early
20th century and developed further with the creation of a high-tech
industrial base around Stanford University in the 1950sÑstudent net-works and fluid relations between scientists and instrument makers
were key factors in the areaÕs vitality.48 It continued with the growth of
46For further discussion, see AnnaLee Saxenian, 1994, Regional Advantage: Culture andCompetition in Silicon Valley and Route 128, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.47See Manuel Castells and Peter Hall, 1994, Technopoles of the World: The Making ofTwenty-First-Century Industrial Complexes, Routledge, London, for stories of Silicon Val-ley and other such complexes.48Presentation by Timothy Lenoir to the committee at its January 2001 meeting atStanford University. Also see Timothy Lenoir, 1997, ÒInstrument Makers and DisciplineBuilders: The Case of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance,Ó Instituting Science: The CulturalProduction of Scientific Disciplines, Stanford University Press, Stanford, Calif.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES AND PUBLIC POLICY193defense electronics during the 1960s and the emergence of semicon-ductor manufacturing and the microprocessor era in the 1970s. The
personal computer industry built on this foundation and established a
culture of innovative consumer electronics development. All that elec-
tronic hardware created a demand for software, and the hard-core
technologists added yet another critical cultural layer. Finally, venture
capitalists, lawyers, journalists, and marketers were attracted by the
booming start-up activity, and in turn greatly facilitated that activity.
In Silicon ValleyÕs boom years, this was a magicalÑand difficult toreplicateÑmix.The possibility of replicating Silicon ValleyÕs vitality, creativity,and economic success is obviously of great interest to policy makers
who would like to produce similar success elsewhere.49 It is easy to
identify some of the necessary elements in the magic mix, but consid-
erably more difficult to combine enough of these ingredients in such a
way as to produce Silicon Valley clones at other locations. Attempts
have been made, with varying degrees of success, in Northern Vir-
ginia (United States), Sophia-Antipolis (France), Tsukuba (Japan),
Hsinchu (Taiwan), and many other locations. Smaller-scale attempts
have also been made, and some of these have focused on ITCP, which
is less capital-intensive than some forms of IT production and engages
a broader skill mix. An example is the western Massachusetts area and
its Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary Art (MASSMoCA) in a
former factory complex, which has attempted to attract digital media
firms to co-locate at the intersection of IT and the arts.50A more subtle question is whether Silicon Valley itself can sustainits hot-spot status as conditions evolve and change over time. For
example, the development of the World Wide Web and digitally dis-
tributed news, entertainment, education, and other content produced
a need to engage graphic artists, designers, writers, and others with IT.
These sorts of specialists frequently did not find the engineering cul-
ture and suburban ambiance of Silicon Valley particularly congenial;
many of them preferred a more urban setting and a different set of
cultural connections, and so they tended to cluster in locations such as
the SoMa area of San Francisco, the SoHo area of New York, and the49See David Rosenberg, 2002, Cloning Silicon Valley: The Next Generation of High-TechHotspots, Reuters, London.50When MASSMoCA opened in May 1999, its mission was not only to function as alaboratory for contemporary visual and performing arts, but also to help drive therevitalization of the economically depressed town of North Adams, Massachusetts. Thetown had experienced a dramatic downturn in its fortunes as the national economy
moved away from a manufacturing base toward information and technology services.See <http://www.massmoca.org/mission/index.html>. Also see Kristen Andersen,2002, ÒBangor Looks to Bay State Town as Model for Culture,Ó Bangor Daily News,October 24. For a broader discussion, see ÒThe Role of the Arts in Economic Develop-ment,Ó Issue Brief, June 25, 2001, National Governors
Õ Association Center for Best
Practices, Washington, D.C.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY194greater Los Angeles region.51 As if to respond to this question, a local
philanthropic and community development organization, Cultural
Initiatives Silicon Valley, was formed in the late 1990s to promote the
arts as a spur to creativity and community; it even used IT to create a
crude cultural policy simulation game to link the arts and culture to
the economic well-being of the area.52It seems likely that in the 21st century a key challenge for theworldÕs established IT hot spots will be to add a vibrant layer of artsand design to the magic mix. If they are unable to do so, their advan-
tage is likely to fade as the cultural content of digital products and
services grows in importance relative to the more purely technical
content. If a company is making chips or operating systems, then it is
an advantage to be located in a strong engineering cluster; but if a
company is making digital movies, it may be more of an advantage to
be located in a cluster of artists, actors, and musicians.GEOGRAPHICALLY DISTRIBUTED CREATIVITYTraditionally, the creative energy of cities has depended on face-to-face contact. So has that of university campuses. Even Silicon Val-
leyÑwhich is a low-density, automobile-oriented suburban areaÑclearly depends for its vitality on its dense concentration of specialists
who can readily interact with one another. But there is a downside to
relying exclusively on physical proximity to foster creative interaction.
It limits the available talent pool, limits access to specialized facilities,
and limits cultural diversity. There can be strong reasons for creative
talent to be based far from urban areas.53 So there is a strong case for
taking advantage of digital technology to add remote participants and
resources to the mix. These will include talent from developing na-
tions, where IT has been leveraged not only for public access, but also
for creating new kinds of work.51Richard Florida refers to these specialists as members of the Òcreative class,Ó who
Òseek an environment open to differences. Many highly creative people, regardless ofethnic background or sexual orientation, grew up feeling like outsiders, different in
some way from most of their schoolmates. When they are sizing up a new company andcommunity, acceptance of diversity and of gays in particular is a sign that reads Ônon-standard people welcome here.Õ The creative class people I study use the word 
Ôdiver-sityÕ a lot, but not to press any political hot buttons. Diversity is simply something theyvalue in all its manifestations.Ó See Richard Florida, 2002, 
ÒThe Rise of the CreativeClass,Ó Washington Monthly, May, available online at <http://www.washingtonmonthly.com/features/2001/0205.florida.html>.52See <http://www.arts4sv.org/>. The simulator was eventually packaged with amonograph that provides context. See John Kreidler, Kate Cochran, and Brendan Rawson,
2002, Great Cities: A Laboratory for Cultural Policy, Americans for the Arts, availableonline at <http://store.yahoo.com/americans4thearts/greatcities.html>.53For example, a study of Canadian artists suggests that Òlandscape appealÓ inspires
work and influences the decision by some artists to seek rural locations. See TrudiBunting and Clare J.A. Mitchell, 2001, ÒArtists in Rural Locales: Market Access, Land-scape Appeal and Economic Exigency,Ó Canadian Geographer 45(2): 268-284.A key challengefor the worldÕsestablished IT hotspots will be toadd a vibrantlayer of arts anddesign to themagic mix.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES AND PUBLIC POLICY195Consider, for example, the production of the present report. Al-though the National Academies are based in Washington, D.C., the
members of the team that wrote the report were scattered widely over
North America and Europe; it would have been far too limiting to rely
only on participants from the D.C. area. Some of the creative interac-
tion necessary to generate the report was accomplished through travel
to meetings at various locations, but a great deal of it was accom-
plished electronicallyÑthrough e-mail and Web interactions. And this,of course, is now typical in group writing projects.In the field of architectural design, major architects now competefor work globallyÑnot just in their local regions. They put togetherteams of consultants and specialized subcontractors, as necessary for
the particular job, from around the world. And they rely on digital
telecommunications facilities and increasingly sophisticated software
to manage the geographically distributed, cross-time-zone process. As
a result of the growing emphasis on remote collaboration, computer-
aided design systems are starting to look increasingly like specialized
Web browsers.Just as effective face-to-face collaboration depends on having theright sort of physical setting, effective remote collaboration depends
on having the right IT tools. This reality has created intense interest in
electronic design studios54and similar facilities, and in computer-sup-ported cooperative work toolsÑwhich may support either local orgeographically distributed teams. These tools do, of course, vary a
great deal by field; online collaboration in graphic design requires
support that differs greatly from that needed for geographically dis-
tributed musical ensemble performance.TECHNOLOGY-SUPPORTED NETWORKS OFCREATIVITYThe emerging pattern of creative production, in the IT era, seemsto be one in which local clusters form intense nodes of activity within
geographically distributed electronic networks. This model allows the
formation of effective linkages between complementary but distant
clusters. Thus, for example, the film industry remains clustered in
Hollywood, but there is an active electronic link to LondonÕs SohoareaÑwhich has particularly strong postproduction capabilities. Sili-con Valley has a strong electronic connection to the complementary
capabilities of Bangalore in India and the founding of a West Coast
campus of Carnegie Mellon University.55 Universities are beginning to
form strategic alliances, supported electronically, with overseas uni-54See, for example, Jose Pinto Duarte, Joao Bento, and William J. Mitchell, 1999, TheLisbon Charrette: Remote Collaborative Design, IST Press, Libson.55See <http://west.cmu.edu>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY196versities that have complementary strengths; the current CambridgeUniversityÐMassachusetts Institute of Technology alliance is a par-ticularly interesting example. And industrial and financial corpora-
tions are increasingly aware of the advantages of locating activity
clusters in the different markets and cultures they serve, and electroni-
cally linking them.In summary, creativity continues to have an identifiable geogra-phy, and the advantages that derive from unique, local subcultures
continue to matter. But IT has overlaid onto this geography new
possibilities for the aggregation of geographically distributed talent
and resources into creative combinations. And, in particular, local
creative clusters can now extend their potential by strategically form-
ing electronic linkages to other clustersÑmaybe very distant onesÑwith complementary capabilities. One can begin to think of these
clusters as the specialized professional neighborhoods of the global
village.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.197
˝upport for information technology and creativepractices (ITCP) comes from many sources and is difficult
to measure. Several questions complicate a full under-
standing of ITCP funding:¥What are the boundaries for such work? (What is an Òinforma-
tion technology and creative practiceÓ expenditure? What is not?)¥WhereÑin market-based and non-market activitiesÑdoes ITCP
take place?¥How much of what is spent on ITCP work lies embedded
within (and may be difficult to disentangle from) more conventional
forms of information technology (IT), the arts, or design activities or
programs?¥What commercial organizations support ITCP as part of the
way they do business? What commercial organizations support ITCP
in other ways and for other reasons?¥What governmental and other non-profit organizations sup-
port ITCP work? Where does one look for such support?All but the last of these questions are the focus of previous chap-ters, which provide the context for this one. Chapters 2 and 5 sketch
the rise of commercial ITCPÑand implicitly the rise of commercial
funding for ITCPÑthrough new approaches to design (e.g., industrial
design, architecture), targeted corporate engagement of artists (e.g.,
artist-in-residence programs), and new kinds of products and pro-
cesses in industries that produce creative content (e.g., video games,
animated film, music).1 Because commercial activity spans only a
1One can observe (relative to the overall state of the economy) healthy and evengrowing industrial bases for these activities, but existing data on revenues or even
employment in these areas do not allow easy inferences as to how much was spent ondeveloping and applying ITCP.  Detailed economic analysis was beyond the scope of
this project.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY198portion of ITCP,2 commercial resources are not sufficient to sustain
ITCP, to make the most of its potential, or to broaden access to its
benefits. Further, commercial activity is not evenly distributed. For
example, the market for computer music is much smaller than that for
computer graphics, which itself is skewed toward entertainment prod-
ucts. As in other arenas, non-market resources can often be invaluable
in exploring areas where a market has yet to be or cannot be estab-
lished. Also, there are non-market, public policy reasons for support-
ing ITCP activity, or the infrastructure for such activity, as discussed
in Chapter 1.This chapter focuses on non-commercialÑgovernment and phil-anthropicÑfunding for ITCP because (1) it is linked to the most ex-ploratory and least mission-constrained activity;3 (2) in the context of
academic institutions, in particular, it is linked to education and hu-
man capacity building, which benefits activity across sectors; (3) it is
most likely to sustain the non- and pre-institutionalized activities that
have been significant in early ITCP and are associated with a signifi-
cant component of the arts; and (4) it is associated with a broader set of
public-interest objectives than commercial funding (which tends to be
linked to production and distribution of a product). Inasmuch as
commercial activities are synergistic with those in non-profit contexts,
spending on ITCP in any one arena may be leveraged elsewhere.Although government and philanthropic funding for ITCP has abroader scope than funding linked to creating and distributing com-
mercial products, it comes with a range of conditions. Its effectiveness
increases to the extent that funds-seekers can ÒseeÓ ITCP through the
strings on a given pool of funds and decreases to the extent that funds-
seekers see those strings as constraints on their creativity.4 Committee
member attitudes ranged from seeing no substitute for resources they
could use at their discretion to accepting pragmatically the strings that
would link activities in ITCP to fundersÕ interests as well as their
own.5 The funding challenge lies in ensuring that practitioners and
funders have enough common interests to nurture a vigorous spec-2There are important differences between ÒartÓ and 
Òcraft,Ó and commercial funding
generally applies to Òcraft.Ó3An analogy can be made to fundamental research for information technology:  IT
research and development overall is spread across commercial and educational (non-profit) organizations.  Almost all of the commercial activity supports development of

products, while the most exploratory workÑfundamental researchÑis associated withgovernment-funded activity in universities.  See Computer Science and Telecommuni-
cations Board, National Research Council, 2000, Making IT Better: Expanding InformationTechnology Research to Meet SocietyÕs Needs, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.4Artists have their own vision and agenda, which often does not coincide with whatsomeone else wants or needs to have made at a given point in time.  These realities put

artistic creativity at odds with conventional market forces.  See Richard E. Caves, 2000,
Creative Industries:  Contracts Between Art and Commerce
, Harvard University Press,Cambridge, Mass.5Their positions varied with the degree to which they saw themselves as artists, andamong the artists, the degree to which they favor a conception of art as self-expression,versus more collaborative or socially shaped conceptions of art.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUPPORTING WORK IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES199¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥trum of ITCP activities via their combination of creative effort andwherewithal. The committee hopes that this report will encourage
more funders to understand the value of ITCP and, given their starting
point, either become more open to funding relevant activity (i.e., gen-
eration of ITCP work; its display, performance, or preservation; corre-
sponding education, training, or physical infrastructure) or more in-
formed in allocating the resources they can provide.FUNDING IN THE UNITED STATES
The committee believes that the United States lags other countries(see the section ÒFunding in the International ContextÓ) in financialsupport for ITCP. This is a judgment,6 based on member familiarity
with initiatives and programs in different countries (which are often
seen as the leading venues for producing or displaying ITCPÑsee, forexample, descriptions of ZKM, Ars Electronica, and so on in Chapter
5); the existence of larger and more sustained public support pro-
grams for the arts abroad (notably in developed nations), which are
comparatively open to ITCP; and the observation that information
technology research programs have provided limited and largely inci-
dental support to date. There are no consistent data that support a
precise analysis of relevant funding in the United States, let alone
across countries.7 Major foreign-based activities that focus on ITCP
appear to be components of national or regional leadership strategies
abroad (often seen as competitive responses to U.S. technical leader-
ship).8Against this backdrop, the United States can leverage early effortsworldwideÑwhich have helped to demonstrate the ITCP potentialand experimented with different approaches to nurturing ITCPÑtofoster new activities that can elicit and sustain ITCP. Those activities
can draw from the substantial base of computer science research sup-
port in the United States, a differentiator of the U.S. potential in many
respects, to support the hybrid character of ITCP through more stable,
focused funding. This is likely to occur naturally through the evolu-
tion of funding patterns for both the advance of computer science and6A comprehensive quantitative analysis of spending trends was beyond the scope ofthe committee, and available data are not necessarily comparable across nations (a
common problem in international comparisons that is aggravated in this instance by therole of tax-policy-induced private spending relative to direct public spending).7U.S. data, for example, tend to aggregate relevant activity together with other, moreconventional kinds. This problem is typical of economic measurements when newactivities arise, often at levels that are too small to measure using conventional surveymechanisms.8One illustration is Europrix, representing Òselection and promotion of EuropeÕsbest in multimediaÓ (see <http://www.europrix.org>); various national initiatives,
such as the establishment of ZKM (see Chapter 5), also have this character.The committeebelieves that theUnited States lagsother countries infinancial supportfor ITCP.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY200the advance of the arts and design, but it can also occur through theexpress initiation of focused programs and initiatives, which the com-
mittee believes it is time to forge. The latter is more direct, but it may
be difficult to obtain government support at a time when research
programs seem to be reorienting to respond to homeland security,
while private philanthropy is constrained by smaller endowments, a
consequence of the decline in the stock market in the 2000-2002 period.SOURCES OF FUNDSAbsent detailed data specific to ITCP,9 the funding potential for
ITCP can be appreciated by examining the historic bases of funding
for work in the arts, computer science, and other elements of IT R&D.10Arts funding is dwarfed by the funding for computer science and
other IT-relevant researchÑas one committee member put it, there isÒmysticism and longing on the part of artists when it comes to scien-tific funding.Ó Typical arts grants are in the low five figures (using
data sets that begin at the $10,000 level); typical computer science
grants are in the six figures. In the aggregate, federal appropriations to
cultural agencies and organizations are comparable in magnitude to
federal support for computer science research, but only a small frac-
tion of the former supports the equivalent of researchÑthe generationof new expression. Arts funding often focuses on display, perfor-
mance, education, facilities, and other dimensions of public accessÑand accordingly is most likely to go to organizations rather than
artists. By contrast, IT research funding is more often awarded to
individuals (principal investigators) or groups of individuals. Relative
funding potential also reflects this apparent rationale: Quality-of-life
concerns such as widened access to cultural artifacts seem to motivate
arts funding, whereas funding for technical research is motivated by a
larger set of economic, social, and governmental concerns that to-
gether have resulted in higher levels of funding.11 Recent efforts to
Typical artsgrants are in the low five figures;typical computerscience grantsare in thesix figures.9The relative paucity of data on the humanitiesÑfunding or otherwiseÑis a well-known phenomenon. See, for example, Robert M. Solow, 2002, ÒLetÕs Quantify theHumanities,Ó Chronicle of Higher Education, April 19, p. B20.10Inasmuch as ITCP may embrace other forms of science and engineering (e.g.,biology, mechanical engineering), other categories of research funding may also berelevant.11According to Heilbrun and Gray, ÒMost analysts who favor public subsidies forthe arts place a very high value on the objective of improving access for all the people.Because it is rooted in the U.S. egalitarian ethic, that position also enjoys wide political
support. . . . Survey evidence from Australia and Canada indicates that the generalpublic does believe the arts produce external benefits and is willing to make substantialtax payments to support them.Ó See James Heilbrun and Charles M. Gray, 2001, 
TheEconomics of Art and Culture, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K., p. 243 andp. 250. Funding a Revolution: Government Support for Computing Research, (ComputerScience and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, 1999, National
Academy Press, Washington, D.C.) describes the rise of funding for computer scienceresearch and the co-evolution of government, industry, and academic interests andactivities over the second half of the 20th century.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUPPORTING WORK IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES201strengthen the linkage of the arts to economic benefits may motivategreater funding12Ñbut doing so causes unease among some artistswho worry about the implications of suggesting that art must be
instrumental. Much as in basic research in the sciences, the idea of
experimentation and research in the arts as contributing to human
understanding is often slighted when criteria are reduced to quantifi-
able return on economic investment. Of course, market support for
ITCPÑthrough design and other product-related activitiesÑdoes nur-ture creativity in the context of some organizational objectives.State and local governments, given their different emphases, andgreater focus on quality of life (extending to economic development as
well as elements of culture) relative to the federal government, are
significant funders of the arts,13 spending an order of magnitude more
than the National Endowment for the Arts (NEA).14 But they do not
(with a few exceptions) fund computer science (or other) research.
State arts agency spending varies considerably, ranging in 2002 from a

high of $4.26 per capita (Hawaii) to a low of $0.28 per capita (Texas);
eight states spent at least $15 million annually and nine less than $1
million.15 In 2000, 
Òmedia artsÓ accounted for 3 percent of state spend-
ing; the largest shares went to music (18 percent) and theater (14
percent). About 0.03 percent of state arts agency grants went to indi-
vidual artists in 2000 (48 percent of those dollars were for the visual
arts). Individual activities supported included fellowships (which con-
stituted about half of the activities), residencies, artwork creation (about
one-eighth of the activities), apprenticeships, and performance.1612See, for example, National Assembly of State Arts Agencies, 2002, ÒThe Arts inPublic Policy: An Advocacy Agenda,Ó The NASAA Advocate: Strategies for Building ArtsSupport VI: 1. Available online at <http://www.nasaa-arts.org>.13By the mid-1970s, each state had an arts council. For an overview of the state ofknowledge about state-level activities, pointing to ongoing research, see J. Mark Schuster,2002, ÒSub-National Cultural PolicyÑWhere the Action Is? Mapping State CulturalPolicy in the United States,Ó working paper of the Cultural Policy Center at the Univer-sity of Chicago, January. Available online at <http://culturalpolicy.uchicago.edu/workingpapers/Schuster9.pdf>.14See Schuster, 2002, ÒSub-National Cultural Policy,Ó p. 9. Note that the aggregate
state legislature arts appropriations have exceeded federal arts appropriations since1985. See National Endowment for the Arts and National Assembly of State Arts
Agencies, 2002, ÒState Arts Agency Funding and Grant Making,Ó National Assembly of
State Arts Agencies, Washington, D.C., February.15National Endowment for the Arts and National Assembly of State Arts Agencies,2002, ÒState Arts Agency Funding and Grant Making.Ó16In 1999, Òstate legislatures appropriated about $400 million in funding for the arts,while local governments spent in excess of $800 million.Ó See National Endowment for
the Arts, Center for Arts and Culture, 2001, AmericaÕs Cultural Capital: Recommendationsfor Structuring the Federal Role, Art, Culture, and National Agenda series, Center for the
Arts and Culture, Washington, D.C. Available online at <http://www.culturalpolicy.
org/pdf/acc.pdf>. The National Assembly of State Arts Agencies has released statisti-cal information on state spending for the arts that shows that Òafter nearly a decade ofrobust growth, legislative appropriations for state arts agencies (SSAs) contracted slightlyBeyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY202Private philanthropy also favors spending on the arts over com-puter science research. These conditions make public arts support in
the United States quite decentralized, while also drawing a sharp
contrast with public support for fundamental computer science re-
search, in which the federal government plays a dominant role. Nev-
ertheless, the rise of ITCP presents the prospect of including more arts-
like activity as research, more research-like activity as art, and new
mixes of funders for new portfolios of activity. Insight into ITCP may
lead traditional arts funders to support it more and also may expand
the availability of resources for technical research.Federal Funding for the ArtsÑTheNational EndowmentsMost of the federal governmentÕs art spendingÑwhich exceeded$1.5 billion in 2001Ñsupports major national organizations, which inturn award funding to other organizations and artists and cover their
own operating costs. Major national organizations include the NEA
(and its organizational sister, the National Endowment for the Hu-
manities), the Commission on Fine Arts, the Institute of Museum and
Library Services, the National Gallery of Art, the Smithsonian Institu-
tion,17 and the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts.
18 Federal
funding for the arts also comes from a range of programs distributed
among a remarkable range of federal agencies.19 Federal arts funding
emphasizes public presentation (e.g., performances and displays) and
education; accordingly, funding for major federal arts institutions (e.g.,
the Smithsonian) dominates federal funding.in fiscal year 2002 as both the national economy and state budgets softened. In fiscalyear 2002, appropriations dropped from $446.8 million to $419.7 million. This marks thefirst time in six years that aggregate appropriations fell. However, appropriation de-clines of $21 million in California and $5 million in New York account for half of nearly
all of this decrease. When they are removed from total appropriations, the aggregateremains flat at zero percent change.Ó As discussed in Chapter 6, state programs (e.g., inNew York and California) have provided some support for computer science research,
including research with links to the arts and activities that fall under the ITCP umbrella.17In 2001, the Office of Management and Budget proposed transferring Smithsonianresearch funds to the National Science Foundation (NSF) as a means of consolidating
science research. Under such an arrangement, Smithsonian staff would apply for NSFgrants. Reports from the National Research Council and the National Academy ofPublic Administration opposed such a proposal. See <http://www.nytimes.com/2002/
11/02/politics/02SMIT.html>.18State and local funding adds about 50 percent more to the federal contribution; seeNational Endowment for the Arts, Center for the Arts and Culture, 2001, AmericaÕsCultural Capital.19The National Endowment for the Arts Web site provides links (<http://www.arts.gov:591/federal-opportunities02/b-federal.html>) to arts funding programs
at widely diverse federal agencies ranging from the Federal Emergency ManagementAgency to the Department of Agriculture, in addition to the agencies that one expects,such as the National Endowment for the Humanities.Public artssupport in theUnited Statesis quitedecentralized.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUPPORTING WORK IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES203The NEA stands out as the largest single public funder of the non-profit arts. Its FY 2002 appropriation from the U.S. Congress was
slightly over $115 million, which represented an increase of more than
$10 million from the year before.20 The NEA divides its grants into
several broad categories, including grants to organizations, partner-
ship agreements, leadership initiatives, and fellowships21 (which award
grants to individual artists). Typically, grant amounts range from
$5,000 to $100,000,22 with some requiring 
Òat least a 1-to-1 match innon-federal funds.Ó Examples of funded projects within these catego-
ries include, among other things, dance and theatrical performances,
exhibitions, workshops, festivals, apprenticeships, master classes, edu-
cational activities for children, and Òinnovative uses of technology thatmake the arts more widely available.Ó23Despite the NEAÕs important role in administering federal sup-port for the non-profit arts and the significant impact that it has had on
American cultural life since its creation in 1965, there are some limits
on its usefulness with respect to promoting ITCP. For example, more
than 40 percent of the NEAÕs 2001 budget went to state and regionalarts agencies24Ñorganizations that tend to fund primarily traditionalgenres of art (e.g., dance, theater, visual arts, and so on) and to empha-
size display, education, and performance. Continuing resource de-
mands of traditional activities reinforce the absolute constraint of a
limited budget.The same legislation that created the NEA also created the Na-tional Endowment for the Humanities (NEH).25 The NEH budget over
the last few years has been slightly higher than that of the NEA at a20It had been slashed by more than 40 percent for FY 1996 in the wake of a great dealof political and cultural controversy. NEAÕs budget exceeded $150 million per year inthe early 1990s, until it was cut radically for FY 1996, remaining fairly static for the nextfew years. For specific appropriations data, see <http://www.nea.gov/learn/Facts/ApprHist.pdf>.21These are the NEAÕs only programs that still award funds to individuals: Litera-ture Fellowships, American Jazz Masters Fellowships, and National Heritage Fellow-ships. Grants range from $10,000 to $20,000 and are not open to applications; rather,
these awards are based on nominations from the arts community and the public. In theaggregate, these programs represent approximately $1 million of NEAÕs annual budget.22A listing of NEA grant awards since 1995 can be found online at <http://arts.endow.gov/learn/Facts/Contents.html>.23From <http://arts.endow.gov/learn/NEAGuide/GTO.html>. An example of thetechnology awards is the $62,000 grant awarded in 2001 to the Deaf West Theatre
Company in California. The grant was awarded to support the design of a backstagecommunication system for deaf and hard-of-hearing technicians, to install a computer-ized control board for technical effects, and to develop lighting mechanisms that auto-
matically focus on signing interpreters or actors. The project also hopes to train deaftechnicians for jobs in the theater and to enhance the theater experience for deaf audi-ences. For more information, see <http://www.deafwest.org/>.24National Endowment for the Arts, [undated], ÒNEA Fact Sheet: NEA at a GlanceÑ2001.Ó Available online at <http://www.nea.gov/learn/Facts/NEA.html>.25The National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities Act of 1965 (P.L. 89-209).Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY204little over $120 million,26 although the amount has remained fairly
static. The NEH provides grants for humanities projects in four areas:
preserving and providing access to cultural resources; education; re-
search; and public programs. NEH grants typically go to cultural
institutions such as museums, archives, libraries, colleges, universi-
ties, public television and radio stations, and (unlike those of the NEA)
individual scholars who apply for funds. Thus, the NEH may support
ITCP in the context of creative writing and literature, for example.Indirect Public Funding for the ArtsAccording to Michael Kammen, the United States set the prece-dent for making charitable donations to arts organizations (as well as
other non-profits) tax deductible:27[In 1917, the United States] became the first nation to allow tax
deductions for cultural gifts to museums and nonprofit cultural
organizations. The pertinent legislation[28] has been altered sev-eral times since, sometimes in ways that seem inconsistent to the
point of being bizarre, but the operative principle has been an
immense boon to cultural institutions. Moreover, the principle
has become increasingly attractive to European countries during
the past decade or so.29The amount of support generated for the arts through tax incen-tives is generally not included in statistics on government funding for
the arts, for, as a previously cited paper points out, Òforegone rev-enuesÓ are 
Ònotoriously difficult to measure precisely.Ó30 Neverthe-
less, that paper reports that according to Òthe best estimates, indi-26National Endowment for the Humanities, 2002, ÒSummary of Fiscal Year 2003Budget Request.Ó Available online at <http://www.neh.gov/whoweare/
2003budget.html>.27Ò[W]hat happens under U.S. tax law is that the donorÕs tax liability is reduced byan amount equal to the donation multiplied by the tax rate in that personÕs marginal taxbracket. The higher the individualÕs marginal tax rate, the greater the tax reduction perdollar given away, hence the less the cost of the gift to the donor . . . . The amount of taxsaved by the individual is also the amount of revenue lost by the government onaccount of the charitable deduction. It is this lost revenue that constitutes the indirect
support given by government to the nonprofit sector.Ó See Heilbrun and Gray, 2001, 
TheEconomics of Art and Culture, p. 257.28For example, the Revenue Act of 1917, the Estate Tax Law of 1921, the Gift Tax Actof 1932, and so on. Note that in recent years changes in estate taxes have been contem-plated that could jeopardize the incentive for charitable giving of all kinds.29Michael Kammen, 1996, ÒCulture and the State in America,Ó The Journal of AmericanHistory 83(3): 791-814.30Bruce A. Seaman, 2002, ÒNational Investment in the Arts,Ó Art, Culture, and the
National Agenda Issue Paper #6, Center for the Arts and Culture, Washington, D.C., p.
22. Available online at <http://www.culturalpolicy.org/pdf/investment.pdf>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUPPORTING WORK IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES205vidual donors, foundations, and corporations gave more than $10billion to arts, cultural, and humanities organizations in 1999,Ó31 ap-
proximately five times the level of direct federal support.32 This is a
highly decentralized mechanism, extending to employer matching
programs33 and private individual largesse. Organizations may ben-
efit more than individuals, inasmuch as organizations may be better
positioned to handle the administrative aspects associated with tax-
exempt statusÑbut some of those institutions, in turn, fund indi-vidual artists.Funding by Private PhilanthropyFunding for artistic endeavors is available from individuals, foun-dations large and small, and corporationsÑin that order34 and all
shaped by tax policy.35 In addition to conventional arts support from
corporations, there is at least some corporate support specifically for
ITCP in academia. For example, the Media Lab at MIT receives about
80 percent of its funding from corporations, which provide support as
members of a consortium that shares interests in any intellectual prop-
erty arising from the Media LabÕs activities. The Media Lab appears tobe unique in its drawÑand dependenceÑon corporate philanthropyto support ITCP;36 other academic programs (and individuals) associ-ated with the arts receive targeted support from corporations, which is31Center for the Arts and Culture, 2001, AmericaÕs Cultural Capital, p. 4.32Another analysis, examining data through 1998, suggested that private givingprovides about 40 percent of arts and culture organizationsÕ revenue. See Loren Renz,
2002, ÒThe Foundation CenterÕs 2002 Arts Funding Update,Ó Foundation Center, New
York, N.Y. Available online at <http://www.fdncenter.org>.33For example, Texas Instruments, through its foundation, encourages and matchestax-deductible gifts in support of the arts and culture: ÒThe Texas Instruments Founda-tion Arts and Cultural Matching Gift Program was established in 1979 to encourageTexas Instruments employees, retirees, and directors to contribute to the arts. It pro-
vides an effective way of assisting you in contributing to the quality of community life.Dollars you contribute to qualified organizations you wish to support will be matchedby the Foundation on a dollar-for-dollar basis. The Foundation will match, one for one,
each eligible tax-deductible contribution of at least $50. The total maximum per indi-vidual donor that will be matched is $10,000 per calendar year (January 1 throughDecember 31). . . . Our cultural organizations are a vital part of the quality of life in our
communities. Such organizations depend on private support to flourish. We are pleasedthrough this matching gift program to join you in helping to strengthen cultural life.ÓSee <http://www.tialumni.org/tiaa/2000%20TI-26453%20Arts%20%20Culture%
20MGP%20form.pdf>.34 Renz, 2002, ÒThe Foundation CenterÕs 2002 Arts Funding Update.Ó35See Heilbrun and Gray, 2001, The Economics of Art and Culture.36There is the question of whether the corporate support provided to the Media Labis motivated primarily by intellectual property concerns, in which case the fundingmight be better construed as investments rather than as philanthropy, or is motivated
by a larger rationale for support of academic research (which includes utilitarian moti-vations such as access to students and graduates), in which case philanthropy might bean appropriate characterization.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY206often linked to their interests in developing or exercising products. Asanother example, faculty at the California Institute of the Arts were
involved for many years with Yamaha in the development of digital
musical instruments, especially the piano, as a result of YamahaÕsexpectation that meeting the artistic needs of those musicians would
result in a better commercial product. University of California at Los
Angeles artist Bill SeamanÕs work on a Òhybrid invention generatorÓ is
supported by a grant from the Intel Corporation. And as noted in
Chapter 2, Ben Rubin at the Brooklyn Academy of Music benefited
from Lucent Technologies and Rockefeller Foundation sponsorship
for a collaborative project.Within private philanthropy, data are most readily available forfoundation activities. Grant support in 2000 was on the order of $3.7
billion for the arts, culture, media, and the humanities, a doubling of
funding since 1996.37 This growth was the result of a combination of
factors, including a healthy economy, an increase in the number of
new foundations, and significant increases in investments by major
funders. Consequently, private foundationsÕ share of all private giving
to the arts increased from less than 30 percent to about 35 percent.38The economic downturn of 2001-2002, compounded by extraordinary
demands for resources arising from the terrorist attacks of September
11, 2001, appears to have constrained available resources, shrinking
endowments and programs among established foundations and di-
minishing capacity for personal philanthropy.39As one might guess, the allocation of grant dollars is concentratedin particular areas of the United States. In a 1998 study conducted by
the Foundation Center, five statesÑNew York, California, Texas, Min-nesota, and MichiganÑand the District of Columbia received about 54percent of art dollars and 52 percent of grants.40 The same report
showed a decrease in the share of grant dollars controlled by the top
50 recipients, which declined from 32.1 percent (or 7.9 percent of all
arts grants) in 1992 to 28.5 percent (or 7.7 percent of all arts grants) in37ÒThe nationÕs nearly 56,600 grant-making foundations provided an estimated $3.69billion for arts, culture, media, and the humanities in 2000, more than double the $1.83
billion estimated for 1996Ó (Renz, 2002, 
ÒThe Foundation CenterÕs 2002 Arts FundingUpdate,Ó p. 1). Note that this $3.69 billion figure is compatible with the $10 billion figure
cited earlier: The former represents grants awarded; the latter, total giving.38Renz, 2002, ÒThe Foundation CenterÕs 2002 Arts Foundation Update,Ó p. 1.39For example, the David and Lucile Packard Foundation announced that it will nolonger focus on arts and non-profit effectiveness, consolidating its activities in other
areas after its endowment shrank from $13 billion in 1999 to $3.8 billion in mid-2002. SeeJon Boudreau, ÒPackard Foundation Facing Cutbacks,Ó September 19, 2002, available
online at <http://www.bayarea.com/mld/mercurynews/4112039.htm>.40Loren Renz and Steven Lawrence, 1998, Arts Funding: An Update on FoundationTrends, Third Ed., Foundation Center, New York, in cooperation with Grantmakers inthe Arts, Seattle, p. 22.The economicdownturn of2001-2002appears to haveconstrainedavailableresources,shrinkingendowmentsand diminishingcapacity forpersonalphilanthropy.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUPPORTING WORK IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES2071996.41 The size of awards has also changed, with the number of
smaller grants ($10,000 to $49,999) decreasing and mid-sized grants
($50,000 to $499,999) increasing, each by about 1 percent a year since
1996, with larger grants ($500,000+) remaining stable.42 The median
size of arts grants in 1999 was $25,000, the same as in 1992 and 1996 but
slightly lower than the median amount for all foundation grants,
which was $25,361.43 Funding distribution by category in 2000 found
the performing arts receiving 32.2 percent of arts-grants dollars, fol-
lowed by museum activities (29.1 percent), media and communication
(9.9 percent), and cross-disciplinary arts (8.8 percent).44Foundations seem particularly interested in the role and expres-sion of culture,45 which seems less explicit in many of the government
programs and has become more complex as a result of globalization
and multiculturalism. These trends have required foundations to de-
velop a broader understanding of the needs of arts groups and artists
through more proactive consultations, seeking advice from the key
figures from artistic domains, and prompting an increased reliance on
research.46 The resulting insights have led many foundations to ex-
periment with new funding models, including venture capital; one-
time endowments to start-up arts and cultural non-profits; and large,
one-time grants. For example, the Ford FoundationÕs Education, Me-dia, Arts and Culture program recently initiated the New Directions/
New Donors for the Arts program, committing $42.5 million in chal-
lenge grants to 28 arts and cultural institutions and nearly quadru-
pling the foundationÕs annual arts appropriations.47Foundation grants seem to be a significant source of support forgenerating, as well as providing access to, works of art, often empha-
sizing the value of art and cultural activities in building and strength-
ening communities. The AT&T Foundation, for example, emphasizes
support for projects that Òpromote artistic expression or create net-41ÒThe disproportionate concentration of support among a relatively few recipientscharacterizes foundation funding in many fields. In 1996, the top 25 health recipientsaccounted for 29.4 percent of all health grants dollars, while the top 25 educationrecipients benefited from 22.3 percent of foundationsÕ education dollars
Ó (Renz and
Lawrence, 1998, Arts Funding, p. 9).42A Snapshot: Foundation Grants to Arts and Culture, 1999, Grantmakers in the Arts,Seattle, Wash.43A Snapshot: Foundation Grants to Arts and Culture, 1999, Grantmakers in the Arts,Seattle, Wash., p. 4.44Renz, 2002, ÒThe Foundation CenterÕs 2002 Arts Funding Update,Ó p. 2.45Arts and culture have been the fourth largest foundation funding priority since themid-1980s; the first three are education, health, and human services. See Renz, 2002,ÒThe Foundation CenterÕs 2002 Arts Funding Update.Ó46Loren Renz and Steven Lawrence, 1999, Arts Funding 2000, Foundation Center,New York, in cooperation with Grantmakers in the Arts, Seattle.47The program seeks to Òlink prosperity to creativityÓ by 
Òoffering opportunities forartists to work in new directions and play innovative roles in their communities.ÓGrantees are encouraged to share best practices with each other and the arts communityat large.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY208works that support artists and/or cultural organizationÓ and engage
local communities. A core program is AT&T: NEAT (New Experi-
ments in Art & Technology), which provides support to regional
science and childrenÕs museums to showcase work by artists who usescience and/or technology as their creative medium.48 The Rockefeller
Foundation provides funding for a range of creative explorations in
new media, including fellowships, conferences, publications, digital
art exhibitions in museums and on the Web, and experimental labora-
tories that foster collaborations among artists, scientists, and technolo-
gists.49 Since 1994, the Rockefeller Foundation has awarded over 100
grants in the area of new media.Private philanthropy is more likely to help to sustain individualartists than is government support, which seems more oriented to-
ward institutions. This is particularly true of smaller foundations. For
example, the Media Arts program of the Jerome Foundation, which
supports artists in New York City and Minnesota, focuses on provid-
ing grants to risky projects by individual emerging artists.50 Many of
the resources provided by private foundations for individual artists
are channeled through non-profit intermediaries that are focused on a
specific domain. Consider the Warhol Foundation as an example. It
does not support individual artists directly, but rather gives to Òcul-tural organizations that in turn, directly or indirectly, support artists
and their work.Ó51 So, in 2002 the foundation provided a grant to
Franklin Furnace Archive to support the production of live art over
the Internet, indirectly funding the production of artwork by indi-
vidual artists. Efforts of the Creative Capital Foundation are described
in Box 8.1. In 1999, 3 percent (about $46 million) of larger arts grants
from larger foundations supported professional development, which
includes fellowships and residencies; internships; scholarships; and
awards, prizes, and competitions. Some private support for individu-
als comes in the form of commissions, which have some similarities in
practice to research grants because of their reflection of the character
of the commissioning entity. Also, when museums do commission
work, it appears to be driven by their interest in making new art forms
accessible.5248See a description of the program at <http://www.att.com/foundation/programs/
arts.html#tech>.49A number of the individuals, organizations, projects, and conferences discussed inthis report received funding from the Creativity and Culture Program of the RockefellerFoundation. For further information, see <http://www.rockfound.org/display.asp?Context=3&SectionTypeID=16&Preview=0&ARCurrent=1>.50See the Jerome FoundationÕs Web site at <http://www.jeromefdn.org/>.51See the Warhol Foundation grant awards at <http://www.warholfoundation.org/FiscalYear2002F.htm>.52For a discussion of commissioning practice, see Susan Morris, 2001, Museums andNew Media Art, a research report commissioned by the Rockefeller Foundation (mimeo),October.Emergent, small-scale, andexperimentalinitiatives face agreater challengein raising funds.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUPPORTING WORK IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES209BOX 8.1Creative Capital FoundationAn unusual approach to funding new arts projects is used by the Creative Capital Foundation.1 Seen
as an attempt to Òfill the void left by the NEA [National Endowment for the Arts] when it stopped funding
individual artists,Ó2 Creative Capital was founded in 1999 as a non-profit organization in the state of New
York. In its own words, Creative Capital seeks to Òsupport artists creating original work who are pursuing
innovative, experimental approaches to form and/or content in the visual, performing, and media arts.Ó3Creative Capital also hopes to distinguish itself from traditional arts grant programs by providing marketing
and other Ònon-artisticÓ aid (e.g., helping artists develop audiences for their work). Also, unlike most
traditional funding sources, Creative Capital shares a portion of the proceeds generated by its artistsÕ
projectsÑif the projects indeed make moneyÑto help replenish its funds and continue the cycle of support
for future projects. One of the main areas where Creative Capital seeks to focus its attention and funds is
emerging fields, which include, among other things, technology-based work. Indeed, early in 2000, Creative
Capital was poised to deliver nearly $100,000 (or 16 percent of the foundationÕs total grants) to support
12 digital arts projects.4 Other funding areas include new media, performing arts, and visual arts. By
December 2001, Creative Capital had made grants to individual artists amounting to more than $1.5 million.5For the period from 1999 to 2002, more than 40 other foundations and individual donors provided almost
$7 million for Creative CapitalÕs programs and operations. Creative CapitalÕs funders include, to name only
a few, the Andy Warhol Foundation, Jerome Foundation, Rockefeller Foundation, Ford Foundation, Benton
Foundation, and Home Box Office.1See the Creative Capital FoundationÕs home page at <http://www.creative-capital.org/>.2Shayna Samuels, 1999, ÒNew Foundation Seeks Provocative Artists for Grants,Ó Dance Magazine 73(8): 29.3See <http://www.creative-capital.org/general/html/prospectus.html>.4Matthew Mirapaul, 2000, ÒDigital Artists Draw Support from a New Foundation,Ó New York Times, January 1, p.F14.5Creative Capital, 2001, Creative Capital: 2001 Year End Report, Creative Capital, New York. Available online at<http://www.creative-capital.org/news&events/html/rubys_reports/2001YearEndReport.pdf>.But even though it helps to sustain artists, private philanthropytends to be associated more with grants to institutions than to indi-
viduals. Foundations and individuals often give to established institu-
tions, which have name recognition; emergent, small-scale, and ex-
perimental initiatives face a greater challenge in raising funds. The
largest shares of foundation arts grants go to program and capital
support, which tend to be associated with institutions. The smallest
share goes to researchÑa condition that must be improved to fosterITCP in the long run.Among larger foundations, there appears to be some recognitionof the importance of promoting creativity and expanding the uses of
IT, but such foundations are just beginning to embrace IT as a theme.5353See Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Coun-cil, 1998, Advancing the Public Interest Through Knowledge and Distributed Intelligence(KDI), White Paper, available online at <http://www.cstb.org>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY210They have been developing IT systems as part of their own infrastruc-ture and as infrastructure for their granteesÑbut generally in pro-grams other than those that support the arts, where infrastructure has
not historically been a concern. This situation began to change in the
late 1990s, when a number of the larger, most visible foundations
began self-assessments and started new initiatives featuring some
attention to IT. And, as the present project demonstrates, foundations
have begun to contemplate the broad potential of ITCP.For the most part, computer science research does not benefit fromfoundation support, unlike biomedical and some other forms of scien-
tific research.54 However, individuals and, in particular, corporate
philanthropy support some academic IT research (in the form of grants

for research, donation of computer hardware and software, or endow-
ment of faculty positions). Corporate support, both in-kind and finan-
cial, is considered critical for growing and sustaining the relatively
high cost of operations of university computer science departments.
Corporate interactions are an important element of how those depart-
ments do business (e.g., personnel interactions, consultancies, job place-
ment for students and graduates, and so on).55 Hence computer scien-
tists often emerge from their education with a relatively positive view
of corporations as employers and sources of support, whereas artists
will generally not have comparable experiences as an integral part of
their education.PrizesOne notable source of funding for the arts is prizes (see Chapters 5and 7).
56 Artists value prizes because they are expressly linked to
54To put this observation into context, foundation grants for science and technologyoverall amounted to 3 percent of total dollars awarded in 2000, while grants for arts andculture amounted to 12 percent. See ÒHighlights of the Foundation CenterÕs FoundationGiving Trends,Ó 2002, Foundation Center, New York. Available online at <http://
fdncenter.org/research/trends_analysis/>.55Corporate conduct of research falls under the broader heading of commercialactivity excluded from the scope of this discussion. Corporate IT research tends to be
applied; regardless of label, it may be more development than research. See ComputerScience and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, 2000, Making ITBetter.56ÒAwards and prizes have proliferated throughout the arts, suggesting that numer-ous sponsors stand ready to fill the available ecological niches. The interests of thesesponsors are evident enough. Associations of artists seek to advance professional stan-
dards and leverage their creative preferences against choices driven by the interests ofhumdrum participants and profit seekers. Independent philanthropists who sponsorand support prizes likely have the same objective. Prizes given by associations of critics
serve to advertise and dignify the criticsÕ regular services. Commercial sponsors seek
goodwill for their products among the honorees and the public with more than casualinterest in the relevant art world. . . .Ó See Richard E. Caves, 2000, 
Creative Industries:Contracts Between Art and Commerce, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass., pp.198-199.Computerscientistsoften emerge fromtheir educationwith a relativelypositive view ofcorporations asemployers andsources ofsupport, whereasartists generallydo not have
comparableexperiences as anintegral part oftheir education.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUPPORTING WORK IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES211critical appraisal and they provide visibilityÑa benefit to the entityawarding the prize as well as the recipient. As a Canadian arts council
explains,Most organizations that provide assistance for the arts and culturehave established or manage awards for artistic excellence accom-
panied by cash prizes. This practice has the advantage of combining
the recognition of artists and their art with their contribution to
cultural activity. Moreover, it significantly enhances the prestige of
the role of funding agencies and publicly indicates that they
significantly support artistic creation.57Against this backdrop, prizes have begun to emerge for ITCP (seethe section ÒValidation and Recognition StructuresÓ in Chapter 7),
building on the foundation laid by traditional supporters of the arts
and economic development (e.g., various state and local prizes, or
certain foreign ones, such as Europriz). Unlike grants, which may be
multiyear or renewable, prizes are one-time infusions of revenue, and
they are awarded ex post facto, which implies that the beneficiary
needs some other source of support to do the work that competes for
the prize.Federal Funding for InformationTechnology ResearchIt is well-known that the federal government has a long history ofsupporting IT research, which is largely computer science research
(including computer engineering) plus some in sister fields such as
electrical engineering. Indeed, it can be argued that federal support is
at the very root of the information-technology world that Americans
and others inhabit today.58 Research funding supports the advance-
ment of a field and associated knowledge, often because that field is
linked to economic well-being and to the broad base of scientific and
technical knowledge; it is also tied more specifically to meeting a
government mission, which varies among agencies. Public access to
information generated or published by an agency, like education, is
also a concern to varying degrees among agencies.Funding for IT research comes primarily from the Department ofDefense, notably the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
(DARPA), and from the National Science Foundation (NSF). A variety
of other agencies also support computer science research, both funda-57See Conseil des arts et des letters Qu”bec, at <http://www.calq.gouv.qc.ca>.58For more information on the history of federal support for computing research, aswell as a history of the early Internet, see Computer Science and TelecommunicationsBoard, National Research Council, 1999, Funding a Revolution, National Academy Press,Washington, D.C.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY212mental and especially applied.59 Computer science and related fund-
ing that is tracked in the aggregate as the Networking and Information
Technology Research and Development (NITRD) program amounted
to about $1.8 billion in 2002 (see Box 8.2 for NITRD goals).60The NSF, which funds research across science and engineeringdisciplines, issues grants that tend to be smaller in size (tens to hun-
dreds of thousands compared to hundreds of thousands into the mil-
lions) and duration (a few months or 1 to 2 years compared to 3 or
more years) than those awarded by DARPA, which supports the
development of large, complex, and often comparatively capital-in-
tensive systems.61 The NSF also supports research centers (for scienceBOX 8.2Goals for the Networking and Information TechnologyResearch and Development Program1.Ensure continued U.S. leadership in computing, information, and communications technologies to
meet federal goals and to support U.S. 21st-century academic, industrial, and government interests.2.Accelerate deployment of advanced and experimental information technologies to maintain world
leadership in science, engineering, and mathematics; improve the quality of life; promote long-term
economic growth; increase lifelong learning; protect the environment; harness information technology; and
enhance national security.3.Advance U.S. productivity and industrial competitiveness through long-term scientific and engineer-
ing research in computing, information, and communications technologies.SOURCE: National Science and Technology Council, 2002, Strengthening National, Homeland, and Economic Security:Networking and Information Technology Research and Development, FY 2003 Supplement to the PresidentÕs Budget, July.59The coordinated information technology research and development program suitetracked by the National Coordination Office is budgeted at between $1.5 billion and $2billion. Other participating agencies besides NSF and various components of the De-partment of Defense include the Department of Energy (the Office of Science and the
National Nuclear Security Administration), the National Aeronautics and Space Ad-ministration, the Department of Health and Human Services (the National Institutes ofHealth and the Agency for Health Care Research and Quality), the Department of
Commerce (the National Institute of Standards and Technology and the National Oce-anic and Atmospheric Administration), and the Environmental Protection Agency.60Derived from National Science and Technology Council, 2002, Strengthening Na-tional, Homeland, and Economic Security: Networking and Information Technology Researchand Development, FY 2003 Supplement to the PresidentÕs Budget, July, the annual compen-dium of federally funded computer science research programs known informally as the
ÒBlue Book.Ó61NSF has begun to experiment with support for larger computer science researchprojects. The early 2000s have witnessed intensive reexamination of program emphases
at DARPA, with significant changes in its support for computer science research begin-ning to unfold but uncertain as of this writing.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUPPORTING WORK IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES213and technology and for engineering research), which typically involvemore than one discipline and sometimes multiple institutions. For
example, the Integrated Media Systems Center at the University of
Southern California62 has undertaken research on new types of user
interfaces with applications from everyday communication to interac-
tion with art forms.The terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, have increased atten-tion to security across the government (and industry), which is ex-
pected to influence trends in computer science research funding.63Projects and programs that can be linked to homeland security are
expected to be favored, with uncertain implications for truly explor-
atory work for which no such linkage can be posited. Prior to Septem-
ber 11, the trend in the predecessor initiatives in what is now known as
the NITRD program was a broadening in the scope of research, includ-
ing more diverse, cross-disciplinary explorations that included the
social sciences and humanitiesÑan evolution toward greater attentionto ITCP interests.The evolution of federal funding programs for computer sciencehas been associated with an erosion of flexibility. When computer
science was a new field, in the late-middle 20th century, research
successes were tied to a few talented individuals: program managers
in government agencies, who selected researchers in universities and
awarded money with considerable flexibility. That fabled pattern
eroded considerably in the latter part of the century, as funding be-
came tied more to specific government program objectives (which
varied in their flexibility) and program management evolved to be
more conservative overall, thanks to pressures on federal spending
and increases in efforts to promote federal accountability. These cir-
cumstances militate against a program managerÕs experimentationwith activities that can seem or be seen as new and different, such as
ITCPÑunless the linkage to other kinds of research and national ben-efits can be established and communicated effectively.FUNDING FOR INFRASTRUCTUREGrants, regardless of source, fund both specific activities (e.g.,research, development of new works of art) and the development of
associated human resources, which can increase the likelihood of suc-
cess and provide capacity for future work. Similar rationales drive
support for relevant physical infrastructure, or tools, a critical aspect
of work involving IT. Accordingly, ITCP work increases overall fund-
ing requirements on the arts side by introducing a need for hardware62See <http://imsc.usc.edu/>.63For example, the Blue Book sports the title Strengthening National, Homeland, andEconomic Security: Networking and Information Technology Research and Development, FY2003 Supplement to the PresidentÕs Budget for the edition published in mid-2002.The evolution offederal fundingprograms forcomputer sciencehas beenassociated withan erosion offlexibility.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY214and software infrastructure already provided for computer science.64This can add significant costs to budgets.65 However, dramatic im-
provements in IT price/performance ratiosÑmaking this infrastruc-ture less expensive than it was just a few years agoÑhave enabledsmaller groups or individuals to do things that were prohibitively
expensive for them in the past. Grant support may be particularly
important in building the ITCP infrastructure inasmuch as IT firms are
less likely to provide hardware and software for activities seen as part
of the (non-profit) arts world, tending instead to donate such compo-
nents for more conventional R&D.66 There are exceptions where mar-
keting publicity may be gained; some artists have served as beta
testers for IT products and have allowed the use of their names in
marketing in return. As noted above, there is already a history of
foundation support for capital projects, the category under which IT
infrastructure is likely to fall.One productive approach to infrastructure building, illustrated bythe federal Digital Libraries Initiative (DLI) (see Box 8.3)Ñis the appli-cation testbed concept, which is familiar to experimental computer
scientists. Another approach, illustrated by some DLI projects and a
wide range of other computer science and humanities research projects,
is the generation of databases and other information resources that are
made available to the public and could be exploited for ITCP. There is
already evidence of artists drawing on government repositories of
imagery, for example.Whereas a testbed is associated with developing something, ITCPalso presents needs for infrastructure associated with archiving and
preservation, without which too much of it may prove ephemeral. It is
far too often the case that ITCP-based works disappear with the close
of the specific, original project. Even ITCP work of distinction, which
has been recognized and awarded prizes, often meets that fate when64Computer scientists, in turn, tend to complain that research funding budgets, byaggregating support for research per se with support for infrastructure, which oftenbenefits other kinds of scientists, overstates what is available to them.65State and regional economic development that features local investment in net-working infrastructure can help educational and cultural institutions. It can also benefitindividuals through initiatives that promote deployment of residential broadband, forexample (see Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research
Council, 2002, Broadband: Bringing Home the Bits, National Academy Press, Washington,D.C.). On a national scale, the Internet2 project seeks to connect a growing number ofcolleges and universities to comparatively high-bandwidth/capacity networking to
support research and education and long-distance collaboration. The cyber infrastruc-ture exploration at NSF, drawing on multiple initiatives, also links dispersed research-ers with a range of networked resources. Depending on where practitioners are located,
ITCP can benefit fromÑand provide added motivation forÑsuch extended infrastruc-ture investments.66IT firms have long recognized that giving their products to educators and research-ers helps to develop their customer base. The arts communities seem to lack that kind ofappeal for firms, though there are exceptions (e.g., Apple Computer has seeded art,music, and architecture departments to be identified with creative users). ITCPpresents needsfor infrastructureassociated witharchiving andpreservation,without which toomuch of it mayprove ephemeral.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUPPORTING WORK IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES215the financial and/or institutional support dries up. The creators ofsuch products are sometimes desperate to secure a further application
for their work but have no means to carry this idea through to fruition
(e.g., a multimedia kiosk presentation accompanying an exhibition
could well be used for education purposes after the closure of the
exhibition for which the presentation was created). Thus, works that
are not seen as having commercial value will only be made available
in digital form by the non-profit and government sectors that allocate
resources to do so. Large-scale digital conversion is likely to incur
significant financial costs, which most non-profits are not in a position
to absorb.6767See commissioned papers of the Art, Technology, and Intellectual Property projectof the American Assembly, available online at <http://www.americanassembly.org/ac/atip_p_cp.htm>.BOX 8.3Awards Related to ITCP Under the Digital Libraries InitiativeA Live Performance Simulation System: Virtual Vaudeville ($900,000 over 3 years)The Virtual Vaudeville project brings together a diverse array of scholars, including computer scientists,three-dimensional modelers and animators, theater practitioners, and theater and music historians. The
objective is to use digital technology to address a problem fundamental to performance scholarship and
pedagogy: How to represent and communicate the phenomenon of live performance using media. This
problem becomes especially pressing when the objective is to represent a performance tradition from the
past. Neither a written description nor a filmed re-creation can convey the experience of attending a live
performance, an experience that encompasses not only the way the performance on stage looks and sounds
from different parts of the theatre, but also spectatorsÕ perceptions of, and interactions with, one another.
The proposed solution to this problem is to re-create historical performances in a virtual reality
environment. The central objective is to simulate a feeling of ÒlivenessÓ in this environment: the sensation
of being surrounded by human activity onstage, in the audience, and backstage, and the ability to choose
where to look at any given time (onstage or off) and to move within the environment.Capturing, Coordinating, and Remembering Human Experience ($200,000 over 4 years)This work will develop algorithms and systems enabling people to query and communicate with asynthesized record of human experiences derived from individual perspectives captured during selected
personal and group activities. For this research, an experience is defined through what you see, what you
hear, and where you are, and associated sensor data and electronic communications. The research will
transform this record into a meaningful, accessible information resource, available contemporaneously and
retrospectively. This vision will be validated through two socially relevant applications: (1) providing memory
aids as a personal prosthetic or behavioral monitor for the elderly, and (2) coordinating emergency response
activity in disaster scenarios.SOURCE: Adapted from <http://www.dli2.nsf.gov/itsprojects.html>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY216RISK PREFERENCES AND THE CHALLENGE OFSUPPORTING EMERGING AREASGrants are usually awarded in the context of formal programs(government and private), which define the parameters of activities
suitable for funding. Depending on the source, there will be more or
less discretion to support activity that does not fit easily within the
stated parameters; sometimes there is an explicit intent to fund oppor-
tunistic new ideas, whereas other times there is strict adherence to
guidelines, with no flexibility. Program emphases change at different
rates and in different directions. In computer science, for example,
funding for supercomputing, graphics, artificial intelligence, and other
subdisciplines has waxed and waned over time with perceptions of
need and opportunity.The risk preferences of grant makers affect what gets funded; theyalso contribute to a greater flow of resources to institutions than to
independent workers. The early DARPA, mentioned above, is an oft-
cited example of grant makers willing to fund risky endeavors; the
Information Sciences Program of a mid-20th-century sister agency, the
Office of Naval Research, just happened to be led by an individual
with strong arts interests, which had some effect on funding direc-
tions. A tendency toward risk aversion among grant makers can mili-
tate against movement into new areas or new types of work processes.
Risk aversion can arise for many reasons, chief among them the fear of
failure and the need to carry out fiduciary responsibilities, because
any award has an opportunity costÑmoney allocated to one recipientis not available to others. On the government side, risk aversion may
arise in response to growing pressures for accountability in spending.
For example, the Government Performance and Results Act (Public
Law 103-62), although tricky to apply to research, requires agencies to
link projects they support to the results achieved. This is easier to do
for applied research than for more exploratory, fundamental research,
where some degree of failure is to be expected, as is unanticipated and
possibly delayed success. In addition to precluding some adventurous
research, risk aversion among grant makers can lead to constraints on
grantees, such as requirements for more frequent (and therefore dis-
ruptive) reporting or demonstration of work in progress.68Of greatest concern for ITCP as an emerging arena for research isrisk aversion related to the selection of topics. Some examples are
obvious: In an environment with a new, major focus on homeland
security and counterterrorism, projects that seem to involve interfer-
ing with or destroying a system might not be viewed favorably. Young

researchers in computer science and engineering, who either served
on or briefed the committee, reported a need to package ITCP work in
more conventional terms to increase the likelihood of funding. Al-68This has been a growing complaint among computer science researchers.Of greatestconcern for ITCPas an emergingarena forresearch is riskaversion relatedto the selection oftopics.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUPPORTING WORK IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES217though it has always been true that grant seekers have to use care inpresenting their ideas, this phenomenon can limit the exploration of a
new arena such as ITCP by discouraging applications for funding or
eliminating ideas that do not lend themselves to repackaging. Absent
grant program definitions that specifically embrace ITCP, progress in
ITCP will depend on grant seekersÕ ingenuity in influencing program
definitions and relating their ideas to an existing definition.69The Òculture warsÓ of the 1990s underscore that reactions to artis-tic endeavors can have political overtones and consequences. These
external concerns can influence which arts projects are funded, whereas
influences on funding in computer science research tend to depend on
such criteria as relevance to the operational mission of an agency (NSF
is an exception) or the objectives of a given program. Program defini-
tions and scopes may be more or less inviting of the risk involved in
new approaches, and so may the processes of evaluating competing
proposals (although the nominal criteria, such as NSFÕs ÒintellectualmeritÓ and 
Òbroader impacts,Ó may not make the potential for varia-
tion obvious). On the arts side, there is anecdotal evidence that focus
and selection processes can discourage innovation, especially at the
point when new art forms emerge. At present, these tensions shape
the ITCP arena of digital arts or new-media work, which may be
treated as a separate category or recognized as a part of other fields,
depending on the funding source. Funders are trying to understand
what is emerging and the nature of its merits as a contender for their
resources. The IT elements have engendered mixed reactions among
traditional arts funders, just as arts elements have perplexed tradi-
tional computer science funders.Risk aversion also arises among foundations. Whereas govern-ment agencies have some degree of public oversight and accountabil-
ity, foundations are intrinsically idiosyncratic, shaped by the prefer-
ences of their founders and boards of directors. Those preferences
may constrain the program staffÕs solicitations of and reactions toproposals.Recently, federal programs have sought to promote cross-disci-plinary work related to ITÑalbeit in areas other than ITCP. Thissituation has put agency leadership, with grants as the proverbial
motivational carrots, somewhat at odds with the research community:
Grant seekers have not, on the whole, gravitated easily to cross-disci-69One speaker at a committee meeting suggested that there might be limited fundingavailable for a proposal on Òcomputer musicÓ research, but much more funding avail-
able if the proposal were relabeled as Òdigital signal processingÓ or 
Òdigital audiosignalÓ research. A Washington, D.C., briefing to the Computer Science and Telecom-
munications Board in September 2002 by Chuck Thorpe of Carnegie Mellon Universitypresented some pragmatic contrasts: Research involving robotic soccer-playing dogs
could be seen as illustrating dogs playing or as multiagent collaboration in a hostilesituation. In other instances, principal investigators have skirted innovation by simplyrenaming old proposals to obtain funds.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY218plinary collaboration. Whether impelled by government programs orarising through a bottom-up process from the grant-seeking commu-
nity, the relative paucity of cross-disciplinary work to date means that
the researchers serving on the panels that review proposals may lack
experience in this type of work and/or an appreciation for its merits
and potential. Anecdotal reports from committee members and grant
seekers and program managers who briefed the committee suggest
that these panels are most comfortable with projects that come closest
to core disciplinary work, or are unable to select for quality among
competing proposals with differing approaches to cross-disciplinarity,

especially where new or unfamiliar methodology may be involved.
This situation is not unique to ITCP; in any context, selection panels
may have difficulty addressing the reinterpretation of fields or emer-
gence of new fields, inasmuch as it involves work and people diverg-
ing from panel membersÕ own experience. The problem is well-known
among federal program managers.The NSF (with some collaboration with other government organi-zations) has engaged in three notable experiments in supporting cross-

disciplinary work with an IT component, some of which relates to
ITCP. (See Box 8.4.) The first two, Knowledge and Distributed Intelli-
gence (KDI) and the Digital Libraries Initiative (mentioned above),
featured strong internal champions at NSF, who worked with the
relevant research communities; the third, Information Technology Re-
search (ITR), drew from a broad, cross-agency reconceptualization of
federal programs for IT R&D, also with input from the research com-
munity. KDIÕs difficulties reflected its attempt to achieve the broadinvolvement of multiple disciplines; the other two may have benefited
in terms of program viability from their greater leaning toward com-
puter science (i.e., a single discipline). The integration of social sci-
ences with computer science is an element of all three, but DLI also
moved to involve humanists, and some ITR components are defined
in ways that are open to the involvement of humanists and artists.
These and other cross-cutting research initiatives, through both sub-
stantive and procedural emphases, aim to advance the science and
practice of collaboration as a means to achieving creativity in any
context, another factor that makes them relevant to planning for the
support of ITCP.The committee emphasizes that investigating new areas and ex-erting leadership are risky, and therefore grant makers need to de-
velop a tolerance for some failures as the inevitable price of explora-
tion. Understandably, foundations prefer that all projects succeed,
because they feel a responsibility to maintain trust both as a fiduciary
body and as a legacy of a family, company, or community. There is a
tendency to play it safe. A way to institutionalize risk into the grant-
making process is to allocate a fixed amount or percentage of grants
for risk-taking projectsÑinitiatives with potentially large payoffs butalso with a significant possibility of failure. This is grant making as
portfolio investing: combining safe, slow-growth projects with some
riskier choices, and expecting some failures as normal. For thisInvestigatingnew areasand exertingleadership arerisky, and grantmakers need todevelop atolerance forsome failures asthe inevitableprice ofexploration.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUPPORTING WORK IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES219BOX 8.4Cross-disciplinary Computer Science Initiatives Pointing Toward ITCPKnowledge and Distributed IntelligenceKnowledge and Distributed Intelligence (KDI) was an experimental initiative carried out between 1997and 1999 that cut across the National Science Foundation (NSF) directorates (defined by their emphases
on research in the physical, natural, and social sciences, and education) and confederated multiple programs
(such as the Digital Libraries Initiative discussed below, Learning and Intelligent Systems, Knowledge
Networking, Universal Access, and Integrated Spatial Information Systems). The initiative revolved around
the relationship between research on information technologies and efforts to meet societal needs, broadly
defined.Because of the initiativeÕs sweeping vision, program management featured not only coordination acrossunits of NSF but also outreach to other agencies (those involved in specific component programs) and
private foundations. Both program managers and the research community grappled with objectives and
options through formative workshops and other interactions, but a lack of consensus about the initiative
and skepticism among groups of researchers (generally defined along disciplinary boundaries) about each
otherÕs roles and their integration weakened the experiment. KDI did not extend beyond its initial 3-yearphase, although component programs have continued.Digital Libraries InitiativeThe Digital Libraries Initiative (DLI) has grown to embrace a widening set of federal agencies, researchdisciplines, and application contexts. Its first phase (launched in 1994) involved six universities funded by the
NSF that developed testbeds and engaged a variety of partners in diverse applications domains. Its second
phase, DLI2 (beginning in 1998), which has added relevance to ITCP, expanded to include as partners the
National Endowment for the Humanities, Library of Congress, Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency, National Library of Medicine, and National Aeronautics and Space Administration. The DLI
generates infrastructure in applications domains that provide a context for developing new computer
scienceÑhence the basing of the NSF participation in the Computer and Information Science andEngineering (CISE) directorate. Collaboration between computer scientists and very different communities
is intrinsic to DLI. Also see Box 8.3 and <http://www.dli2.nsf.gov>.Information Technology ResearchInformation Technology Research (ITR) is an umbrella initiative for a wide range of computer scienceresearch projects, including core disciplinary investigations and research that engages other disciplines to
varying degrees. Based at NSF, it reflects that organizationÕs approach to a larger reconceptualization ofsupport for IT research across several agencies. Like that larger effort, ITR has been widening its scope from
fundamental computer science to computational science and to interactions with multiple disciplinesÑthefiscal year 2002 funding was supposed to emphasize Òemerging opportunities at the interfaces betweeninformation technology and other disciplinesÓ that can 
Òelucidate, expand and exploit IT.Ó1 ITR addresses
social, economic, and workforce implications, involving social scientists to address how to design computer-
based systems that work better for people, as well as the societal impacts of systems as currently designed
(see, for example, NSFÕs Digital Society and Technology program).2 The engagement of social scientists
involves both the CISE and the Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences directorates.1See <http://www.itr.nsf.gov/aboutitr.html>.2See <http://www.interact.nsf.gov/cise/descriptions.nsf/30ff6e7ea7d05a0d85256659004c0237/976ffb01fa3aea5e852565d90056864d?OpenDocument>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY220approach to work, program managers must not be subject to sanctionsfor the inevitable failures. In general, tolerance for occasional failure
may be higher in the private sector than in the public sector; hence,
private foundations may have to take the leadership with respect to
high-risk initiatives.Federal funding agencies have special issues to consider. To beginwith, the agency structures and approaches typical of the IT arenaÑscience and engineering researchÑdiffer significantly from those usedin the arts and humanities. The level and allocation of funding, nature
of funding agencies, interactions among agencies, and so on, are gen-
erally different, although there are some commonalities. Experience
suggests that the success of any new major programs within the U.S.
government will be enhanced by the appointment of a champion. The
structure of the federal governmentÑin both the executive and con-gressional branches, the latter strongly influenced by the appropria-
tions processÑcan often militate against cross-disciplinary programscutting across jurisdictional and disciplinary lines. Without a cham-pion, no one understands the potential benefits or who is accountable
and whose budget is at stake.When funding a major new program in ITCP, organizations mayincrease their chances for success by following general principles for
fruitful research and Ògood work.Ó Funding should be made available
to cross-disciplinary teamsÑperhaps a dozen teams or so are neededto attain critical mass, in the committeeÕs judgmentÑand the budgetshould be adequate to support two or more principal investigators.
The program should be ÒownedÓ by several units within a foundation
or government agency (or multiple foundations or agencies, or possi-
bly even a combination thereof) to obtain real, committed participa-
tion by all. Commitments should be made for a sufficient period to
enable programs to become establishedÑon the order of 5 yearsÑandallow for no (or very limited) provision for renewals, to avert inten-
tional or accidental empire-building.70REEXAMINING FUNDING POLICIES ANDPRACTICESReliance on grant support (so-called ÒsoftÓ money) shapes the
modus operandi of academic researchers and artists, chiefly by build-
ing the search for grants into their activities. A characteristic of grant
support is finite duration: Even longer-term grants build in the antici-
pation of an end to the support. Also, with the possible exception of
support from a research center, individual grants tend to provide only
partial support for a computer science researcher or an artist. As a
result, professionals who depend on grant support work to develop70Based on Norman Metzger and Richard Zare, 1999, ÒInterdisciplinary Research,ÒFrom Belief to Reality,Ó Science 283: 642-643.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUPPORTING WORK IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES221and renew grants, a process with uncertain results that typically in-volves attempts to seek more grants than one is likely to receive. The
awarding of longer-term grants allows the grant makers to get to
know the grant seekers better. Inasmuch as grant seeking is a competi-
tive process, participants may benefit from having a track record. But
officials at federal funding agencies also understand that young re-
searchers may need to be evaluated somewhat differently than are
their senior counterparts.71 It is not clear whether foundations are
comparably sensitive to that problem. Committee members seemed to
regard foundations as conservative and therefore most likely to fund
those with a track record. Some specific disciplines, such as architec-
ture, are structured with the expectation that solo creativity can flower
comparatively late in a career, and job opportunities are structured
accordinglyÑbut architecture operates within a market context.The issue of whether to fund ÒresearchÓ or 
ÒcontentÓ also arises;
these concepts, which never could be separated with complete clarity,
are becoming more intertwined.72 Grants that foster ITCP are particu-larly likely to incorporate both content and IT in substantive ways. Ad
hoc practices, such as pairing content producers with researchers to
qualify them for research funding, can be awkward and inefficientÑworking through the challenges of collaborations (see Chapter 2), but
only for economic reasons. Instead, granting agencies should review
their policies for supporting content development, or consider coop-
erative projects among consortia of granting agencies in areas of spe-
cial interest, to meet challenges that cannot otherwise be addressed.
On the arts side, private philanthropic collaborations have already
begun to nurture ITCP. For example, the Rockefeller Foundation has
joined forces with the Ford Foundation and the Pew Charitable Trusts
in exploring relevant issues.One interesting experiment is a grant awarded to Leonardo/ISASTto study the feasibility of a hybrid art center and research lab struc-
tured to be financially sustainable. Called Arts Lab, the project is an
attempt to build a bridge between the creative community exploring
new technologies and the marketplace. Arts Lab is structured as a not-
for-profit corporation that is intended to be managed with the disci-
pline of a commercial enterprise. The goal is to be sustainable with
little compromise of artistic or research values. This type of project can
help in exploring the boundary between commercial and non-com-
mercial spheres: Arts grants, in particular, have been assumed to
support non-commercial activity, but given the nature of ITCP and the
need to promote viability, this boundary bears reexamination.Agencies and foundations should structure proposal-review pro-cesses that encourage the development of new practices as well as the
evolution of existing ones. As has happened previously in variousscientific and engineering disciplines, digital practices are proliferat-71NSF, for example, offers career awards to young investigators.72This is one reason for the prominence of design in ITCP.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY222ing within all existing categories of the arts, from filmmaking andtheater to the fine arts, as well as in new categories. Should the digital
arts be placed in their own category or recognized as a part of every-
thing else? Both strategies should be pursued to expand existing defi-
nitions as well as recognize new and emerging forms. Accordingly, a
wide range of representation is necessary on panels, and panelists will
need to be familiar with multiple areasÑa long-standing issue con-cerning appraisal panels and the peer-review process. As part of this
effort to nurture innovation, panels should consider making, in lieu of
only large grants, some modest grants to a larger number of groups or
individuals. To avoid forcing individuals or small organizations to
spend disproportionate amounts of time on grant-related paperwork,
care may be needed in program design, or implementation strategies
could be pursued that leverage intermediaries that can absorb some of
the administrative burdens.73Multiple approaches are important, because ITCP is evolving at arate that seems to be outrunning the traditional feedback loop of
criticism, and it is evolving in multiple directionsÑthere is no consen-sus on how to appraise different ideas. How funders react will shape
whether and how schools of thought or practice develop. To fund a
diversity of projects, program managers will need more time and
leeway to learn about, evaluate, and reach out to accommodate in-
creased numbers of grantees. They need competence to reinterpret
existing fields to accommodate the evolution associated with ITCP
and to place priority on truly new forms of creative practice that
exploit the power of digital information and networks. They may also
need to convene different groups of evaluators who are peers to differ-
ent kinds of grant seekers and also have an appreciation for how fields
and creative practices are changing.Funders are receiving feedback from their decision-making panelsthat indicates it is difficult to review the full spectrum of practice now
offered within certain granting categories. For instance, a media panel
might have to judge a documentary film alongside an interactive
installation or Web site. Panelists often feel unable to judge both
effectively. How can agencies structure a panel process that will en-
courage the development of new practices as well as the evolution of
existing ones? In other words, how can agencies support development
without defining it before it has emerged? One problem can be that
people with experience and credentials in a field may feel threatened
or discomfited by the onslaught of new media forms. Selection pro-
cesses need to cover the breadth of evolving practices without
balkanizing panels and without slanting choices to the particular ex-
pertise represented. It will be important to find ways to function as
support for the incubators rather than as a prescriptive reinforcement
of existing and familiar forms of work.73The National Alliance of Media Arts and Culture (<http://www.namac.org>)might be an appropriate model for a national umbrella organization to distributefunding to local community media arts centers.Programmanagers willneed more timeand leeway tolearn about,evaluate, andreach out toaccommodateincreasednumbers ofgrantees.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUPPORTING WORK IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES223Support for development of new practices also entails recastingwhat is regarded as research, to enable expanding activities in organi-
zations (notably government technical research funders) with com-
paratively little history in funding artistic practices and activities in
organizations (notably arts branches of foundations) with compara-
tively little history in funding IT research. Qu
”bec-based funding agen-
cies, for example, have identified an entirely new realm of supportable
activity defined by the term Òresearch-creation,Ó defining a practice
that straddles the artistic and the technical and does not carry some of
the constraints of technical research. This approach helps to reduce the
chances of projects falling through the cracks in a world where, for
example, projects are not funded by the NEA because they are per-
ceived as technical research, but also are not funded by the NSF
because they are seen as cultural projects. As discussed in Chapter 3,
there would be value in establishing a special granting category for
tool building in both software and hardware. Additional support
would be needed to make these tools available (i.e., distribution,
documentation, and support) to both artists and industry and gener-
ally push forward creative production.As noted above, archiving and preservation concerns also have tobe addressed by funders. The instigators and funding bodies of ITCP
work should feel responsible for the long-term preservation and use of
this work whenever possible (see discussion of archiving in Chapter
7). The need for long-term archiving and/or preservation can be ad-
dressed both through infrastructure support and through augmenta-
tion of the creativity-oriented grant itself.Getting at the IT-arts intersection involves attention to both thescope of work and the mechanisms of combining different disciplines,
whether through the efforts of an individual or cross-disciplinary
teams. By drawing on multiple sources of fundsÑwithin a complexorganization like the NSF or across organizationsÑa program mightreinforce the message that a cross-disciplinary effort is sought, al-
though that raises its own practical problems at the program manage-
ment end.74Experimentation with different approaches to grant making wouldcorrespond to the novelty and dynamism of ITCP. One model of note
is the Pew Charitable Trusts Venture Fund. Created during the mid-
1990s to enable the Trusts to explore opportunities that fall outside its
traditional program areas, the Venture Fund has no restrictions on the
subject matter it can support. Key funding decisions include such
questions as, Are we being innovative? Are we maximizing our return
on investment? Answers to these questions are evaluated based on
social returns, not financial ones. Other questions include the follow-74The challenges of combining funding among private foundations and betweenNSF and private foundations are outlined in the CSTB white paper Advancing the PublicInterest Through Knowledge and Distributed Intelligence (KDI), 1998.By drawing onmultiple sources offunds, a programmight reinforcethe message thata cross-disciplinaryeffort is sought.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY224ing: Does the proposed project have a particular urgency? Is it ad-dressing an important need? Can it produce concrete results in a
reasonable time frame? Will it enable us to explore new partnerships
with other foundations or with public or private funders? If it carries a
significant risk of failure, is there also the possibility of unusually high
social return if it succeeds? During 2001 the fund issued more than $34
million to cover 20 grants. Since its inception, the fund has provided
several grants to organizations associated with information technol-
ogy and creativity. For example, it joined the Rockefeller Foundation
in providing support to the American AssemblyÕs Art, Technologyand Intellectual Property (ATIP) project addressing the impacts, chal-
lenges, and opportunities resulting from technological advances that
are confronting the arts.75Informed analysis of the related issues will require increased evi-dence gathering and analytical resources for the arts and humanities.76Relatively few economists, social scientists, or policy analysts engage
in policy research related to the arts and humanities (as compared to
other domains), in part because of ambivalence in the United States
about the public role in this space.77 The empirical base for supporting
policy analysis is weak, and the academic and practitioner wings of
the community are largely strangers. Interaction among policy mak-
ers, practitioners, and policy scholars is much richer in other fields of
public policy.78 In addition to building a knowledge base in this area,
public policy analysts could build relationships and understanding
with key intermediaries, such as journalists, commentators, think tank
researchers, and political party representatives. Policy attention to
these issues is consistent with the long-run shift of the economy to-
ward services, some of which focus on cultural products and content
generally, and enduring concern about the quality of life and creativ-
ity in general. Finally, and complementary to developing better data, a
digital art and culture history project would provide valuable context75See <http://www.pewtrusts.com> and <http://www.americanassembly.org/ac>.76See Ruth Ann Stewart and Catherine C. Galley, 2002, ÒThe Research and Informa-tion Infrastructure for Cultural Policy: A Consideration of Models for the United States,Óappendix in J. Mark Schuster, Informing Cultural Policy: The Research and InformationInfrastructure, Rutgers Center for Urban Policy Research, Center for Urban Policy Re-search Press, New Brunswick, New Jersey.77A consortium of foundations moved to address this practical problem by under-writing the Center for Art and Culture (see <http://www.culturalpolicy.org/issuepages/infotemplate.cfm?page=History>). The Pew Charitable Trusts made newsby voicing concerns about Òcultural policy,Ó which is more controversial in the United
States than in many other countries. Its initiative ÒOptimizing AmericaÕs Cultural Poli-ciesÓ announced in 1999 was renamed 
ÒOptimizing AmericaÕs Cultural ResourcesÓ in
response to the ensuing controversy over the appropriateness of this kind of policy. See
Schuster, 2002, Informing Cultural Policy.78See Margaret Jane Wyszomirski, 1995, ÒPolicy Communities and Policy Influence:Securing a Government Role in Cultural Policy for the Twenty-First Century,Ó Journal ofArts Management, Law, and Society 25(3): 192-205.Relatively feweconomists, socialscientists, orpolicy analystsengage in policyresearch relatedto the arts andhumanities. Theempirical basefor supportingpolicy analysisis weak.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUPPORTING WORK IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES225and serve as an educational tool for policy makers, educational institu-tions, and people interested in engaging in ITCP.79FUNDING IN THE INTERNATIONAL
CONTEXTInternationally, a variety of ITCP funding models have evolved.Examples are presented here both to illustrate the diversity of ap-
proaches and to draw contrasts between the United States and other
countries. As noted earlier, a nationÕs cultural policies influence fund-ing for art and design activities. A case could be made that a stronger
central intervention (e.g., the creation of a ministry of culture, as in
France) can have positive effects, either to get new ITCP initiatives
going, or at least jump started, and/or to help establish an infrastruc-
ture. (Funding sources may be reluctant to pay for an infrastructure
until there is a demonstrated need for it; but the need may not materi-
alize until the infrastructure is in place.) However, a case could equally
be made that decentralized funding fosters initiatives that rise from
the bottom up and thus are more likely to lead to the development of
ideas and projects that reflect leading-edge work in ITCP.PUBLIC SUPPORT FOR THE ARTSWorldwide, funding for the arts has a long history80 that has been
far from uniform across time or space. Indeed, looking primarily at
European countries, one is likely to form the opinion that direct gov-
ernment support for the arts is a long-standing and widespread prac-
tice. Looking at other countries such as the United States or Japan,
however, one might just as easily conclude that national governments
leave support for the arts primarily to private (commercial or non-
profit) or local organizations. Kevin Mulcahy81 provides a succinct
79For further discussion, see Kevin F. McCarthy and Elizabeth Heneghan Ondaatje,2002, From Celluloid to Cyberspace: The Media Arts and the Changing Arts World, RAND,Santa Monica, Calif.80Public support for the arts among the nations of the world is almost as old ascivilization itself. Indeed, examples of such support in even the distant past are fairly
easy to find; one need only consult an art history or world history text to find numerousinstances. Pisistratus (605?Ð527 B.C.), for instance, although known as the Òtyrant ofAthens,Ó is also remembered as a patron of the arts. He arranged city-state support for a
range of artistic activities, including building projects, poetry, sculpture, dance, andmusic. He is also credited with starting public arts festivals that were open to all citizensin an effort to enhance the cultural prestige of Athens.81See Kevin V. Mulcahy, 1998, ÒCultural Patronage in Comparative Perspective:Public Support for the Arts in France, Germany, Norway, and Canada,Ó Journal of ArtsManagement, Law and Society 27(4): 247-264.¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY226description of the perceived differences in how Europe and the UnitedStates, in particular, have dealt with public arts support historically:The conventional wisdom of much discourse about public supportof the arts is that European national governments are long-time,
generous, and uncritical benefactors of culture, whereas the U.S.
government, by invidious comparison, has been a reluctant sup-
porter, of decreasing generosity and with increasingly dispiriting
criticism. But broad generalizations about comparative public
policies often disguise substantial exceptions.82The developing nations present another, much more resource-constrained picture, but as with economically stronger nations they,
too, supportÑor receive support from such non-governmental organi-zations as foundations forÑthe arts in the context of cultural heritageand competitive advantage. In developing nations, the traditions of
art and aesthetics have developed high degrees of sophistication whose
potential for interaction with IT has barely been explored. Information
technology, when combined with the arts and crafts in these countries,
can accelerate economic and human development. This can take simple
forms, such as the use of IT to create markets for the creative output of
the populations in these nations. It can also take the form of inspira-
tion for new designs rooted in the aesthetics and traditions of the local
culture.83 Both could leverage financial support, to the extent it is
available. See Box 8.5.France has a long and rich tradition of public support for arts andculture, dating back at least to the Capet monarchy (c. 987). The French
government is among the worldÕs largest funders of art and culture,administered primarily through the Ministry of Culture and Commu-
nication.84 Created in 1959, the ministry seeks to make art and cultureavailable to as much of the French public as possible, with an annual
budget of nearly 1 percent of the entire national budget.85 A specific
division of the ministry of culture and communications in France
finances research and development. A major item included in this82The substantial exceptions derive primarily from the indirect public support pro-vided by donors motivated or rewarded (at least in part) by U.S. income tax incentives,as described in the previous section. However, though constrained by available datasources, a comparison of direct government arts funding suggests a huge variation per
capita, ranging from $6 in the United States to $46 in Canada and $85 in Germany. Dataderived from National Endowment for the Arts, 2000, International Data on GovernmentSpending on the Arts, Research Division Note #74, available online at <http://arts.endow.gov/pub/Notes/74.pdf>.83Ranjit MakkuniÕs work is an example; see <http://www.hinduonnet.com/thehindu/2001/04/23/stories/13230074.htm>.84See the ministryÕs home page at <http://www.culture.fr>.85One percent of the U.S. federal executive branch budget for FY 2002 is approxi-mately $13 billion.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUPPORTING WORK IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES227BOX 8.5Four Models for Public Arts Funding¥The facilitator state 
supports the arts through foregone taxes, which is to say that donorsÕcontributions are made tax deductible. The objective of this model is to promote diversity of activity in the
non-profit amateur and fine arts, although Òno specific standards of art are supportedÓ by the state. Rather,
the focus is on Òthe preferences and tastes of the corporate, foundation, and individual donors.Ó The United
States is a good example of a facilitator state.¥The patron state provides support for the arts through armÕs-length arts councils. In this model, thestate decides on an overall level of support, leaving the actual decisions regarding which projects to support
to the arts councils. The arts councils, in turn, rely on the advice of professional artists working through a
system of peer evaluation. The objective of this model is as much to promote Òstandards of professionalartistic excellenceÓ as it is to support 
Òthe process of creativity.Ó The United Kingdom is an example of a
patron state.¥The architect state 
provides funds for the arts through government institutions created solely forthat purpose (e.g., ministries or departments of culture or the arts). In this model, the state tends to support
the arts as part of its national objectives, which can have distinctively different emphases; for example,
historically, France has leaned toward professional standards of artistic excellence, whereas the emphasis
in the Netherlands is much less elitist.¥The engineer state
 Òowns all the means of artistic production.Ó In this model, the state supports only
art that meets certain Òpolitical standards,Ó and decisions about funding and support are left up to 
Òpoliticalcommissars.Ó One example of an engineer state was the Soviet Union.SOURCE: Adapted from Harry Hillman-Chartrand and Claire McCaughey, 1989, ÒThe ArmÕs Length Principle andthe Arts: An International PerspectiveÑPast, Present and Future,Ó WhoÕs to Pay for the Arts? The International Search forModels of Support, M.C. Cummings, Jr. and J. Mark Davidson Schuster, eds., American Council for the Arts, New York.Available online at <http://www.culturaleconomics.atfreeweb.com/armÕs.htm>.budget is the Institut de Recherche et Coordination en Acoustique etMusique (IRCAM), a permanent state-funded institute for computer
music research. This office also offers ÒState CommissionsÓ to French
artists, and on occasion these commissions have been opportunities
for international co-production (e.g., the virtual Tunnel under the
Atlantic, ÒconstructedÓ between Paris and Montr
”al in September1995). Major institutes such as IRCAM and GermanyÕs Zentrum frKunst und Medien (ZKM) described below (and in Chapter 5) derived
the basis for political support of major public expenditures in part to
respond to U.S. high-technology leadership.86The German method for directing public funds to the arts is muchmore decentralized. Indeed, the German federal government has been
described as Òeffectively barredÓ from cultural activities, a response to
earlier times when government-supported cultural activities were used86IRCAMÕs efforts to combine high modernist musical experimentalism with tech-nology transfer to the French IT sector were fraught with contradictions and confusion,
according to one ethnographic study. See Georgina Born, 1995, Rationalizing Culture:IRCAM, Boulez, and the Institutionalization of the Musical Avant-garde, University of Cali-fornia Press, Berkeley.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY228Òfor purposes of national glorification,Ó or even 
Òabused . . . for propa-ganda purposes.Ó87 Accordingly, Germany has no central agency to
oversee cultural funding; rather, individual l−nder (or states) and localauthorities bear this responsibility. For example, although many of
ZKMÕs constituencies are outside Germany, much of its funding isderived from regional public funds and small-scale industrial spon-
sorship. Such a unique environment comes with a high price tag, and
to contribute to the institutionÕs discretionary funds, the research insti-tutes also secure contracts for ITCP research within European Union
(EU) research projects, which has caused tension between the insti-
tutesÕ mission to develop artwork and the need to generate funding
through research projects that generally do not directly fund art as
such. Local governments account for 47 to 58 percent of public spend-
ing on the arts, the states for 40 percent, and the federal government
for only 2 to 13 percent; despite tax incentives, private support for the
arts accounts for Òno more than 1 percentÓ of the total revenue for
German art institutions.88 Various networks of research institutes (e.g.,
the Fraunhofer institutes) may have entities whose work relates to
ITCP. The Fraunhofer, for example, even has an outpost in Rhode
Island (near Brown University and the Rhode Island School of Design)
to support its interests in computer graphics.Government programs established to support the arts have histo-ries measured in decades rather than centuries in many countries. For
example, the Canadian governmentÕs main means of supporting thework of individual artists and arts organizations is the Canada Coun-
cil for the Arts, which was created by an act of Parliament in 1957 and
was funded initially by a $50 million endowment to Òensure theCouncilÕs complete independence of the government.Ó89 Currently,
however, in addition to support from various endowments, dona-
tions, and bequests, the council receives the majority of its funding
from Parliament in the form of an annual appropriation. In 2000-2001,
the Canada Council made awards and grants amounting to $117 mil-
lion;90 in April 2002, the council and the National Research Council
(NRC) of Canada launched a collaborative program of research grants
to bring leading artists into Canadian NRC laboratories across the
country as researchers.91 This agreement will also create a forum to
facilitate the development of partnerships among other arts, science,
and technology organizations in Canada. In addition, the Canada
Council will soon complete its first round of awards to joint proposals87Annette Zimmer and Stefan Toepler, 1996, ÒCultural Policies and the WelfareState: The Cases of Sweden, Germany, and the United States,Ó Journal of Arts Manage-ment, Law, and Society 26(3): 167-195.88See Zimmer and Toepler, 1996, ÒCultural Policies and the Welfare State.Ó89See John Meisel and Jean Van Loon, 1987, ÒCultivating the Bushgarden: CulturalPolicy in Canada,Ó in Milton C. Cummings, Jr., and Richard S. Katz, eds., 
The PatronState: Government and the Arts in Europe, North America, and Japan, Oxford UniversityPress, New York, p. 289.90From <http://www.canadacouncil.ca/council/about-e.asp>.91See <http://www.canadacouncil.ca/news/pressreleases/co0215-e.asp>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUPPORTING WORK IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES229by groups of artists, engineers, or scientists, which will be reviewedfor the first time by a mixed panel cooperatively managed by the arts
council and its two sister science councils (the Natural Science and
Engineering Council and the Social Science and Humanities Council).
The government of Canada also underwrites the National Film Board,
an innovative force in computer graphics (see Box 6.3 in Chapter 6),
and the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation and offers subsidies, tax
incentives, and marketing support to creative industries (publishing,
music, museums, multimedia, computer games).The Japanese experience with public arts support bears only avague resemblance to that of Europe, Canada, or the United States.
Currently, most art genres in JapanÑincluding traditional Japanesearts, modern arts derived from Europe, and popular artsÑare Òthor-oughly commercial,Ó surviving through a mixture of income from,
among other sources, ticket sales, advertising, and the sale of related
products or services.92 The flurry of Japanese corporate sponsorship
for art and technology that began in the late 1980s was typically
justified as a sophisticated kind of symbiotic corporate philanthropy
(which has suffered in the difficult economic climate in Japan; see
Chapter 5). However, the Japanese government has built museums
and libraries and preserved important cultural monuments ever since
the Meiji state (a stronger, more centralized government) was estab-
lished in 1868.93 Indeed, the Tokyo Academy of Music was founded in
1879, and the Academy of Art was formed in 1887; these two organiza-
tions merged following World War II to form the Tokyo University of
Fine Arts, an institution considered to be the center of art and music
research and education in Japan.In 1968 the Agency for Cultural Affairs (ACA), devoted to publicsupport for the arts, was formed and began with an initial budget of
around $14 million, but over the next 10 years the ACA budget swelled,
as authorities discovered that the promotion of culture was in the
publicÕs interest at home Òas well as the national interest abroad.Ó94 In
1972, the Japan Foundation was created by a legislative act to be an
autonomous non-profit public corporation whose primary concern is
cultural relations abroad. It promotes a variety of cultural exchange
programs each year, with its overall focus being on personal exchange.
In 2002, the Association for Corporate Support of the Arts (Mecenat)
broadened its definition of an arts eventÑin the context of authorizingtax-deductible contributionsÑto include media arts.9592Meisel and Van Loon, 1987, ÒCultivating the Bushgarden,Ó p. 333.93Thomas R.H. Havens, 1987, ÒGovernment and the Arts in Contemporary Japan,Óin Cummings and Katz, eds., The Patron State: Government and the Arts in Europe, NorthAmerica, and Japan, p. 334.94Havens, 1987, ÒGovernment and the Arts in Comtemporary Japan,Ó p. 333. During
the period from 1968 to 1978, the ACA budget grew some 574 percent, while the overallnational budget increased by 489 percent.95Dramatic Online, ÒBroadening the Definition of Arts Events in Japan,Ó available
online at <http://www.dramaticonline.com/ifacca/web/news/detail.asp?Id=24073&from=Arts_Council_News>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY230PUBLIC SUPPORT FOR INFORMATIONTECHNOLOGY RESEARCHInformation technology research is supported by a number ofnational governments around the world. As in the case of the arts, the
policies and practices of only a few countries are reviewed in this
report, to provide a broader perspective on, and contrast to, policies
and practices in the United States.Canada uses a model that combines tax and funding incentiveswhile also supporting collaboration and information sharing among
geographically dispersed federal research labs, private R&D facilities,
and research universities. A large part of this model is made possible
as a result of the Canadian Network for the Advancement of Research,
Industry and Education (CANARIE),96 which is Canada
Õs advancedInternet development organization. This non-profit organization, which

receives its core funding from the Canadian government, has estab-
lished the worldÕs largest and fastest national R&D network. A col-laboration involving more than 120 universities and industry partners,
CANARIE has helped to fund more than $600 million in research
projects related to the Internet, including those associated with con-
tent distribution.97In addition to the tax incentives open to all forms of industrialR&D (in contrast to the United States98), the Canadian governmentfunds a series of research organizations whose focus is promoting
innovation in IT. The Canadian NRC operates the Institute for Infor-
mation Technology (IIT),99 which, through cost-sharing collaborative
projects, assists other organizations with the development of market-
driven technologies. These collaborations can be one-on-one with a
single company or multiparty, with several participating organiza-
tions combining resources to share costs and risks. A similar program,
the Networks of Centres of Excellence (NCE),100 promotes partner-
96See <http://www.canarie.ca>. Also mentioned in Chapter 5.97As of this writing the CANARIE project, e-content, is soliciting requests for projectsthat emphasize Òcultural research, development and applications in areas such as archi-tecture and design, film and video, 3D graphics, net and web art, digital music, digital
photography, game design, graphic design, human/computer interface, and copy-right/rights management tools; and feasibility studies, including consumer research/testing of broadband cultural products and the monetization of content.Ó See <http://
www.canarie.ca>.98See CanadaÕs Leadership in Information and Communications Technologies, available
online at <http://strategis.ic.gc.ca/SSG/it04270e.html>.99See <http://www.iit.nrc.ca/>.100Three Canadian federal granting agencies, the Canadian Institutes of Health Re-search, the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, and the
Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada, along with IndustryCanada, have combined their efforts to support and oversee the NCE. See <http://www.nce.gc.ca/>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUPPORTING WORK IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES231ships among industry, universities, and government. The program,which is intellectually diverse and geographically dispersed, consists
of 22 centers, 8 of which conduct research in information and commu-
nication technology (usually, networks are funded for 7 years and can
be renewed).101 Since 1997, several proposals were made to the NCE
program for hybrid research networks (grouping university-based
researchers in IT, the arts and humanities, and cultural organizations
(like the Banff Centre and the National Film Board)). Although none of
these proposals passed the stringent NCE competition, they formed
the basis for an alternative program with a regional basis (i.e., support-
ing geographic clusters) and support for new-media industrial activ-
ity. Canadian Heritage, the branch of the Canadian government re-
sponsible for cultural affairs, launched a new grant program in the fall
of 2002 as part of its Canadian Culture Online program. Called New
Media Research Networks, it was planned to support multiyear col-
laborative networks on a pilot basis through March 2004, with funding
for up to five networks for 3 years for about one million Canadian
dollars per year. Its goals include Òdevelopment of an environmentthat is conducive to Canada becoming a world leader in digital context
creation and productionÓ through 
Òresearch at the intersection of tech-nologies and culture.Ó102Following a model similar to the NCE program is Precarn Incor-porated,103 a national consortium of corporations, research institutes,
and government partners that supports innovation in intelligent sys-
tems. Precarn helps to promote collaboration among Canadian com-
panies, universities, and government researchers by providing fund-
ing on a case-by-case basis for projects that include the participation of
at least two companies and one university.Japan is known for a strong national, coordinated policy withrespect to technology, and the situation with IT is no different. The
policy strategy for IT that the Prime Minister, Council on Science and
Technology Policy (CSTP), and the ministries currently support is the
Basic Law on the Formation of an Advanced Information and Tele-
communications Network Society, or e-Japan for short. The primary
goal of e-Japan is to Òestablish an environment where the privatesector, based on market forces, can exert its full potential and make
Japan the worldÕs most advanced IT nation within five years.Ó104 E-
Japan is an integrated strategy that emphasizes four points:101For example, the Centre of Information Technology and Complex Systems in-volves more than 50 university researchers supported by 379 graduate students, and
carries out research in seven Canadian provinces. The network supporting this centerincludes 28 universities, 62 industrial partners, and 27 government departments andagencies. See CanadaÕs Leadership in Information and Communications Technologies, avail-
able online at <http://strategis.ic.gc.ca/SSG/it04270e.html>.102See <http://www.canadianheritage.gc.ca/progs/pcce-ccop/progs/mednet_e.cfm> and <http://www.pch.cg.ca/progs/pcce-ccop/pubs/mednetguide_e.cfm>.103See <http://www.precarn.ca/>.104See e-Japan Strategy
 at <http://www.kantei.go.jp/foreign/it/network/
0122full_e.html>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY232¥Enable every citizen to enjoy the benefits of IT.¥Reform the economic structure and strengthen industrial com-petitiveness.¥Realize affluent national life and creative community with vi-tality.¥Contribute to the formation of an advanced information andtelecommunication networked society on a global scale.Under the CSTP, a Cabinet-level office sets science and technology(S&T) policy direction and funding levels. The CSTP uses a compre-
hensive overview strategy in its decision making that has resulted in a
significant increase in the involvement of the humanities and social
science in the discussion. Increasingly, this strategy is forcing policies
into a direction that emphasizes the relationship between society and
human beings.105 The CSTP immediately identified the support of IT
as one of four strategic fields that the government must emphasize
when formulating S&T policy and funding R&D. However, while the
CSTP decides on policy direction and funding levels, it does not fund
individual projects directly; this is left to the ministries. Government
funding for IT R&D comes primarily from three ministries: the Minis-
try of Economy, Trade, and Industry (METI);106 the Ministry of Educa-
tion, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT);
107 and the
Ministry of Public Management, Home Affairs, Posts, and Telecom-
munications.108 Specifically for IT R&D, the government has devel-
oped an approach whereby it will promote market competition, facili-
tate commercialization, and promote international cooperation and
collaboration among industry, academia, and government agencies.109A strong, coordinated position has also been taken in Europe.Most recently, as part of its Fifth Framework Programme for Research,
Technological Development and Demonstration Activities (FP5) (1999Ð2002), the European Commission identified seven thematic research
programs intended to promote industrial competitiveness and quality
of life in Europe. One of these, the Information Society Technologies
(IST) Programme, is designed to support R&D in information and
communication technologies. The IST Programme had a working bud-
get of 3.6 billion euros (1998Ð2002) to achieve its goal of supporting ITresearch Òwithin a single and integrated programme that reflects theconvergence of information processing, communication, and media105See A New System for Promoting Science and Technology in Japan, available online at<http://www.nsftokyo.org/rm01-15.html>.106Formerly known as the Ministry of International Trade and Industry. METI over-sees about 15 percent of the R&D budget.107The former Ministry of Education, Science, Sports, and Culture and the Scienceand Technology Agency have been combined to form MEXT, which oversees about 63percent of the S&T budget.108Formerly two separate ministries.109See ÒOverview of Action PlanÓ at <http://www.kantei.go.jp/foreign/it/990519overview.html>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUPPORTING WORK IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CREATIVE PRACTICES233110See ÒBackgroundÓ at <http:europa.eu.int/information_society/programmes/
research/index_en.htm>.111See ÒObjectivesÓ at <http://www.cordis.lu/ist/cpt/2002cpa15.htm>.112See ÒIST in FP6, PriorityÓ at <http://www.cordis.lu/ist/fp6/fp6.htm>.113See ÒIST in FP6, PriorityÓ at <http://www.cordis.lu/ist/fp6/fp6.htm>.114See ÒThe RADICAL ManifestoÓ at <http://www.e-c-b.net/ecb/internal/
1027149839>. The RADICAL consortium includes the SMARTlab at Central Saint Mar-tins College of Art and Design in the United Kingdom, the Ecole sup”rieure de lÕimagein Angoul’me-Poitiers in France, and the Society for Old and New Media in theNetherlands, together with a network of artists, creative professionals, and small andlarge businesses participating in the RADICAL program of events and symposia.technologies.Ó110 The European Commission manages the program
with the assistance of the IST Committee, consisting of representatives
of each EU member and associated states. A key feature of the pro-
gram is its emphasis on supporting cross-program (CP) themes. The
objective of CP projects is to allow grant seekers the flexibility to
address cross-disciplinary research and ensure that topics associated
with more than one area are addressed. For example, one CP project,
Technology Platforms for Cultural & Arts Creative Expressions, is
concerned with Òdeveloping future generic platforms and tools forimproving creative expression and facilitating access to inspirational
material for artistic and cultural content creation.Ó111 To achieve this
goal, the IST seeks to support medium- and long-term exploratory
work with an emphasis on digital expression by providing funding to
collaborative projects.As the European Commission continues to develop its next frame-work (6), the IST Programme remains one of the main themes and a
significant part of the anticipated S&T needs. Specifically, within the
Sixth Framework, information and communication technologies are
being looked at to Òstimulate the development in Europe of technolo-gies and applications at the heart of the creation of the Information
Society in order to increase the competitiveness of European industry
and allow European citizens in all EU regions the possibility of ben-
efiting fully from the development of the knowledge-based
economy.Ó112 To achieve this goal, the research supported by the IST
Programme will focus on Òthe future generations of technologies inwhich computers and networks will be integrated into the everyday
environment . . . that places the user, the individual, at the center of the
future developments for an inclusive knowledge-based society for
all.Ó113 Some concerns have arisen, however, about the adequacy of
support to be provided for ITCP research and development. The
RADICAL consortiumÑthree European media arts and culturalorganizations engaged in a 2-year projectÑissued a manifesto in July2002 urging non-market support for transdisciplinary ITCP activity.
Its recommendation that Òspecific support mechanisms be imple-mented to promote cross-disciplinary research platforms which

explicitly include media arts and cultural organisations and creative
practitioner-researchers,Ó in the context of the rest of the document,
raises questions about the depth and durability of official support for
ITCP in Europe.114Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY234115The primary source of information for this overview was the Daniel LangloisFoundation Web site at <http://www.fondation-langlois.org>. For 2002, the founda-tion gave priority to West Africa and South America.PRIVATE PHILANTHROPYOutside the United States, private philanthropy seems to play animportant, although relatively less prominent, role as a source of
funding for the arts and IT. Although the committee did not attempt a
comprehensive survey of relevant programs, one initiative did come
to its attention that deserves mention. The Daniel Langlois Foundation
has established the Program for Organizations from Emerging Re-
gions,115 through which it financially supports projects that allow
artists or scholars who are not European or North American to im-
merse themselves in technological contexts that are non-existent or
difficult to access in their own country. The aim of the program is to
promote the integration of knowledge and practices specific to differ-
ent cultures, and grants may also support research projects that com-
bine traditional artistic practices with advanced technology or that
explore methods and processes based on the unique aesthetic prin-
ciples of certain cultures. Each year the foundation selects two differ-
ent priority regions. Examples of projects funded through the pro-
gram include the following:¥Lima, Peru: Alta Technologia Andina (ATA), Media Laboratory forEducation, Research and Creation in Video and New Media. Funding wasused to help integrate electronic elements into local artistic practices
and to set up a shared space for cross-disciplinary education and the
creation and distribution of experimental artwork.¥Delhi, India: Center for the Study of Developing Societies: InterfaceZone. Funding was used to create a physical meeting place in Delhi toact as a dynamic node for fostering the exhibition, online dissemina-
tion, and pedagogy of new-media culture.¥Sofia, Bulgaria: InterSpace Media Arts Center. Funding was usedto support new-media projects and to showcase projects generated by
the media lab in an effort to foster sustainable growth in the indepen-
dent artistic scene in Bulgaria and to encourage artistic experimenta-
tion with new media.¥Riga, Latvia: The Center for New Media Culture: Acoustic SpaceResearch Lab and Program. Funds were used to establish two media labsand to develop the Acoustic Space Research Program to investigate
the field of streaming media; to coordinate projects in sound art,
audio, radio, and streaming media; and to organize international events
on sound and acoustics.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.237
WILLIAM J. MITCHELL, Chair, is professor of architecture and me-dia arts and sciences and dean of the School of Architecture and
Planning at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT).  He has

demonstrated an unusual interest in how technology and society in-
teract, team-teaching with software innovator Mitch Kapor and spear-
heading the development of a new program within the School of
Architecture/Department of Urban Studies and Planning in that area.
He has developed software and engaged in distance learning, and he
oversees the MIT Media Laboratory, an alternative (to the mainstream)
concentration of information technology expertise at MIT.  Mitchell

teaches courses and conducts research in design theory, computer
applications in architecture and urban design, and imaging and image
synthesis.  He consults extensively in the field of computer-aided

design and was the co-founder of a California software company.  He
has served recently on the Council for the Arts and Technology at
Central State University (Ohio).  Mitchell came to MIT in 1992 from

the Graduate School of Design at Harvard University.  From 1970 to

1986, he was on the faculty of the School of Architecture and Planning
at the University of California at Los Angeles.  He has also taught at

Yale, Carnegie Mellon, and Cambridge Universities.  Mitchell holds a

B.A. from Melbourne University, a master of environmental design
from Yale University, and an M.A. from Cambridge University.
Among his many writings is City of Bits.STEVEN ABRAMS manages the Business and Application Modelinggroup in the Software Technology Department at IBM Research.  With

that team, he researches and develops tools that help people describe,
architect, visualize, validate, and develop enterprise applications more
easily and naturally than traditional tools.  He originally joined IBM in

1992 to develop two-dimensional and three-dimensional geometric
processing algorithms and system architecture for a rapid prototypingBeyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY238system in the Manufacturing Research group, while pursuing hisPh.D.  He then joined Stratasys Inc., where he helped to commercialize

the rapid prototyping technology developed at IBM.  After finishing

his Ph.D., he rejoined IBM Research, working in the Computer Music
Center.  As manager of that department, he led a series of projects that

revolve around music, art, and creativity.  One goal of the work of the

Computer Music Center was to develop a better understanding of
how people work on creative tasks in general, and how technology
can better support people in these tasks.  In his new role, Abrams is

taking lessons learned from the music domain and applying them to
the creative tasks of designing, architecting, and developing software
systems.  Abrams studied at Columbia University, where he earned

B.S. and M.S. degrees in computer science from the School of Engi-
neering and Applied Sciences in 1990 and 1991, respectively, and the
M. Phil. and Ph.D. degrees from the Graduate School of Arts and
Sciences in 1993 and 1997, respectively.  His Ph.D. thesis was on sensor

planning for robots in an active environment, focusing on multidi-
mensional modeling and manipulation of computer vision constraints
and the computation of three-dimensional swept volumes.MICHAEL CENTURY is chair of the Arts Department at Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute, which he joined in August 2002.  Long associ-

ated with the Banff Centre for the Arts, Century founded the CentreÕs
Media Arts Division in 1988 and instigated the Art and Virtual Envi-
ronments project (1991-1994).  From 1993 to 1996, Century was a

program manager at the Canadian Centre for Information Technology
Innovation (CITI), a federal research laboratory located in Montr”al,
with responsibility for new-media arts funding.  From 1996 to 1998, he

served as policy advisor to the federal department of Canadian Heri-
tage.  Since September 1997, he has been the principal of Next Century

Consultants, focusing on new media and cultural policy for various
public and university sector clients.  From 1997 to 2001 he was a

research fellow and adjunct professor at the Graduate Program in
Communications, McGill University, Montr”al. For the Rockefeller
Foundation, he researched and wrote a report in 1999 entitled Path-ways to Innovation in Digital Culture.  He was educated in humanities,
piano performance, and musicology at the University of Toronto (B.A.),
the University of California at Berkeley (M.A.), and the University of
Iowa (M.A).  He has recently completed a historical study of the

transition from analog to digital techniques in animation as a doctoral
dissertation in science and technology policy studies at the University
of Sussex.JAMES P. CRUTCHFIELD received his B.A. in physics and math-
ematics in 1979 and his Ph.D. in physics in 1983 from the University of
California at Santa Cruz.  He is currently a research professor at the

Santa Fe Institute (SFI) after 14 years in the Department of Physics at
the University of California at Berkeley (UCB).  He maintains a re-
Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A239search group at SFI that includes postdoctoral researchers and Ph.D.students.  Currently he is an adjunct professor of physics in the Phys-

ics Department at the University of New Mexico, Albuquerque.  He

was a visiting research professor at the Sloan Center for Theoretical
Neurobiology at the University of California, San Francisco, a
postdoctoral fellow of the Miller Institute for Basic Research in Science
at UCB, a UCB Physics Department IBM postdoctoral fellow in con-
densed matter physics, a distinguished visiting research professor of
the Beckman Institute at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign,
and a Bernard Osher Fellow at the San Francisco Exploratorium.  At

the exploratorium, he helped design and mount the ÒTurbulent Land-scapesÓ exhibit series on chaos, complexity, and pattern formation.This exhibit series was funded by the National Science Foundation
and Department of Energy and was on display from June 1996 through
January 1997.  It is currently touring the nation
Õs science museums.Crutchfield has several publications, his most recent being QuantumAutomata and Quantum Grammars, Theoretical Computer Science (2000).CHRISTOPHER CSIKSZENTMIHALYI is a member of the faculty at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Media Laboratory.  Previ-

ously, he was an assistant professor of electronic art at Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute.  He has worked in the intersection of new tech-

nologies, media, and the arts for 8 years, lecturing, showing new-
media work, and presenting installations in both Europe and North
America.  His most recent piece, Natural Language Processor, was

commissioned by the KIASMA Museum in Helsinki, Finland.  He has
an M.F.A. from the University of California at San Diego (1998) and a
B.F.A. from the School of the Art Institute of Chicago.ROGER DANNENBERG is a senior research computer scientist on
the faculty of Carnegie Mellon UniversityÕs School of Computer Sci-ence.  Dannenberg
Õs current work includes research on music under-standing, the automated accompaniment of live musicians, and the
design and implementation of high-level languages and systems for
real-time control and signal processing.  His current artistic direction

is toward real-time integrated computer music and computer graphics
performance systems, for which he has developed tools for rapid
software prototyping.  Dannenberg has a broad background in electri-

cal engineering and computer science.  His publications include work
on computer music, human-computer interaction, program verifica-
tion, programming language design, computer architecture, and com-
puter networks.  Dannenberg is also a musician and composer.  He

performs frequently on trumpet in classical, jazz, and contemporary
ensembles and writes works for electronic and conventional media.
Dannenberg earned his Ph.D. (1982) and an M.S. in computer science
from Carnegie Mellon University, as well as an M.S. in computer
engineering from Case Western Reserve University.  He also has a B.S.

degree in electrical engineering from Rice University.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY240TONI DOVE is an artist who works primarily with electronic media,
including virtual reality and interactive video laser disk installations
that engage viewers in responsive and immersive narrative environ-
ments.  Her work has been presented in the United States, Europe, and

Canada, as well as in print and on radio and television.  Her most

recently completed project, Artificial Changelings (1993-1998), is an
interactive narrative installation that uses video motion sensing to
track the location and movements of a viewer standing in front of a
large screen and translates them into changes in image and sound.  A

sci-fi romance about shopping, this interactive movie follows the life
of Arathusa, a kleptomaniac in 19th-century Paris during the rise of
the department store, who is dreaming about Zilith, an encryption
hacker in the future with a mission.  It debuted at the Rotterdam Film
Festival in 1998 and was part of the exhibition ÒBody M”caniqueÓ at
the Wexner Center for the Arts and at the Computing Commons
Gallery at Arizona State University during the Performance Studies
International Conference in March 2000.  A new piece currently under

development, Spectropia, will be a feature-length interactive movie.  It

will be performed by two players on multiple screens for an audience
in a theatrical setting or experienced by two individuals interacting at
the same time as a single-screen serial installation in three parts over a
more extended time period.  The second phase of the proposal is to

port the project to a component-based DVD system for a shared inter-
active narrative experience in the living room.  A research fellowship

from the Institute for Studies in the Arts at Arizona State University
will provide the programming and engineering resources to develop
the technology prototype.N. KATHERINE HAYLES, professor of English and media arts at theUniversity of California at Los Angeles, teaches and writes on the
relationships of science, technology, and literature in the 20th century.
Her most recent book, How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies inCybernetics, Literature and Informatics (1999), won the Rene Wellek Prize
for the best book in literary theory.  Her current projects include two

new books, Coding the Signifier: Rethinking Semiosis from the Telegraph tothe Computer and 
Linking Bodies: Hypertext Fiction in Print and NewMedia.  Her work has been recognized by a Guggenheim Fellowship,
two fellowships from the National Endowment for the Humanities, a
Rockefeller Residential Fellowship in Bellagio, and numerous prizes
and awards, including the Distinguished Scholar Medal from the Uni-
versity of Rochester and the Medal of Honor from Helsinki Univer-
sity.J.C. HERZ (jc@joysticknation.com) is the principal of Joystick Nation
Inc., a research and design practice that applies the principles of com-
plex systems to the design of products, services, and brands.  Drawing

from an understanding of ecology, online social dynamics, computer
games, and information theory, Joystick NationÕs focus is multiplayerinteraction design and systems that leverage the intrinsic characteris-Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A241tics of networked communication.  Clients include multinational cor-
porations, high-tech start-ups, and military research organizations.
She is the author of two books, Surfing on the Internet (Little Brown,
1994), an ethnography of cyberspace before the Web, and JoystickNation: How Videogames Ate Our Quarters, Won Our Hearts, and Rewired
Our Minds (Little, Brown, 1997), a history of video games that traces
the cultural and technological evolution of the first medium that was
born digital, and explores how it shaped the minds of a generation
weaned on Atari.  Herz published 100 essays on the grammar and

syntax of game design in the New York Times between 1998 and 2000.
1She has conducted workshops on game design and learning and hasspoken at technology and design conferences, including Technology
Entertainment Design (TED) in Monterey, SIGGRAPH, E3, Game
DevelopersÕ Conference, and the Forum on the Future of Higher Edu-cation at the Aspen Institute.  Herz sits on the Defense Advanced

Research Projects AgencyÕs study group on patterns of emergentbehavior in massively multiplayer persistent worlds.NATALIE JEREMIJENKO is a design engineer and techno-artist.
Recently, she was named one of the top 100 young innovators by the
MIT Technology Review, her work was featured in the Tate GalleryCream 2, and a large project was commissioned for the opening of the
museum MASSMoCA (<www.massmoca.org>).  Her work includes

digital, electromechanical, and interactive systems in addition to bio-
technological work and has appeared in the Rotterdam Film Festival
(2000), the Guggenheim Museum, New York (1999), the Museum
Moderne Kunst, Frankfurt, the LUX Gallery, London (1999), the
Whitney Biennial Ô97, Documenta Ô97, and Prix Ars Electronica Ô96,presented at the Museum of Modern Art in New York. She was a 1999
Rockefeller fellow.  She did graduate studies at Stanford University in

mechanical engineering and at the University of Melbourne in the
History and Philosophy of Science Department, and her Ph.D. is in the
Department of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering,
University of Queensland.  As the director of the Engineering Design

Studio at Yale University she is developing and implementing new
courses in technological innovation.  She is also affiliated with the

Media Research Lab/Center for Advanced Technology in the Com-
puter Science Department at New York University, where she did
postdoctoral studies.  Other research positions include several years at

Xerox PARC in the computer science lab and a position at the Ad-
vanced Computer Graphics Lab, RMIT University.  Jeremijenko has

also been on the faculty in digital media and computer art at the
School of Visual Art, New York, and the San Francisco Art Institute.

She is known to work for the Bureau of Inverse Technology.1Available online at <www.nytimes.com/library/tech/reference/indexgametheory.html>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY242JOHN MAEDA, Sony Career Development Professor of Media Artsand Sciences, is an associate professor of design and computation at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Media Laboratory.
Maeda attended MIT, where he was awarded bachelorÕs and masterÕsdegrees in computer science in 1989.  He completed his doctoral

studies in graphic design at the Tsukuba University Institute of Art
and Design in Tsukuba, Japan.  There, he began to experiment with

ideas on ways to bond the simplicity of good graphic design together
with the complex nature of the computer.  Those experiments grew

into a series of five books, called Reactive Books, that are a worldwide-
recognized standard for high-quality digital media design.  His com-

mercial work for Shiseido Cosmetics, Sony, and Morisawa was hon-
ored in 1996 in the one-man exhibition ÒJohn Maeda: Paper andComputerÓ at the Ginza Graphic Gallery in Tokyo, Japan, and at the
Dai Nippon Duo Dojima Gallery in Osaka, Japan.  In 1999, he pro-

duced Design by Numbers (MIT Press), which outlines the theoretical
underpinnings of his work as a combination of graphical examples
and codes.  His latest book,
 MAEDA@MEDIA
 (Thames & Hudson/
Rizzoli, 2000), outlines his design and technology philosophy.  John

MaedaÕs awards include the 1994 Japan Multimedia Grand Prix forÒThe Reactive Square,Ó the 1996 Tokyo Type Director
Õs Club GoldPrize for his series of 10 posters for Morisawa, the 1997 Tokyo Type
DirectorÕs Club Interactive Prize for Ò12 oÕclocks,Ó the 1999 Japan
Ministry of Culture Interactive Prize for Òone-line.com,Ó the 1999 ID
Magazine Gold Prize, the 1999 Milia dÕOr nomination, and the 1999New York Art DirectorÕs Club New Media Gold Award for ÒTap,Type, Write.Ó  He is also a 1999 recipient of the Daimler-Chrysler
Design Award.  He is an honorary member of the Tokyo Type Director
ÕsClub and is on the national board of directors of the American Insti-
tute of Graphic Arts.DAVID SALESIN is a professor in the Department of Computer
Science and Engineering at the University of Washington, where he
has been on the faculty since 1992, and a senior researcher at Microsoft
Research, where he has also worked since 1999.  He received his Sc.B.

from Brown University in 1983 and his Ph.D. from Stanford Univer-
sity in 1991.  From 1983 to 1987, he worked at Lucasfilm and Pixar,

where he contributed computer animation for the Academy Award-
winning short film Tin Toy and the feature-length film 
Young SherlockHolmes.  During his years at Stanford, he also worked as an intern at
the DEC Systems Research Center and Paris Research Lab.  In 1991-

1992, he spent a year on leave as a visiting assistant professor in the
Program of Computer Graphics at Cornell University.  He has con-

sulted at Sogitec Audiovisual, Aldus (now part of Adobe), Xerox
PARC, Broderbund, and Microsoft Research.  In 1996, he co-founded

two start-up companies, where he served as chief scientist: Inklination
and Numinous Technologies (acquired by Microsoft in 1999).  Salesin

received an NSF Young Investigator Award in 1993; an ONR Young
Investigator Award, an Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship, and anBeyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A243NSF Presidential Faculty Fellow Award in 1995; the University ofWashington Award for Outstanding Faculty Achievement in the Col-
lege of Engineering in 1996; the University of Washington Distin-
guished Teaching Award in 1997; the Carnegie Foundation for the
Advancement of Teaching and the Council for the Advancement and
Support of Education 1998-1999 Washington Professor of the Year
Award in 1998; and the ACM SIGGRAPH Computer Graphics Achieve-
ment Award in 2000.  Salesin
Õs research interests are in computergraphics and include non-photo realistic rendering, image-based ren-
dering, color reproduction, digital typography, and compositing.LILLIAN F. SCHWARTZ is best known for her pioneering work inthe use of computers for what has since become known as computer-
generated art and computer-aided art analysis, including graphics,
film, video, animation, special effects, virtual reality, and multimedia.
Her work was recognized for its aesthetic success and was the first in
this medium to be acquired by the Museum of Modern Art.  Her

contributions in starting a new field of endeavor in the arts, art analy-
sis, and the field of virtual reality have recently earned her
Computerworld Smithsonian Awards.  Schwartz began her computer

art career as an offshoot of her merger of art and technology, which
culminated in the selection of her kinetic sculpture, Proxima Centauri,
by the Museum of Modern Art for its epoch-making Ò1968 MachineExhibition.Ó  She then expanded her work into the computer area,
becoming a consultant at the AT&T Bell Laboratories, IBMÕs Thomas J.Watson Research Laboratory, and Lucent Technologies, Bell Labs In-
novations.  On her own, and with leading scientists, engineers, physi-
cists, and psychologists, she developed effective techniques for the use
of the computer in film and animation.  Besides establishing computer

art as a viable field of endeavor, Schwartz additionally contributed to
scientific research areas such as visual and color perception and sound.

Her own personal efforts have led to the use of the computer in the
philosophy of art, whereby databases containing information as to
palettes and structures of paintings, sculptures, and graphics by artists
such as Picasso and Matisse are used by Schwartz to analyze the
choices of those artists and to investigate the creative process itself.
Her contributions to electronic art analysis and restoration, specifi-
cally in Italian Renaissance painting and fresco, have been recognized.
SchwartzÕs work has been much in demand internationally both bymuseums and festivals.  Schwartz has always had close ties to the

academic community, having been a visiting member in the computer
science departments and psychology departments of several universi-
ties and colleges.  She has also been awarded numerous fellowships

and honors.  There are several books that include her work, the most

recent being The Web (2000), by Bridget Mintz Testa.  She has also
written, with Laurens Schwartz, The Computer ArtistÕs Handbook (1992).
For other publications, awards, lectures, collections, exhibitions, films,
and videos, see <http://www.lillian.com>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY244PHOEBE SENGERS is an assistant professor in the Computing and
Information Science Department and in Science and Technology Stud-
ies at Cornell University.  Her work synthesizes cultural studies and

computer science, by building new technology based on a cultural
critique of existing research practices and assumptions.  Results of this

work are evident in three areas: technical advances in artificial intelli-
gence, human-computer interaction, and media research; cultural
analyses of technical practices; and explorations of strategies for cross-
disciplinary synthesis between the two cultures of the humanities/
arts and the sciences/technology.  Sengers graduated in 1998 from

Carnegie Mellon University with a self-defined cross-disciplinary Ph.D.
in artificial intelligence and cultural theory.  In 1998-1999, she was a

Fulbright guest researcher at the Center for Art and Media Technol-
ogy (ZKM) in Karlsruhe, Germany.  From 1999 to 2001, she was a

research scientist in Media Arts Research Studies at the German Na-
tional Research Center for Information Technology (GMD).  In 1999,

Lingua Franca named her one of the top 20 researchers most likely to
change the way we think about technology.BARBARA STAFFORD is the William B. Ogden Distinguished Ser-vice Professor at the University of Chicago in the Department of Art
History.  Her special interests include the relationships of art, science,
and medicine in the early-modern period, and the history of perception,
visualization, and the intellectual and cultural development of body
imagery.  She also works on contemporary media and visualization

technologies.  Her focus is on the intersections between the arts and

sciences in the early-modern and modern periods.  She writes contem-

porary art criticism and serves as a visiting critic.  Professor Stafford is

continuing her work on analogy and neurobiology and presented an
exhibition on visionary technologies at the Getty Museum, Los Ange-
les, from November 2000 through February 2001.  Stafford has written

several books, including Visual Analogy: Consciousness as the Art ofConnecting (MIT Press, 1999), Good Looking (1996), and Essays on the
Virtue of Images (1996).  She has also written several articles, includingÒA Range of Critical Perspectives: Digital Imagery and the Practices ofArt History,Ó Arts Education Policy Review (July-August 1998), and 
ÒToCollage or E-Collage?Ó Harvard Design Magazine (Fall 1998).  Stafford
has also delivered several lectures, her most recent being ÒOld Mind/New Mind: The Role of Images in the Consciousness DebatesÓ (Won-
der Conference, Santa Barbara, March 2000).  In May 1998 she spoke

on computers and writing at the University of Florida, Gainesville,
and in April 1998 she was a speaker in the Jurassic Technology series
at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago.  Stafford received her

Ph.D. in art history from the University of Chicago, as well as an M.A.
in art history and a B.A. in philosophy and comparative literature
from Northwestern University.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A245StaffALAN S. INOUYE is the study director for the Committee on Infor-
mation Technology and Creativity, which created Beyond Productivity:Information Technology, Innovation, and Creativity, and is a senior pro-
gram officer at the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
(CSTB).  Inouye has a wide range of interests at the intersection of the

social sciences (especially sociology, economics, political science, and
organization theory) and information technology.  His current projects

include congressionally mandated studies on Internet navigation and
the Domain Name System and improving cybersecurity research in
the United States.  His recently completed CSTB studies include 
LC21:A Digital Strategy for the Library of Congress (2001), 
The Digital Dilemma:Intellectual Property in the Information Age (2000), and Trust in Cyberspace(1999).  Prior to joining CSTB, Inouye completed a Ph.D. from the

School of Information Management and Systems at the University of
California at Berkeley.  In a previous life, Inouye worked in Silicon

Valley, as a programmer (Atari Corporation), statistician and pro-
grammer/analyst (Verbatim Corporation), and manager of informa-
tion systems (Amdahl Corporation).  Inouye also completed other

degreesÑin information systems (M.S.), systems management (M.S.),business administration/finance (M.B.A.), liberal studies (B.S.), and
mathematics (B.A.).MARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL is the executive director of the Com-
puter Science and Telecommunications BoardÑa 20-member Board ofleaders from industry and academiaÑand its many expert projectcommittees and staff.  She designs, develops, directs, and oversees

collaborative study projects, workshops, and symposia on technical,
strategic, and policy issues in computing and telecommunications.
These activities address trends in the relevant science and technology,
their uses, and economic and social impacts, providing independent
and authoritative analysis and/or a neutral meeting ground for senior
people in government, industry, and academia.  Marjory is the princi-
pal author and/or substantive editor of numerous reports and articles.
The majority of her work has been cross-disciplinary.  Before joining

CSTB, Marjory was a manager of Competitive Analysis and Planning
for GE Information Services.  There she directed an analytical team

supporting business development, product marketing, and field sales
and developed business alliances for domestic and international net-
work services.  Previously, she was a project director at the former U.S.

Congress Office of Technology Assessment, evaluating computer and
communications technology trends and their social and economic
impacts.  There, among other things, she produced an internationally

acclaimed study of computers in manufacturing and their implica-
tions for industries and employment.  She is a member of the Santa Fe

Institute Science Board, the Advisory Board of the Pew Internet &
American Life Project, the TPRC Board of Directors, the editorial
board of ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, and the ACM, AEA,Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY246and IEEE.  In 1998 Marjory was a visiting scientist at the Massachu-
setts Institute of Technology, Laboratory for Computer Science.  At

MIT she developed and taught a course on public policy for computer
science graduate students and pursued personal research interests.
Marjory did her undergraduate work at Brown University and her
graduate work (as an NSF Graduate Fellow) at Harvard University.MARGARET MARSH HUYNH, senior project assistant, joined theComputer Science and Telecommunications Board in January 1999
and has worked on several projects.  Currently, she is working on the

projects on Internet navigation and the Domain Name System and the
future of supercomputing.  Ms. Huynh also assists with CSTB Board

meetings and has worked on such recent projects as ÒExploring Infor-mation Technology Issues for the Behavioral and Social Sciences,Ó as
well as those leading to the reports IT Roadmap to a Geospatial Future(2003), Building a Workforce for the Information Economy (2001), and 
TheDigital Dilemma: Intellectual Property in the Information Age (2000).
Ms.Huynh assists on other projects as needed.  Prior to coming to the

National Academies, Ms. Huynh worked as a meeting assistant at
Management for Meetings for 4 months and as a meeting assistant at
the American Society for Civil Engineers from September 1996 to
April 1998.  Ms. Huynh has a B.A. (1990) in liberal studies, with minors

in sociology and psychology, from Salisbury State University, Salisbury,

Maryland.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.247AUGUST 14-15, 2000NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL
WASHINGTON, D.C.
Steve Dietz, Walker Art CenterJon Ippolito, Guggenheim Museum
Joan Shigekawa, Rockefeller Foundation
Bruce Sterling, WriterNOVEMBER 8-9, 2000AMERICAN INSTITUTEOF GRAPHIC ARTS

NEW YORK CITYZoe Beloff, ArtistKathy Brew, Thundergulch
Timothy Druckrey, Curator, Critic, and Writer
Robert Gehorsam, CBS/Viacom
Richard Gref”, American Institute of Graphic ArtsMark Hansen, Bell Laboratories, Lucent Technologies
Perry Hoberman, Artist
Jaron Lanier, Advanced Network & Services Inc.
Daniel Lee, Bell Labs
Paul Miller (aka DJ Spooky), Music and Art Management Inc.
Warren Neidich, Artist
Daniel Oppenheim, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
Anne Pasternak, Creative TimeBeyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BEYOND PRODUCTIVITY248Marah Rosenberg, Avaya LabsJakub Segen, Bell Laboratories, Lucent Technologies
Mark Tribe, Rhizome.orgNOVEMBER 8, 2000NEW YORK UNIVERSITY
CENTER FOR ADVANCED
TECHNOLOGYNEW YORK CITY
SITE VISITJohn Johnson, Eyebeam AtelierCaroline Jones, Boston University
Neil Sieling, Media Arts Curator and Television Producer
Noah Wardrip-Fruin, New York UniversityJANUARY 11-13, 2001
STANFORD UNIVERSITY

PALO ALTO, CALIFORNIA
Chris Chafe, Stanford UniversityRichard Gold,1 Xerox PARCKen Goldberg, University of California at Berkeley
Kris Halvorsen, Hewlett Packard Laboratories
Barbara Hayes-Roth, Stanford University
Tim Lenoir, Stanford University and Extempo
George Lewis, University of California at San Diego
Michael Mateas, Georgia Institute of Technology
Robert Morris, IBM Almaden Research Center
Stuart Parkin, IBM Almaden Research Center
Arati Prabhakar, U.S. Venture Partners
Rick Prelinger, Prelinger Archives & Internet Moving Images Archive
Hal Varian, University of California at Berkeley
Gio Wiederhold, Stanford University1Rich Gold (Richard Goldstein) of Menlo Park died in his sleep on January 9, 2003.Born on June 24, 1950, he received a B.A. from SUNY-Albany and an M.F.A. from MillsCollege.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B249JANUARY 12, 2001
PIXAR ANIMATION STUDIOS

EMERYVILLE, CALIFORNIA
SITE VISITGreg Brandeau, Pixar Animation StudiosSharon Calahan, Pixar Animation Studios
Ed Catmull, Pixar Animation Studios
Rikki Cleland-Hura, Pixar Animation Studios
Tony DeRose, Pixar Animation Studios
Oren Jacob, Pixar Animation Studios
Randy Nelson, Pixar Animation Studios
Bill Reeves, Pixar Animation Studios
Tasha Wedeen, Pixar Animation StudiosMAY 30-31, 2001
MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OFTECHNOLOGYMEDIA LABORATORY

CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTSBruce Blumberg, Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyJohn Guttag, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Hiroshi Ishii, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
John Maeda, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Rehmi Post, Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyJULY 29-30, 2002
DANIEL LANGLOIS FOUNDATION

THE CENTRE FOR RESEARCH ANDDOCUMENTATION
MONTREAL, QUEBEC, CANADA
SITE VISITAlain Depocas, Daniel Langlois FoundationBeyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.251THE COMPUTER SCIENCE ANDTELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARD
As a part of the National Research Council, the Computer Science and TelecommunicationsBoard (CSTB) was established in 1986 to provide independent advice to the federal government
on technical and public policy issues relating to computing and communications.  Composed of

leaders from industry and academia, CSTB conducts studies of critical national issues and
makes recommendations to government, industry, and academia.  CSTB also provides a

neutral meeting ground for consideration of complex issues where resolution and action may
be premature.  It convenes discussions that bring together principals from the public and

private sectors, assuring consideration of key perspectives.  The majority of CSTB
Õs work isrequested by federal agencies and Congress, consistent with its National Academies context.A pioneer in framing and analyzing Internet policy issues, CSTB is unique in its compre-hensive scope and effective, cross-disciplinary appraisal of technical, economic, social, and
policy issues.  Beginning with early work in computer and communications security, cyber-

assurance and information systems trustworthiness have been a cross-cutting theme in CSTBÕswork.  CSTB has produced several reports known as classics in the field, and it continues to

address these topics as they grow in importance.To do its work, CSTB draws on some of the best minds in the country and from around theworld, inviting experts to participate in its projects as a public service.  Studies are conducted

by balanced committees without direct financial interests in the topics they are addressing.
Those committees meet, confer electronically, and build analyses through their deliberations.
Additional expertise is tapped in a rigorous process of review and critique, further enhancing
the quality of CSTB reports.  By engaging groups of principals, CSTB gets the facts and insights

critical to assessing key issues.The mission of CSTB is to¥Respond to requests from the government, nonprofit organizations, and private industryfor advice on computer and telecommunications issues and from the government for advice on
computer and telecommunications systems planning, utilization and modernization;¥Monitor and promote the health of the fields of computer science and telecommunications,
with attention to issues of human resources, information infrastructure, and societal impacts;¥Initiate and conduct studies involving computer science, technology, and telecommunica-tions as critical resources; and¥Foster interaction among the disciplines underlying computing and telecommunications
technologies and other fields, at large and within the National Academies.CSTB projects address a diverse range of topics affected by the evolution of informationtechnology.  A sample of CSTB
Õs completed reports includes Cybersecurity Today and Tomorrow:Pay Now or Pay Later; Youth, Pornography, and the Internet; Broadband: Bringing Home the Bits; TheDigital Dilemma: Intellectual Property in the Information Age; IDsÑNot That Easy: Questions AboutNationwide Identity Systems; The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11; andIT Roadmap to a Geospatial Future.  For further information about CSTB reports and active
projects, see <http://www.cstb.org>.Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and CreativityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.