DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/10707Building an Electronic Records Archive at the NationalArchives and Records Administration: Recommendations forInitial Development96 pages | 8.5 x 11 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-08947-0 | DOI 10.17226/10707Robert F. Sproull and Jon Eisenberg, Editors; Committee on Digital Archiving andthe National Archives and Records Administration; Computer Science andTelecommunications Board; Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences;National Research CouncilBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSi









ˇ
˝˛

'

Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS   500 Fifth Street, N.W.   Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the NationalResearch Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the NationalAcademy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible for the report
were chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.Support for this project was provided by the National Archives and Records Administration under Contract No.NAMA-02-C-0012.  Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the organizations that provided support for theproject.International Standard Book Number 0-309-08947-6 (Book)International Standard Book Number 0-309-51729-X (PDF)Copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 500 Fifth Street, N.W., Lockbox 285, Wash-ington, DC 20055. Telephone (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313 in the Washington metropolitan area.  Internet, http://www.nap.edu.Copyright 2003 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Printed in the United States of AmericaBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of distinguished scholars
engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their
use for the general welfare.  Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy
has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters.  Dr. Bruce M.
Alberts is president of the National Academy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the National Academy of
Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers.  It is autonomous in its administration and in the

selection of its members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federalgovernment.  The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting na-
tional needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers.  Dr. Wm.

A. Wulf is president of the National Academy of Engineering.The Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences to secure the services of
eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of thepublic.  The Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congressional
charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care,
research, and education.  Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad
community of science and technology with the AcademyÕs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising thefederal government.  Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the Council has
become the principal operating agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of
Engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities.The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts and
Dr. Wm. A. Wulf are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.www.national-academies.orgBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ivCOMMITTEE ON DIGITAL ARCHIVING AND THE NATIONAL ARCHIVES ANDRECORDS ADMINISTRATIONROBERT F. SPROULL, Sun Microsystems, ChairHOWARD BESSER, University of California, Los AngelesJAMIE CALLAN, Carnegie Mellon UniversityCHARLES DOLLAR, Dollar Consulting
STUART HABER, Hewlett-Packard LaboratoriesMARGARET HEDSTROM, University of MichiganMARK KORNBLUH, Michigan State University
RAYMOND LORIE, IBM Almaden Research CenterCLIFFORD LYNCH, Coalition for Networked InformationJEROME H. SALTZER, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
MARGO SELTZER, Harvard UniversityROBERT WILENSKY, University of California, BerkeleyStaffJON EISENBERG, Study Director and Senior Program OfficerSTEVEN WOO, Program OfficerDAVID PADGHAM, Research AssociateJENNIFER M. BISHOP, Senior Project AssistantBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARDDAVID D. CLARK, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, ChairERIC BENHAMOU, 3Com Corporation
DAVID BORTH, Motorola LabsJOHN M. CIOFFI, Stanford UniversityELAINE COHEN, University of Utah
W. BRUCE CROFT, University of Massachusetts at AmherstTHOMAS E. DARCIE, University of VictoriaJOSEPH FARRELL, University of California at Berkeley
JOAN FEIGENBAUM, Yale UniversityHECTOR GARCIA MOLINA, Stanford UniversityWENDY KELLOGG, IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center
BUTLER W. LAMPSON, Microsoft CorporationDAVID LIDDLE, U.S. Venture PartnersTOM M. MITCHELL, Carnegie Mellon University
DAVID A. PATTERSON, University of California at BerkeleyHENRY (HANK) PERRITT, Chicago-Kent College of LawDANIEL PIKE, GCI Cable and Entertainment
ERIC SCHMIDT, Google, Inc.FRED SCHNEIDER, Cornell UniversityBURTON SMITH, Cray Inc.
LEE SPROULL, New York UniversityWILLIAM STEAD, Vanderbilt UniversityJEANNETTE M. WING, Carnegie Mellon UniversityMARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL, DirectorKRISTEN BATCH, Research Associate
JENNIFER M. BISHOP, Senior Project AssistantJANET BRISCOE, Administrative OfficerDAVID DRAKE, Senior Project Assistant
JON EISENBERG, Senior Program OfficerRENEE HAWKINS, Financial AssociatePHIL HILLIARD, Research Associate
MARGARET MARSH HUYNH, Senior Project AssistantALAN S. INOUYE, Senior Program OfficerHERBERT S. LIN, Senior Scientist
LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Program OfficerDAVID PADGHAM, Research AssociateCYNTHIA A. PATTERSON, Program Officer
JANICE SABUDA, Senior Project AssistantBRANDYE WILLIAMS, Staff AssistantSTEVEN WOO, Dissemination OfficerFor more information on CSTB, see its Web site at <http://www.cstb.org>, write to CSTB,National Research Council, 500 Fifth Street, N.W., Washington, DC 20001, call at (202) 334-
2605, or e-mail the CSTB at cstb@nas.edu.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiPreface
Like its constituent agencies and other organizations, the federal government generatesand increasingly saves a large and growing fraction of its records in electronic form.  Recog-
nizing the greater and greater importance of these electronic records for its mission of preserv-ing Òessential evidence,Ó  the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)
launched a major new initiative, the Electronic Records Archives (ERA).  NARA plans to
commence the initial procurement for a production-quality ERA in 2003 and has started aprocess of defining the desired capabilities and requirements for the system.As part of its preparations for an initial ERA procurement, NARA asked the NationalAcademiesÕ Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB) to provide indepen-
dent technical advice on the design of an electronic records archive, including an assessment
of how work sponsored by NARA at the San Diego Supercomputer Center (SDSC) helpsinform the ERA design and what key issues should be considered in ERAÕs design andoperation.CSTBÕs Committee on Digital Archiving and the National Archives and Records Adminis-tration has been tasked with preparing two reports.  This first of the two reports is intended to
provide quick, preliminary feedback to NARA on lessons it should take from the SDSC work
and to identify key ERA design issues that should be addressed as the ERA procurementprocess proceeds in 2003.  The committee
Õs second report, anticipated in late 2003, will providelonger-term strategic recommendations to NARA on how to meet its electronic records
archiving challenges.In order to provide feedback as soon as possible, this report has been developed on a verytight time line.  In preparing it, the committee received briefings from NARA staff and a

number of other experts in archiving and related technologies.  It conducted two site visits to
supplement information received in the briefings: Members of the committee participated inBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.visits to SDSC in San Diego and to NARAÕs College Park, Maryland, facility.  The committee
Õssecond report will provide longer-term strategic recommendations to NARA on how to meetits electronic records archiving challenges. A number of topics in the committeeÕs charter, suchas advice on NARAÕs research program, are deferred to the second report.viiiPREFACEBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ixAcknowledgment of ReviewersThis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their diverse per-spectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the NationalResearch CouncilÕs Report Review Committee.  The purpose of this independent review is to
provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its published
report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards forobjectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. The review comments and draftmanuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. We wish to
thank the following individuals for their review of this report:William Y. Arms, Cornell University,Eric W. Brown, IBM Research,Paul Conway, Duke University,James Gray, Microsoft Bay Area Research Center,
Gary King, Harvard University,Butler W. Lampson, Microsoft Corporation,Michael E. Lesk, Internet Archive,
Peter G. Neumann, SRI International,Jeff Rothenberg, RAND,William Scherlis, Carnegie Mellon University, and
Jeffrey D. Ullman, Stanford University (emeritus)Although the reviewers listed above provided many constructive comments and sugges-tions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recommendations, nor did they seethe final draft of the report before its release.  The review of this report was overseen by Robert
Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.J. Spinrad, Xerox Corporation (retired).  Appointed by the National Research Council, he wasresponsible for making certain that an independent examination of this report was carried outin accordance with institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefullyconsidered.  Responsibility for the final content of this report rests entirely with the authoring

committee and the institution.xACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERSBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiContentsSUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS1
1INTRODUCTION13
2COMMONALITIES BETWEEN REQUIREMENTS FOR THE ERA AND15
REQUIREMENTS FOR OTHER ACTIVITIES3SPECIFIC LESSONS TO BE LEARNED FROM THE SDSC19
DEMONSTRATION PROJECTSLessons from the SDSC Project That May Be Helpful in Designing the ERA, 20
Aspects of the SDSC Project That Might Not Apply to the NARA System, 22Areas Where the SDSC Project Experience Should Not Be Used in Designingthe NARA System, 234DESIGNING AND ENGINEERING THE ERA24
An Engineering Approach, 24
Data and Estimates to Support the Definition of Initial Requirements, 25Pragmatic Engineering Decisions, 26Supporting Future Archivists and Researchers, 29
Pragmatic Steps to Facilitate Future Access to Records, 30Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiCONTENTS5KEY TECHNICAL ISSUES35
Data Model, 35Storage, 42Ingest, 46
Access, 49Security and Access Control, 53Integrity of Records, 566STRENGTHENING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY EXPERTISE58
Expertise to Design and Evolve the ERA, 58
Expertise to Operate the ERA, 607STRATEGY FOR EVOLUTION AND ACQUISITION62
Strategy for Evolution, 62Iterative (Spiral) Development, 67Pilots: Starting Small and Gaining Experience, 68APPENDIXESABACKGROUND ON NARA AND THE ERA PROGRAM73
BCONCLUSIONS FROM THE GENERAL ACCOUNTING OFFICE REPORT80
INFORMATION MANAGEMENT: CHALLENGES IN MANAGING ANDPRESERVING ELECTRONIC RECORDSCBRIEFERS TO THE STUDY COMMITTEE81
WHAT IS CSTB?83Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS11Summary and RecommendationsAs in other sectors of society, much of the businessÑand thus record keepingÑof thefederal government depends on digital information.  Documents are created, transmitted, and
stored electronically.  E-mail has become an importantÑand often primaryÑcommunications
technology.  And many records exist only in electronic form, stored in databases and other

computer systems.  Some of these records will, in time, be transferred to the custody of the
National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) for long-term preservation.NARAÕs current systems for archival preservation of electronic records are limited incapability and ad hoc in nature.  Recognizing the growing importance of electronic records toits mission of preserving Òessential evidence,Ó1 NARA launched the Electronic Records Ar-
chives (ERA) initiative.  It sponsored work through this program at the San Diego Super-

computer Center (SDSC), which resulted in a series of archival preservation demonstrations.Building on this experience and that of other institutions studying digital preservation,NARAÕs new ERA Program Office plans to begin initial procurement for a production ERA in
2003.  As of this writing, NARA has hired a contractor to assist with the ERA program and has
started to define desired capabilities and requirements for the system, including a visionstatement and concept of operations for the ERA.THE IMPORTANCE OF THE ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVES PROGRAM(CHAPTER 1)Finding 1.  As NARA recognizes, it is critical to start developing new electronic records
preservation capabilities quickly in order to continue to fulfill NARAÕs mandate to pre-
serve federal records.1National Archives and Records Administration (NARA).  2000.  
Ready Access to Essential Evidence: The StrategicPlan of the United States National Archives and Records Administration 1997-2002 (revised 2002). Government PrintingOffice, Washington, D.C.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARAWith the rapid increase in federal records in digital formÑand with many records borndigital or existing only in digital formÑit is clear that solutions must be found for preservingthese records in order for NARA to continue to fulfill its mandate.  NARA has determined and
the committee concurs that new capabilities for electronic record archiving are needed for
NARA to perform its mission to preserve and provide access to federal records of enduringvalue.The overall challenge facing NARA is substantial.  The volume and diversity of digital
records that will be eligible for transfer from the custody of federal agencies to NARA isprojected to be very large.  Indeed, it is reasonable to anticipate that in the not-too-distant
future, the number of digital records is likely to exceed the number of records originating in
paper form.  NARA
Õs current systems for electronic records, designed primarily to supportpreservation of relational databases and similar highly structured records, cannot meet thesedemands.The backlog of electronic records presents additional challenges.  Under the paper-based
model, NARA receives records from a few years to many decades after they were are created.The transfer of electronic records to NARA has for the most part proceeded in similar fashion.
Thus when the ERA system becomes operational, NARA will face a large backlog of electronicrecords that were created over the past few decades, many of which may pose challengingpreservation problems owing to their age (media deterioration, loss of documentation and
other metadata, and obsolescence of data types).  For records yet to be created, there may be
ways to avoid the technology obsolescence problem by restructuring records acquisition pro-cesses to obtain records closer to the time they are created.  (Discussion of this opportunity and

related process issues is deferred to the committeeÕs second report.)If NARA fails to design and implement an electronic records archiving program that iscapable of handling the projected volume and diversity of electronic records, important records
are likely to be lost for the reasons discussed above.  Likewise, significant delays in the ERA
program would put records at greater risk of loss.  The consequence of either failure to
institute a program or a significant delay in doing so would be the possibleÑindeed evenlikelyÑloss of an important part of the nationÕs history.Finding 2.   ERA systems can and should be built, but it is a challenging, leading-edge
engineering undertaking, not a routine procurement.Although no one has yet designed, built, or managed a production digital archives systemon the scale that NARA envisions, the ERA program can be launched in a technically soundway.  No off-the-shelf overall solution is available, but there are demonstrated solutions to

many of the important system components the ERA will need, making it possible to startbuilding ERA capabilities today.  The projected scale and complexity of the ERA program
mean that the task of designing, engineering, and evolving the system is a formidable chal-
lenge.Recommendation 1.  The ERA should comprise a series of interrelated systems that evolve
over time to fulfill NARAÕs digital preservation needs.The scope of the ERA in terms of time and function demands that the digital archives bethought of as a set of systems that evolve over time.  Digital materials (records and associated
metadata) will need to be preserved for a very long timeÑlonger than the lifetime of anyBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS3physical device or software component that is part of the ERA.  This means that hardware and
software will have to be replaced or modernized many times without disrupting the archive.Because requirements for NARAÕs digital archives will change over time, the ERA systemsmust be designed to evolve gracefully.  For example, new data types (or 
Òfile formatsÓ2) willemerge and require modifications to parts of the system.  Likewise, storage and other imple-
mentation technologies will evolve, necessitating the replacement or upgrading of parts ofsystems without disrupting the operation of the ERA as a whole.  The volume of records to be

stored will continue to increase, requiring a strategy for graceful scaling of storage and pro-cessing.  New options for preservation will probably emerge and be incorporated into the
ERA.  User demands will also change over time, requiring modifications in the ways that

records are located and accessed by users.COMMONALITIES WITH OTHER DIGITAL PRESERVATION ACTIVITIES(CHAPTER 2)Finding 3.  The requirements of NARA
Õs ERA program have much in common with those ofother digital preservation systems.Although NARAÕs statutory mandate to preserve federal records is unique, many organi-zations need to preserve digital objects and are taking steps to design and implement systems
that address this need.  They are developing architectures, techniques, experiments, pilot
systems, and expertise relating to digital preservation.  NARA has embraced some of these
developments, such as the Open Archival Information System (OAIS) reference model for
characterizing archival systems in terms of their ingest, storage, and access functions,3 and is
aware of activities in organizations such as the Library of Congress, the National Aeronauticsand Space Administration (NASA), and the Online Computer Library Center (OCLC).The technology to address the ERA largely overlaps the technology required to build otherdigital repositories.  For example, NARA and others require robust long-term storage of bits,
accommodation for many different data types, metadata standards and processing techniques,
and flexible searching and access provisions.  Many systems require a high degree of scalability
and the ability to evolve their architecture and implementation.  And a number of organiza-
tions, government agencies, and businesses also face the challenge of long-term preservation
of large volumes of data.  As it examines commonalities with others working on digital
preservation, NARA should evaluate what is already available as commercial software.There are a few areas where NARA faces requirements that are more stringent than thosetypical of other digital repositories.  NARA
Õs mandate to guarantee record authenticity isstronger than that of some but not all organizations.  NARA must also be ready to preserve
materials of very diverse types, even if they were created by obsolete systems or saved on2ÒData typesÓ is a more general term than 
Òfile formats,Ó though the latter may be more familiar.
3Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS).  2002.  
Reference Model for an Open Archival Informa-tion System (OAIS), CCSDS 650.0-B-1 (Blue Book).  CCSDS Secretariat, National Aeronautics and Space Adminis-
tration, Washington, D.C.  January.  Available online at <http://wwwclassic.ccsds.org/documents/pdf/CCSDS-

650.0-B-1.pdf>.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARAobsolete storage media; by contrast, many digital libraries can simplify their challenge byaccommodating only a limited set of contemporaneous or common data types.  Indeed, the
ERA will have to be capable of ingesting the full variety of data types used to create permanentrecords across the federal government, which will roughly correspond to the full variety of
data types in use more broadly.  Also, NARA must sometimes redact classified or restricted
documents in order to produce versions that can be released to the public.  While these and
other requirements may be special to NARAÕs electronic preservation systems, the list ofspecial requirements is modest compared with the list of requirements that the ERA shareswith other digital preservation systems.Recommendation 2.  NARA should emphasize the ERA program
Õs commonality with otherdigital preservation systems and engage with other programs and organizations whereverpossible.NARA would benefit from increased coordination with other federal entities (such as theLibrary of Congress or NASA), other institutions (such as OCLC, university libraries, archivingprojects, and foreign national libraries and archives), and businesses that share common inter-ests in digital preservation.  Enhanced coordination should extend at least to increased infor-

mation sharing as the various institutions move forward with digital repositories.  It might
extend to such activities as joint work on standards or best practices.  However, the committee
is not recommending coordinated or joint procurements, which could significantly complicate
or delay the ERA program.It is not enough to be aware of efforts by other institutions; NARA must engage them bybecoming an active participant. Engagement means not only that NARA will have better
access to the expertise and artifacts that these efforts develop but also that it can influence theresearch, development, and deployment agendas of these groups when it is appropriate andhelp build a larger community addressing engineering issues related to digital preservation.NARAÕs long-term objective should be to increase the commonalities between its preser-vation systems and those of other digital repositories such as libraries, because this will (1)make it possible to share software and metadata standards with other institutions, (2) help
stimulate the development of commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) components by increasing thesize of the market for these components, and (3) help grow the cadre of professionals trainedin digital preservation and build ties that would help NARA recruit them to work on the ERA
program.LESSONS LEARNED FROM THE SDSC DEMONSTRATIONS(CHAPTER 3)Finding 4.  Demonstrations conducted at the San Diego Supercomputer Center (SDSC) for
NARA have provided a useful opportunity for NARA to explore relevant technologies.However, the work has not informed many significant aspects of the ERA design, has notreduced the engineering risk of the program, and has not enhanced NARAÕs operationalcapabilities for running ERA systems.The SDSC proof-of-concept demonstration projects have provided NARA with the oppor-tunity to interact with the information technology (IT) community and to explore approaches
for a production digital archiving system.  The SDSC projects have demonstrated options for
Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS5parts of a production digital archiving system, but NARA should not interpret these projectsas solutions to digital archiving issues, as a substitute for gaining experience with operationalpilots, or as a source of components of a production system.  The areas where the SDSC workfalls short of what would be accomplished through operational pilots include the following:¥Scale.  
The quantity of records tested in the SDSC demonstrations is small comparedwith the quantity of records that NARA anticipates ingesting.¥Complexity
.  The demonstrations addressed only a few relatively simple record types
(such as e-mail and Senate legislative records), so the experience is not easily transferable tomore complex problems.¥Attention to trustworthiness issues.  
For example, the SDSC work did not address  require-
ments related to redundancy, integrity checks, or access controls.¥Attention to operational matters.  
The SDSC work should be understood as a demonstra-tion of technology rather than as a prototype of an operational system or an operational pilot.The SDSC demonstrations shed little light on the operational issues, such as the work flowassociated with ingesting high volumes of varied records, that NARA will need to address in
order to run ERA systems.  Nor does this exploratory work substitute for having NARA staff
work with a system in a production environment; users of SDSCÕs scientific data managementsystems, unlike the potential users of the ERA, are generally very savvy about technical mat-
ters and can turn to a highly proficient support staff.Finally, the SDSC work emphasized a particular strategy for digital preservation:  migrat-ing records to XML-based formats.  Although XML has important applications in archiving,
the use of an XML document format does not solve the problem of format obsolescence, and itwould be inappropriate to rely on a migration strategy alone for long-term preservation (see
Recommendation 4 below).  In addition, some aspects of the SDSC demonstrations were
research work that attempted to express semantic constraints within records.  This is a worth-
while long-term goal that may have some utility as a technique for ingesting or preserving
certain types of records.  However, this particular demonstration of 
Òlifting knowledgeÓ from
a document is not persuasive; the technology is far from ready for inclusion in a productionsystem.ENGINEERING THE ERA(CHAPTERS 4 AND 5)Finding 5.   The broad principles and expectations that NARA has established thus far for
the ERA are an insufficient basis for proceeding with its design, procurement, and opera-
tion.NARA has thus far expressed the requirements and objectives for the ERA in very high-level terms.  Some of these objectives stem directly from its statutory mandate, e.g., Òpreserveand provide access to any kind of electronic record.Ó4  It has also embraced the OAIS reference
model to describe the high-level structure of the system.4The basic goals of NARA and the ERA program, as expressed in NARA documents, are presented in AppendixA of this report.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARAMore preliminary work is required in setting expectations for the system and estimatingits size and scope before NARA can start procuring a workable production system.  This
includes (1) characterizing the electronic records that the ERA should be expected to ingest inthe near term and (2) making pragmatic engineering decisions and defining realistic require-
ments and priorities.  Only by jointly considering archival and technical concerns can NARA
chart a course to meet its preservation mandate with achievable IT systems.Recommendation 3.  Before proceeding with design and procurement of the ERA, NARA
should gather more data about the electronic records that it expects to preserve in the nearfuture.To formulate some of the quantitative and qualitative requirements of the ERA, NARAneeds more information about the population of government records that it will hold andprojections about how the records will be used.  To guide the engineering of the ERA, and
especially of its early versions, NARA should obtain or estimate these data now.  None of

these attributes will remain unchanged over the life of the system, but it is nonetheless impor-tant to develop the system based on these initial requirements.When data are not available or are impractical to obtain, estimates should be prepared,justified, and made explicit; otherwise, a system design will reflect implicit estimates, whichmay be dangerously wrong.  Importantly, the intent of this recommendation is not that the
ERA program should be significantly delayed to conduct detailed surveys; only rough esti-
mates are needed, and order-of-magnitude estimates will suffice in most cases.Examples of the required data include these:¥Characterization of the population of digital records that will need to be preserved.  How manygovernment records, using what data types, will require preservation?  How many records
does NARA expect to receive in each future year?  As remarked below, the ERA will need to

prioritize handling of records based on archival and technical considerations.  Both current
data and forward estimates are required in order to make these decisions.¥Estimates of size and scaling trajectory.  How much data will be stored in the ERA, and how
will it grow over time?  These estimates, which are needed to inform the technical structure of
the system, may follow directly from estimates of the record population but may also begoverned by the overall project plan, ingest rates, and other considerations.¥Mechanisms for delivering records to NARA.  While today
Õs and future records can bedelivered to NARA using secure networking techniques, records generated over the past 30years or less may reside outside network-connected systems on media that are rapidly becom-
ing obsolete. How many records are stored on which media?¥Estimates of access rates.  Since the ERA does not yet exist, access rates can only be
estimated, perhaps based on experience with digital libraries (which might provide a better
indication of user interest in online collections than would data on access to NARAÕs non-electronic records).  The system will certainly need to be designed to increase access perfor-
mance as demand increases, but even an initial system will require some estimate of access
rates.¥Budget estimates.  The quantitative estimates lead to estimates of costs for developing,
procuring, and operating the ERA and are critical to making informed design decisions and
investment trade-offs.  If, for example, it turns out that the originally planned scope of the ERA
would be unaffordable, criteria for preservation scheduling may have to be adjusted.  Many
Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS7design decisions concerning ingest processes and the amount of automation required for themwill be driven by the cost of ingesting records of different types.  The committee could not find
much basis to support estimates for the cost of the ERA, nor could it determine whethercurrent ERA plans are consistent with budgetary constraints.Recommendation 4.  NARA should address key design issues before commencing imple-
mentation and apply a pragmatic engineering approach to the ERAÕs development andevolution.Although it may be tempting to speak in absolutes (e.g., Òevery important record will bepreserved foreverÓ) when designing a system, engineering practice recognizes that there areobjectives that are subject to constraints.  Engineering the ERA will require specifying the

objectives and constraints of such a system.This report describes and the section below summarizes some of the important designissues that need to be addressed and provides some advice on how to think about them.  In

some cases, the committeeÕs preliminary analysis led to design suggestions, but this is nosubstitute for comprehensive analysis by NARA.  Key engineering tasks include these:
1.Prioritize the functions of the ERA and focus initial design on capabilities that permit rapiddeployment of operational pilots. NARAÕs most basic requirement is to save bits for a hundredyears or more.  To achieve this requires a combination of careful technical and operational

design based on extensive industry experience with robust storage systems of shorter life.Examples of measures to meet this goal are (1) redundant storage of bits at separate physicalsites to survive physical destruction, (2) copying bits to new physical storage devices as exist-
ing devices age, (3) using storage systems with nonproprietary interfaces to prevent lock-in byany specific vendor, (4) careful system design and operation to guard against human error thatmight delete vital bits, and (5) diverse system implementations to guard against software
errors that could lose data.One way to gain experience is to build an effective bit storage capability that supports pilotprograms to begin preserving records in the short term and that provides a critical foundation
for future systems with broader capabilities.Some basic ingest (i.e., intake of records and associated metadata) and access mechanismsare required in early ERA versions, but other functions that are less important can be deferred
for later implementation, as long as the initial architecture, design concept, and implementa-tion strategy are sufficiently flexible and evolvable and sufficient attention has been devotedto overall robustness,  survivability, maintainability, and compatibility with critical long-term

requirements.2.Design for common cases. Given resource limitations, it is not reasonable to expect asystem to preserve and provide equally good support for all records.  A relatively small
number of data types will likely support the majority of records that federal agencies arecreating.  It is also advisable that early system builds concentrate on a relatively small number

of types.  It will be necessary, therefore, to make some choices about what quality of service to
provide for different types of record.  To decide on the service level accorded each class of
record, NARA will need to assess both technical and archival aspects of records.  For some

lower-priority formats, ERA support should, at least initially, be limited to capturing, storing,and providing access to the original bits and essential metadata.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARA3.Take pragmatic steps now to facilitate future access to records.  NARA does not have toanticipateÑor invest inÑall the higher-level services that future users might want.  Indeed,
future archivists and researchers will be skilled in computing and thus will be more able tomanipulate and interpret digital records.  Also, many institutions, including NARA, share an

interest in building an infrastructure of tools that support conversion, migration, and emula-tion; these will be available to NARA and its users.The ERA should be designed so that certain fundamental information about a record issaved to enable future access.  This pragmatic strategy includes the following elements:
¥Be neutral with respect to migration, emulation, or other approaches.  None of todayÕs ap-proachesÑsuch as migration or emulationÑfor dealing with data type obsolescence havebeen perfected, nor has one emerged as accepted archival practice.  Today, one should rely
foremost on saving the original bitsÑeven if one is unable to decode or render those bits whenthe records are ingestedÑtogether with additional information that facilitates their interpreta-tion (preferred derived forms and essential metadata; see below).  The viability of whatever
strategies are used in the future will depend on the availability of the original bits.¥Save records in Òpreferred derived formsÓ in addition to the original bits.
  The derived forms
simplify access to records because the formats are chosen pragmatically to be common, well-documented, and expected to last a long time.  These derived forms can readily be created for

many common record types by making use of existing export functions or conversion soft-ware.  Derived forms are, however, no substitute for preserving and providing access to the
original bits.  (A related strategy that may be discussed in the committee
Õs second report is toencourage agencies to create records in preferred formats at the outset.)¥Do not rely primarily on a strategy of converting records to platform- and vendor-independentarchiving formats in an attempt to avoid obsolescence.  This point follows from the previous two
elements but is stated explicitly because it runs directly counter to the approach of convertingall records to technology-independent formats, which is not likely to be effective.  XML for-
mats are often proposed for this role, but they cannot assume the role of the original data type
because they cannot be relied on to faithfully encode all of the elements of all data types.  By
contrast, an XML derived form may be a very useful derived form that serves as an adjunct tosaving the original data type.¥Save essential metadata.  While it is often advisable to save as much metadata as possible,
the most important metadata to save are those that cannot be derived from the record itselfand thus would otherwise be lost (e.g., contextual metadata).¥Save essential external references that are implicit or explicit in the record.  Digital files often
refer to other digital objects, such as embedded images, tables generated by running someprogram, and files belonging to other organizations.  The possibilities for cross-reference in

digital files are far richer than in paper files, and rules will have to be developed to decidewhich cross-references should be preserved by copy, by reference, or both.¥Archive as much information as possible about the software and work flow processes used toingest the original records.  This information may be essential when future users of the archive
wish to understand in detail how records have been processed.  A desirable goal would be that
the ingest process work flow be log-based and otherwise designed to facilitate analysis in case
the preserved form of the record is later discovered to have been incorrectly ingested.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS94.Safeguard the bits.  The risks of the various possible causes of data lossÑsuch as mali-cious acts, natural disasters, software bugs, human error, and hardware failuresÑshould beassessed and used to make informed engineering cost-benefit trade-offs.  A combination of
appropriate system design and operational policies and procedures will be required.  Mea-

sures to consider include redundancy (e.g., geographically distributed replicas), media refresh(copying data to new media before old media fail due to age), integrity checks (e.g., to verifythe integrity of records received from agencies, to detect errors in data storage systems, and to
protect against tampering), access controls (e.g., to control who can write or modify recordsand to protect classified or otherwise nonpublic records), and auditing.  Some records may be
deemed more important than others and will justify greater investment than others to ensure
that they persist.5.Select the appropriate storage media. The economics, performance, and robustness of all-disk storage systems have recently begun to exceed those of systems that include magnetictape either as a primary storage medium or as a backup.  While not yet common practice, it islikely that robust disk-only storage systems will become an attractive alternative to tape stor-
age early in the life of the ERA.  NARA should seriously consider such designs for the first
ERA systems; they are much simpler than storage involving both tape and disk.  Offline,
possibly write-once, storage may continue to play some useful role in storing infrequently
accessed records;  the cost, complexity, performance, and reliability trade-offs associated with
each technology option should be carefully considered.  Even if the ERA does not initially
eschew tape, it should be designed to make it easy to switch away from tape in the future.6.Decide where to invest in access capabilities.  Historically, the primary tool for finding
physical (paper) records of interest has been the finding aid; finding aids, along with other
surrogate records, are now used by computer systems that help people to find physical records.When the entire contents of digital records are available for computer processing, content-based retrieval techniques like full-text searching (which has proven to be a high-payoff,
relatively low-cost method in other contexts) become possible.  These will alter access interface
designs, ingest, processing, access strategies, cost trade-offs, and even approaches to handlingconfidential or classified records.7.Plan for consistent access to digital and physical records. Over time, it should become pos-sible to use single, consistent access tools to search all the records in the custody of NARA, be
they physical or digital. Indeed, over time, some current physical records may even be trans-ferred to digital form. The ERA design needs to take this into account, and while such cross-collection capabilities would probably not be implemented in early iterations of the ERA, it is
essential that the architecture recognize this long-term convergence.INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY EXPERTISE(CHAPTER 6)Finding 6.   Greater information technology (IT) expertise is needed if NARA is to success-fully design, acquire, and operate ERA systems.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARAInsufficient technical expertise at NARA is a major obstacle to successful development andacquisition of the ERA.  Based on briefings and other interactions with NARA staff, the com-
mittee concludes that while there is recognition of the importance of the ERA program, fewNARA staff members have experience with or fully understand the complexity of building
and managing a program as challenging as the ERA.  NARA today does not appear to have
sufficient technical depth to assure success in launching the ERA programÑthat is, to defineand manage the overall architecture, develop the appropriate request for proposals, evaluate
technical responses, negotiate changes in the architecture with vendors, and manage the imple-mentation of the system.In addition to needing a quick ramp-up in the IT expertise necessary to oversee the earlyphases of procurement, NARA faces a longer-term need for a more pervasive culture changeÑIT skills related to preservation will need to be a core competence throughout the organiza-tion, on a par with its other institutional strengths.  NARA recognizes the existence of this

issue in its appointment of a change manager associated with the ERA program, but thedifficulty in achieving this shift cannot be overestimated.  It will not be possible to achieve the
needed changes quickly; this pervasive change should be addressed in parallel with other
facets of ERA development.Recommendation 5.   In order to pursue technical development of the ERA, NARA should
first hire a small team of first-rate information technologists with systems design expertise.The addition of a few employees with properly focused systems design expertise wouldgreatly increase the likelihood that the ERA program will be successful.Preparing the architectural design of the ERA requires first-class talent having both archi-val and IT expertise.  Whether the architecture is defined by NARA staff (the preferred ap-
proach; see Recommendation 7) or contractors, the challenges of hiring qualified IT people arealmost identical for these two approaches.  If it is to be successful, the contracting approach

requires NARAÕs expertise to equal that of the design contractors in order to determinewhether a design will meet NARAÕs needs.Contracting for system implementation once an architecture is defined likewise requires ata minimum an in-house contract monitoring staff (e.g., the contracting officerÕs technical rep-resentative) with IT expertise at least as good as that of the contractorÕs people.  This
expertise will be essential, in particular if NARA is to successfully pursue an iterative develop-
ment approach (Recommendation 7).Recommendation 6.   To supplement its in-house expertise, NARA should recruit an advi-
sory group of government, academic, and commercial experts with deep knowledge of
digital preservation and IT system design.A standing ERA advisory committee focused on digital preservation issues would providean ongoing way to supplement NARAÕs IT capabilities.  By drawing expertise from the rangeof digital preservation efforts under way in government, industry, and elsewhere, the advi-sory committee would allow NARA to learn from those efforts and to foster collaboration(e.g., on techniques, standards, or common components) where warranted.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS11STRATEGY FOR EVOLVING AND ACQUIRING THE ERA(CHAPTER 7)Finding 7.   Building the ERA as a conventional procurement is unlikely to succeed owing
to the difficulty of accurately anticipating all system requirements.  Instead, an iterative
approach is needed.Procurement of the ERA is fundamentally different from procurement of a payroll or othercommonplace IT system.  No one has built an ERA before, and its requirements are not yet
completely understood.  Also, some of the requirements
Ñsuch as safeguarding bits with veryhigh confidenceÑare stringent.  As a result, the procurement should emphasize modularity,
iteration, and working with vendors to define and evolve the system rather than arms-lengthspecification and delivery of a completed, turnkey system.The ERA will need to evolve, perhaps rapidly, during its early years as technical andoperational requirements are modified by experience.  Later in its life, the ERA may evolve
more slowly as new needs are identified and as old hardware and software components arereplaced or upgraded.Recommendation 7.  The ERA should be designed as a modular system that can be built,
maintained, modified, and evolved incrementally, subject to an overall architecture.A proper modular design allows components to be upgraded without disrupting theoperation of the system.  An overall structure for the ERA is suggested by the OAIS referencemodel, but a design for the ERA will need to be much more detailed in order to exploit thebenefits of modularity.  A modular structure would make it easier to use COTS components

for the ERA.The systemÕs architecture ensures that the pieces fit together, that the system can be incre-mentally modified, and that it can evolve over time.  Interfaces between major parts should be

specified using an open approach that allows multiple vendors to supply components over along lifetime.  The architecture is itself subject to evolution over time as requirements are
better understood or new requirements emerge.  However, devising a good initial architecture

is very important as the programÕs success will be sensitive to the nature of the architecturaldecisions that are made early on.  It is, for example, far harder to evolve the modular structure
than to evolve individual modules.The architecture of the ERA system(s) should be ÒownedÓ (specified and evolved over
time) by NARA.  This would help ensure that NARA understands the implications of alterna-
tive proposals, reduces its dependence on vendors and the risk of proprietary lock-in, and
understands the limitations and strengths of systems that vendors deliver. Preparing thearchitectural design of the ERA requires first-class talent having both archival and IT exper-tise.  So too does evolving it over time to meet new requirements.
A far poorer alternative to a NARA-owned architecture is for NARA to contract for one ormore architectural designs.  In this case, it may be worthwhile to obtain several proposals,
because different contractors may have different opportunities or ideas for incorporating COTS
elements.  This alternative also requires first-class technical talent in order to specify the scope
of a design contract, to evaluate resulting designs, and to proceed with acquiring and evolvinga system.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARARecommendation 8.  NARA should begin development of the ERA with a small number of
focused pilot production systems designed to gain early experience and to converge ulti-mately into a smaller number of more comprehensive systems.NARA should concurrently develop and deploy small, focused systems that rapidly buildoperational experience.  All of these systems should be built within a common architectural
framework (Recommendation 7), so that they may eventually coalesce into a smaller numberof more comprehensive systems as experience and confidence grow.  It is especially important

that the data modelÑthe data types and related metadataÑconform to the architecture so thatthe digital data obtained by ingesting records into one of the early systems will carry forwardinto future evolutions.The initial systems should be selected and scoped for rapid deploymentÑthis is the key togaining early experience to inform the requirements of later systems.  The following are someexamples of limited-scope systems that might be considered for early pilots:¥U.S. State Department diplomatic cables.  NARA is preparing to acquire a collection of
diplomatic cables, which are simple structured text files, in digital form.  Ingest might include

automatic extraction of metadata from the cables; access might include full-text search or othermethods appropriate to the collection.  For quickest deployment, NARA might consider mak-
ing these records available using software already developed for operating a digital library.¥Records at the National Personnel Records Center.   There is interest in preserving large buthomogeneous collections of official military records scanned in TIFF image format when theyare transfered to NARAÕs National Personnel Records Center.  Confidentiality considerationsand the imperative to provide ready access to veterans or next-of-kin would require carefulattention to access controls.¥E-mail from the Clinton administration held by the Clinton Presidential Center.  Metadatacould be extracted from the e-mail headers, full-text search could be provided, and so on.  The
presence of attachments would permit gaining experience with preserving and providingaccess to a broad range of relatively contemporary data types.These three examples illustrate collections that could be organized and made availablequickly.  Although these collections might lack the scale of the eventual ERA, early deploy-

ment of systems to preserve and access them would yield important operational experiencefor NARA and avoid costly mistakes in later, more complex systems.Experience with early systems can be expected to lead to changes to the ERA architectureand to the substantial refinement of requirements for subsequent, more comprehensive sys-tems.  Managing the initial architecture, the first system deployments, the learning from early
operations, and the revisions to architecture and specifications, and evolving the ERA will be
the task of NARAÕs augmented IT staff.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION13131Introduction
With the rapid increase in federal records originating in digital form (including wordprocessing documents, e-mail messages, images, and database records), it is very clear thatsolutions must be found for preserving these records in order for NARA to fulfill its mandate.In fact, as NARA itself recognizes, its strategic future depends on the development of a suit-
able archive for electronic records.  In the not-too-distant future, the total number of born-
digital recordsÑand the number of those that are permanently valuableÑmay well exceed thenumber that originate in paper form.  The flow of digital records into NARA will be enormous.

Compounding the challenge, the backlog of existing digital records when NARA systems forarchiving them become operational will be large.NARA launched the Electronic Records Archives (ERA) initiative in the late 1990s, envi-sioning that it would Òauthentically preserve and provide access to any kind of electronicrecord.Ó1 NARAÕs new ERA Program Office plans to commence the initial procurement for
the ERA in 2003.  As of this writing, NARA has hired a contractor to assist with the ERA

program and has started a process of defining desired capabilities and requirements for thesystem, including the development of a vision statement and concept of operations for theERA. Further background on NARA and the ERA program can be found in Appendixes A
and B.ERAÕs broad objectives for archiving digital records build on NARAÕs extensive experi-ence in archiving paper records.  But digital records present new problemsÑand opportuni-

tiesÑwith very little operational experience for guidance.  In some ways, digital records
improve on paperÑthey can, for example, be easily searched and delivered electronically andit is cheap to keep more than one copy in case one is destroyed.  But digital records are
1Electronic Records Program Office, National Archives and Records Administration (NARA ERA PMO).  2002.
Electronic Records Archives Vision Statement.  NARA ERA PMO, Washington, D.C.  April 18
.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARAvulnerable to new forms of loss, such as tampering, storage failures, obsolescence of datatypes, and failure to archive all the data required to reconstitute a record.  Finally, research-
ersÑespecially in the futureÑwill use electronic records quite differently from paper records.The design and operation of the ERA must anticipate the differences between paper and
electronic records but also be prepared to change as the requirements of an electronic recordsarchive become clearer.NARAÕs current systems for electronic records archiving are limited in capability and adhoc in nature.  NARA does have some useful foundations to build on.  The Open Archival
Information System (OAIS) reference model2 offers a good conceptual design, including a
very-high-level modularity.   But design and implementation must go well beyond the gener-
alities of an OAIS model.  NARA has also gained some experience in the application of digital
archiving tools through its work with the San Diego Supercomputer Center (SDSC).  NARA-
sponsored work at SDSC resulted in the development of a system and set of tools that were
used to conduct a series of archiving demonstrations.3  Some useful lessons can be drawn
from this work (see Chapter 3).  The primary design challenges facing NARA relate not to the
development of fundamental technologies but to addressing a number of engineering issues
surrounding the building of these systems (Chapters 4 and 5) and an evolvable system archi-tecture and strategy for managing the ongoing evolution of the ERA (Chapter 7).   Other
challenges relate to the IT expertise required for the ERAÕs design and operation and culturalchanges associated with the growing importance of digital records in both NARA and federalagencies (see Chapter 6).The committee strongly endorses the concept of an ERA.  Such a system can and should be
designed and implemented.  Building such a system is critical to NARA
Õs mission, and NARAshould move forward as quickly as possible to start developing these capabilities.  But, as the
committee shows in the chapters that follow, many areas will need attention if the program is
to be successful.2Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS).  2002.  
Reference Model for an Open Archival Informa-tion System (OAIS).  CCSDS 650.0-B-1 (Blue Book).  CCSDS Secretariat, National Aeronautics and Space Adminis-
tration, Washington, D.C.  January.  Available online at <http://wwwclassic.ccsds.org/documents/pdf/CCSDS-

650.0-B-1.pdf>.3A detailed description of this work is provided in Reagan Moore, 2001, Final Report for the Research Project onApplication of Distributed Object Computation Testbed Technologies to Archival Preservation and Access Requirements, SanDiego Supercomputer Center (SDSC) Technical Report TR-2001-8, SDSC, San Diego, Calif., available online at<http://www.sdsc.edu/TR/TR-2001-08.doc.pdf>.  A number of additional technical reports on this work are
available at the project Web site <http://www.sdsc.edu/NARA/Publications.html>.  Briefer descriptions can be

found in Reagan Moore et al., 2000, ÒCollection-Based Persistent Digital Archives - Part 1,Ó D-Lib Magazine 6(2),March, available online at <http://www.dlib.org/dlib/march00/moore/03moore-pt1.html> and Reagan Mooreet al., 2000, ÒCollection-Based Persistent Digital Archives - Part 2,Ó D-Lib Magazine 6(4), April, available online at<http://www.dlib.org/dlib/april00/moore/04moore-pt2.html>.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REQUIREMENTS FOR THE ERA AND REQUIREMENTS FOR OTHER ACTIVITIES15152Commonalities Between Requirements for the
ERA and Requirements for Other Activities
The committee heard repeatedly in briefings by NARA staff that NARAÕs requirementsare unique.  This perspective is found in numerous articles, position statements, and require-
ments documents related to the ERA program.1  It is based on the idea that special require-
ments apply to archival institutions, that NARA plays a unique role in the federal government,

and that the scale and diversity of the governmentÕs programs exceed those of any otherentity.  NARA does have unique statutory responsibilities for the management of federal
government records and the identification and preservation of records of long-term value.
However, its situation is in many respects not all that different from that of many otherorganizations that also have mandates to preserve digital information.It would be a mistake to start with the position that (1) NARAÕs requirements are uniqueand (2) preserving records is fundamentally different from preserving other types of informa-tion.  Such an assumption would limit NARAÕs potential to benefit from common solutions to
archiving challenges found throughout the federal government and other organizations with
long-term preservation needs.  State and local governments face many of the same problems,
as does the private sector.  Moving away from the position that NARAÕs requirements are
unique would also open up many possibilities for closer collaboration between NARA and
other organizations with similar archiving challenges.  The benefits of common solutions andcollaboration would include these:¥Freeing up development resources to tackle more exceptional problems.  
To the extent thatNARA can make use of common (including off-the-shelf) options for such components as1See, e.g., Kenneth Thibodeau, 2001, ÒBuilding the Archives of the Future,Ó D-Lib Magazine, 7(2), February.Available online at <http://www.dlib.org/dlib/february01/thibodeau/02thibodeau.html>; and NARA, 2002,
Electronic Records Archives Feature List, ERA Program Office, NARA, October 31.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARAstorage and data management, resources will be available to solve more specialized problemssuch as ingest of and access to unusual record formats.¥Reducing development costs.  To the extent that commonalities are identified, NARA
Õsdevelopment costs can be reduced by increasing the potential size of the market for archiving
system components.  Development costs would also be reduced by collaborative work on
common tools (e.g., format conversion, automatic ingest, and metadata extraction and mark-up), standards (e.g., metadata standards and key interfaces to modules), and other technolo-
gies for preservation.¥Easing ingest.  To the extent that NARA can build a repository on common standards, itwill make it easier for federal agencies to deposit digital materials in a NARA repository or for
NARA to harvest records worthy of preservation.¥Facilitating interoperability.  Adoption of common standards by NARA and other institu-
tions will facilitate the development of federated collections by third parties and enable users
to employ common tools across multiple digital repositories.¥Transferring benefits from NARAÕs experience and investments to a larger community and viceversa.  NARAÕs participation in developing and disseminating information about the OAISmodel and its work with the group developing the Metadata Encoding and TransmissionStandard (METS) are good examples.¥Sharing technical expertise and knowledge.  Both formal and informal mechanisms can be
used to tap outside knowledge of and experience with digital archiving.  As discussed in
Chapter 6, IT expertise is critical to the success of the ERA program.¥Identifying and recruiting new IT talent.  More collaboration will increase the opportuni-
ties to identify new IT talent to design and implement the ERA program.  For example, a
number of graduate students are being trained in digital libraries.Recent research and development activities in digital preservation have emphasized defin-ing archiving problems in as generic a way as possible and seeking solutions that are commonto the many types of organizations with long-term preservation needs.2  The collection-basedpersistent archive model developed at SDSC (with support from NARA), for example, seekssolutions to digital preservation by integrating archival storage technology fromsupercomputer centers, data grid technology from the scientific community, information mod-
els from digital libraries, and preservation models from the archival community.  The SDSC
persistent archive prototype (discussed in Chapter 3) aims to support long-term preservationof collections from scientific data repositories, large digital libraries, and archives with the
same architecture.  NARA also contributed to the development and dissemination efforts of
2See, for example, Commission on Preservation and Access and Research Library Group (RLG), 1996, PreservingDigital Information: Final Report and Recommendations, RLG, Mountain View, Calif., May, available online at <http://www.rlg.org/ArchTF/>; CEDARS Metadata Standards, available online at <http://www.leeds.ac.uk/cedars/
index.html>; RLG-OCLC Working Group on Digital Preservation Metadata, 2002, Trusted Digital Repositories: At-tributes and Responsibilities (an RLG-OCLC report), RLG, Mountain View, Calif., May, available online at <http:
//www.rlg.org/longterm/repositories.pdf>; and various documents from the Digital Preservation Coalition,
available online at  <http://www.dpconline.org/>.
Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REQUIREMENTS FOR THE ERA AND REQUIREMENTS FOR OTHER ACTIVITIES17the Consultative Committee on Space Data Systems, which developed the OAIS referencemodel, which is now an international standard.3  The OAIS reference model provides com-
mon terminology and a high-level framework for an archive.4Many other groups, including these, are working on long-term digital preservation issues:¥Library of Congress (LoC).  Through the National Digital Information Infrastructure and
Preservation Program, LoC is developing a repository for LoCÕs own digital collections (bothborn-digital and turned-digital); developing standards and mechanisms for the exchange ofpreserved digital objects; and working toward mechanisms for interoperability among digitalrepositories.  Like NARA, LoC is seeking more efficient methods for acquiring digital collec-

tions in many different formats, working to identify metadata standards for access and intel-lectual property rights management, and seeking technology for a repository system.¥National archives and libraries in other countries.  The NetherlandsÕ Koninklijke Bibliotheek
(KB) has built on the work of a European collaborative project, Nedlib, to build a system tostore KBÕs collection of born-digital documents.5  IBM is implementing the system drawing on
a number of off-the-shelf products.¥Digital library researchers.  This research community addresses issues such as storage and
data management of large amounts of information in diverse formats and media (e.g., text,images, video, music, recorded speech); search within a single archive using controlled-vo-
cabulary and/or content-based indexing; federated search across collections, including collec-tions operated by different organizations; metadata conversion; format conversion; resource(archive) selection; and interoperability among archives.¥Digital library operators.  Much practical experience has been gained by the operators of
such digital libraries as the California Digital Library, JSTOR, the National Library of Medi-cine, and the Library of Congress.¥Federal agencies.  Some federal agencies, including the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, the National Institutes of Health (especially the National Library of Medi-cine), the Department of Defense, and the intelligence agencies already manage large digital
repositories.¥State and local governments.  State and local governments also maintain archives and thusface long-term preservation challenges quite similar to those of NARA.¥Private sector.  Online text retrieval services such as Lexis-Nexis and WestLaw maintain
very large digital libraries.  A number of industry sectors, such as pharmaceuticals, public
utilities, aviation, and those using hazardous materials, must retain very large collections of
records for the long term to fulfill regulatory requirements.3Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS).  2002.  
Reference Model for an Open Archival Informa-tion System (OAIS).  CCSDS 650.0-B-1 (Blue Book).  CCSDS Secretariat, National Aeronautics and Space Adminis-
tration, Washington, D.C.  January.  Available online at <http://wwwclassic.ccsds.org/documents/pdf/CCSDS-
650.0-B-1.pdf>.4The model does not provide the specifications for a particular architecture or an implementation framework; itdoes define core functions as ingest, archival storage, data management, access, administration, and preservationplanning.5See <http://www.kb.nl/dnep-project>.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARAIn summary, NARAÕs requirements for many aspects of the ERAÑsuch as archival stor-age, data management, preservation, administration, and preservation planningÑare surpris-ingly similar to the requirements of any other organization preserving digital data for the longterm.  NARA has much to gain by starting from the premise of common requirements in these

areas first and then clearly specifying where its requirements are different or unique.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECIFIC LESSONS FROM THE SDSC DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS19193Specific Lessons to Be Learned from the
SDSC Demonstration Projects
Starting in 1998, NARA cosponsored work at the San Diego Supercomputer Center (SDSC)to explore the long-term preservation of electronic records.  Recently, NARA and the National
Science Foundation (NSF) have been supporting work to extend and refine an architecturedeveloped at SDSC and now referred to as Òpersistent archives.ÓSDSC is part of the National Partnership for Advanced Computational Infrastructure(NPACI), a collaboration among 46 U.S. member institutions and foreign affiliates.  The prin-
cipal thrust of this collaboration is to develop the computational infrastructure required to
support large-scale scientific computation.  The partnership has developed techniques to link
together large computers into a global grid, and a corresponding data grid for storing numer-ous large data sets used in scientific computation.SDSC has considerable experience building and operating large data storage systems.  The
current data archive has a capacity of about 400 TB, in which tape robots move data betweentape cartridges of roughly 20 GB capacity and a 1.6-TB disk cache.  A high-speed network

gateway delivers up to 90 MB/sec transfer rates to computational nodes via networks ofvarious kinds.  This system is designed principally for high capacity and the very-high-speedaccess required by supercomputers.SDSC has also developed data management techniques that allow uniform access to filesfrom different kinds of computer systems.  Principal among these is the Storage Request
Broker (SRB), which mediates between clients and storage of various kinds (file systems,
databases, and the tape archive).  Files are accessed by a logical name; the SRB middleware
determines where files are stored and how to access them.  Also kept is a metadata catalog,
which principally records file metadata (such as the location of a file), but may also contain
application- or domain-specific metadata.  Several SRBs may work in concert to form a feder-
ated data management system, in which clients access the combined collections of the federa-tion. These facilities have the important property that they hide computer- and vendor-depen-
dent details, so that storage equipment can be upgraded without changing client software.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARAThey are routinely used by scientific computing applications:  Organizing and saving scien-
tific datasets for a long time is an important requirement for NPACI users.For its NARA work, SDSC has built a number of demonstrations that use this data-storageinfrastructure.1  The archival processing conforms to the OAIS model, with its principal in-
gest, storage, and access components.  The demonstrations have treated a few record collec-
tions, building ingest and access functions suitable for each.  A few examples follow:
¥Approximately a million electronic mail messages were ingested.  Header fields, such as
sender, recipient, date, and subject, were extracted to form metadata for each message.  Mes-
sages were transformed into an XML representation to explicitly tag the metadata elements.  A

relational database of metadata allowed easy retrieval of messages based on metadata proper-tiesÑe.g., all messages from a given sender on a given day.  This experiment did not attempt
to deal with e-mail attachments and their wide-ranging data types.¥Files describing the Senate Legislative Activities for the 106th Congress, expressed as 99Rich Text Format (RTF) files, were ingested.  These files were created from an IT system (the
Thomas system) that keeps track of bills, amendments, and resolutions for each senator.  The

SDSC project attempted to Òlift knowledgeÓ from the text representation to obtain something
akin to the original database, by first converting from RTF to an XML format, then (in effect)parsing text to extract names of senators, committees, bills, etc.  This work showed inconsis-

tencies in the original database (especially the omission of one senator from the collection).The result was expressed as a (new) database using XML syntax.¥An electronic database already held in NARA archives describing air missions overVietnam was transformed into an XML format for preservation.  One problem that required
attention was normalizing several coordinate systems, including a military grid scheme nolonger in use.  In the process of building presentation tools, SDSC discovered inconsistencies

in the geographic (and geometric) data in the database.  Expressing the map data in XML
permitted building quite simple presentation viewers using commercial tools.All of these demonstrations stressed the use of XML as a preservation format because of itsindependence from vendor- or computer-system specifics, in some cases taking advantage offreeware or commercial packages for processing XML.In the remainder of this chapter, the committee assesses the usefulness of certain strategiesand features of the SDSC work and classifies them as (1) lessons that might influence theconstruction of the NARA system, (2) aspects that may not apply, and (3) choices that NARA
should not consider.  These specific lessons complement the engineering issues discussed in
the succeeding chapters.LESSONS FROM THE SDSC PROJECT THATMAY BE HELPFUL IN DESIGNING THE ERA1.  The SDSC work increases confidence that it is possible to build an electronic archive system and
that some of the assumptions behind the project are sound.  The SDSC project demonstrated both1Reagan Moore.  2002. 
ÒThe San Diego Project:  Persistent Objects,
Ó Proceedings of the Workshop on XML as aPreservation Language, Urbino, Italy, October.  Available online at <http://www.sdsc.edu/NARA/
Publications.htm>.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECIFIC LESSONS FROM THE SDSC DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS21archival and technical processes for embedding a few of NARAÕs electronic collections withina prototype electronic archive.  In particular, the demonstrations showed the following:
¥The OAIS model provides a useful overall system structure, although it does little tohelp specify an implementation.  The basic OAIS structure
Ñingest, storage, and accessÑwassuccessfully mirrored in the overall modular design of the SDSC demonstrations.¥XML is a useful way to represent metadata.¥A significant degree of independence from particular vendors and systems can beachieved.The SDSC demonstrations also show how modern networking technologies can be used tointerconnect heterogeneous machines and to add equipment as needed to increase capacity.Networking technologies also allow parts of the system to be physically separated. The XAPT
ingest workbench demonstrated by SDSC can be operated anywhereÑfor example, run onworkstations in the agency that originates the records even though other parts of the workflow, and the archival storage, are located elsewhere.2.  Metadata sets will be constantly changing.  
The writings of the electronic archive commu-nity make it clear that a universal metadata set is extremely unlikely.  The SDSC projects

exploited the ability to tailor metadata sets for each collection.  The scientific data sets that
SDSC archives make even more extensive and critical use of metadata (e.g., recording impor-tant physical parameters of instruments used to make measurements that are recorded in the
file) than is likely in an archive of electronic government records.3.  Indexing metadata offers a simple and effective way to search for archived records.  
The SDSCsystem entered pertinent metadata into a relational database, which could be searched tolocate records.  This approach leverages the power of relational database systems, including
interactive query software, and is easy to understand and use.  Metadata searches are not as

powerful as full-text searches, but the SDSC work demonstrated their value.4.  Placing a Òfederation layerÓ between the archival system and its file storage is a very usefultechnique, and the SDSC implementation of such a layer (the SRB) is quite extensive.  The SRB is apiece of middleware that enables distributed clients to access storage resources in a heteroge-neous environment.  Among the benefits of the SRB approach, the following are particularly

noteworthy:¥The SRB approach provides uniform access to and manipulation of files stored in filesystems, databases, and archival storage.¥It allows new implementations of file systems (or storage types) to be added to thesystem as it evolves.  This allows storage capacity to increase; it also allows new hardware to

be introduced.  However, the SRB does not provide automatic refreshing
Ñcopying of datafrom old storage equipment to newÑwhich would be a desirable capability in a productionsystem.¥Similarly, it allows unused file systems to be removed.¥It supports location-independent access to files by keeping a mapping between thepermanent file identifier and the physical location of the file.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARA¥It allows working files to be accessible in exactly the same fashion that archived filesare.  This means that a collection can be tested before it is committed to the archive (
ÒtestedÓmay mean that audits are performed to ensure integrity or to verify that the access softwareworks correctly).  In other words, the same auditing and access software can access collections

as works in progress as well as archived collections.¥Very-high-speed data transfer rates can be provided if necessary.5. The project demonstrated several successful uses of significant COTS products.  COTS filesystem implementations (hardware and software) are easily incorporated using SRB media-tion. Commercial relational database software maintains a metadata index and processes ad
hoc queries used to find records in the archive.ASPECTS OF THE SDSC PROJECT THAT MIGHTNOT APPLY TO THE NARA SYSTEM1.  The SDSC file systemÕs exclusive use, at least for long-term archival, of off-line tape storage.Tape is clearly not the only way to build a robust, long-term file system, and a trend towardincreased use of online disk storage is evident.  Tape storage propagates significant complex-
ity to the rest of the system, especially the requirement that efficient use of tape requires files
to be quite largeÑa minimum of several gigabytes. The trade-offs between tapes and othermedia depend significantly on how often and in what patterns the data are accessed.  Since the
SDSC demonstrations made no attempt to mimic the scale of an operating ERA, they offer no
evidence that tape archival storage will have adequate performance.2.  The conversion of each record to a single XML representation as a way to achieve persistenceÑi.e., to avoid obsolescence of data types.  SDSCÕs approach to persistence of data types relies on theconversion of records into an XML representation as part of the ingest process.  This method
has a number of problems.  For example, there is no mention of how a stylesheet specification

might be archived and remain executable in the future.  Style sheets refer to an underlying
rendering model that may change with time; moreover, the existing standards for style sheetsdo not cover all possible rendering and presentation techniques.  An example helps make this

more concrete:  One can instruct Microsoft Word to produce HTML or XML, but the output
will contain many Word-specific tags.  If these tags are not understood, one has access to the
text but may lose access to a lot of information about layout, change tracking, and many other
things.Also, the SDSC project demonstrated the XML approach only for simple record formats,such as electronic mail messages, and tackled neither complexÑbut increasingly commonÑcommercial record types, such as presentations with animation, nor the issues associated withpreserving records that contain scripts or executable elements.3.  Validation of approaches through use in a production environment or for an extended period of
time.  Because the SDSC demonstrations were limited in scope and duration, they do notprovide the same sort of operational experience that would be gained from operating early
iterations of an ERA.  For example, no provision was made for automated media refresh
(automatically copying bits from an aging storage medium to a newer one).   Nor did the
Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECIFIC LESSONS FROM THE SDSC DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS23demonstrations address the problems of work flow and scale associated with ingestÑforexample, How will NARA be able to ingest electronic records fast enough to meet its needs?The SDSC demonstrations also shed little light on the operational capabilities NARA willneed to run ERA systems.  ERA users are less likely to have such skills or recourse to the same

sort of IT support.  Each demonstration was carried out by highly skilled programmers ca-
pable of diagnosing problems in the input documents, the ingest processing, and the datafinally added to the archive. There was no attempt to build a system for ingest that could be
operated on a routine basis by less skilled people.  (Users of SDSC
Õs scientific data manage-ment systems are generally highly technically savvy and they can turn to a highly proficientsupport staff.)  More generally, such exploratory work is no substitute for having NARA staff
work with a system in a production environment.AREAS WHERE THE SDSC PROJECT EXPERIENCE SHOULD NOT BE USED INDESIGNING THE NARA SYSTEM1.  The archival file system used, HPSS, should not be used as a model for NARA because it lacks
important properties.  HPSS is designed for manipulating large data sets on large computers(i.e., scientific data on supercomputers), which have a set of requirements different from thoseof an electronic archive.  For example, HPSS does not provide facilities for replication (redun-
dant copies must be created explicitly), for automatically refreshing the storage media (mediarefresh has been done under HPSS, but it requires explicit management by staff), or for geo-graphic redundancy.2.  The SDSC project covered a very small number of file formats and cannot therefore serve as amodel for preserving records across the federal government, where a large number of formats will be
encountered.  The project, for example, did not consider the following:¥How to prioritize how much support to provide to which formats (quality of service),¥How to determine what subset of formats may cover many of the commonly foundrecord types, and¥How to deal with formats for which there are no existing tools to extract the informa-tion from which an XML structure can be built.3.  The efforts to build a knowledge layer are not ready for deployment.
  Trying to express
semantic constraints within records is a worthwhile long-term goal, but the demonstrations ofhow to Òlift knowledgeÓ from a document (such as the Senate legislative activity example
discussed above) is not persuasive.  These techniques are insufficiently developed to be

planned for the NARA system.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARA244Designing and Engineering the ERAAN ENGINEERING APPROACHThe ERA program is a complex undertaking.  Its archiving goals for the ERA program areambitious, in keeping with NARAÕs tradition of careful stewardship of the records it pre-
serves.  To meet these goals the ERA will have to be engineered properly.  Key elements of an
engineering approach include expressing program objectives and constraints, measuring orestimating key parameters, defining realistic requirements, and making pragmatic engineer-
ing design decisions.  This chapter discusses these issues in the context of the ERA program.
The two chapters that follow address design issues related to key system properties, includingscalability, reliability, trustworthiness, and longevity.Attention to engineering principles is especially important because the work done byNARA to date, as evidenced in the documents and briefings provided to the committee,displays insufficient engineering perspective.  Efforts to date have focused on articulating

high-level preservation requirements, an essential early step for developing the systemÕs ar-chival requirements.  However, in order to develop a procurement plan through which succes-
sive iterations of working systems can be built, delivered, and made operational in a reason-
able amount of time, NARA will have to address the specific engineering considerations andcost trade-offs that this section discusses.Engineering practice depends strongly on experience with prior designs.  In this case, there
is no body of prior designs from which to draw direct lessonsÑno large-scale, long-lived,wide-scope electronic archives exist today.  Instead, one must seek experience in the engineer-
ing portions of other systems that have properties required of the ERA and gain experience by
building capabilities incrementally.  For example, copious experience is available for impor-
tant elements of the ERA system, e.g., a scalable, robust file system.  Other qualities, such as
very-long-term preservation, can be shaped by experience in the industry, even if there is
scant experience with systems designed explicitly to preserve for the very long term.  Finally,Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DESIGNING AND ENGINEERING THE ERA25there is a large body of more general experience in engineering complex, large-scale systemsthat can be applied.DATA AND ESTIMATES TO SUPPORT THE DEFINITION OFINITIAL REQUIREMENTSEngineering for the ERA program requires a solid understanding of requirements, includ-ing the data types1 to be accommodated, the quantity of records to be stored, the kinds of
access to be provided, and the performance expected.  Although these requirements can be
expected to evolve at every stage of a systemÕs life as a result of changes in the characteristicsof electronic records, the system will successfully meet its expectations only if its engineeringis in step with its requirements.  So it is essential, even for the very first system, to state these
requirements carefully and explicitly.A key to understanding the initial requirements is information about the population ofgovernment records that it will hold and projections about how those records will be used.Importantly, great precision is not needed.  Indeed, in some cases, data may be unavailable or

impractical to obtain.  It is not necessary to significantly delay the ERA program in order to
conduct in-depth surveys.  Rough, even order-of-magnitude estimates, if well justified, will
suffice in most cases.It is important that estimates supporting initial requirements be made explicit; otherwise,a system design might reflect implicit estimates that are dangerously wrong.  The assumptions
and reasoning behind the estimates should be made explicit.  This will allow the estimates and

consequent decisions to be modified whenever the assumptions and estimates change.In order for the first iterations of the ERA to be designed, questions such as the followingneed to be answered:¥What are the data types that it must support, and what is their frequency of occurrence?
  In what
forms do records currently existÑe.g., which data types, on what storage media, and withwhat kinds of supporting documentation or online metadata?  If there is an inventory of
digital records Òwaiting in the wingsÓ to be archived, what are the properties of these collec-
tions?  The system design must also anticipate and accommodate new data types and changes

in their distribution over time.¥How much data must be accommodated at the outset?
  A great many design decisions (such
as the archive media, the implementation technology, and the techniques used to provide
reliability) will require estimates of the scale of the archive. The committee heard estimates of1Throughout this report, Òdata typeÓ is used to identify the data-encoding rules whereby various kinds of
records (documents, electronic mail messages, pictures, database entries, etc.) are expressed as a collection of bits.Thus an image might be represented by bits whose data type is TIFF or GIF or JPEG or any of a number of other
such specifications.  ÒFile formatÓ is often used interchangeably with 
Òdata type,Ó but 
Òdata typeÓ is used through-
out this report because the literal interpretation of Òfile formatÓ is files of bits, which would be too restricted.  For
example, when an image is embedded in an e-mail message that is itself embedded in a ÒfolderÓ of many messages
saved in a file, the bits representing the image cannot properly be called a Òfile.ÓBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARA1 PB, but this figure needs to be verified and justified.  What is the expected rate at which the
archive will need to scale?  Is the initial flow into the archive likely to be a small number of
very large files or a very large number of small files or some combination of these?¥How will the records be delivered to NARA?  While today
Õs and future records can bedelivered to NARA using secure networking techniques, records generated over the past 30years or less may reside on media that are rapidly becoming obsolete. How many records arestored on which media?  Early versions of the ERA may have a disproportionately greater

burden to deal with old media. Alternatively, NARA might decide to contract for mediaconversion services to copy the data to modern media.  In any case, an inventory of media
types and quantities is required.¥What rates of access to the archive will be required?  Access rate might be measured by
counting retrieved documents per day, retrieved gigabytes per day, searches per day, or allthree. How will NARA provide for searching, retrieval, and access in the digital archive?  Will

users be able to search and retrieve files and items online?  Will NARA be able to support
search across and within individual record groups and series?  Will there be provisions for
full-text search?  Will such services be provided by NARA or third parties?  Estimating access

requirements in advance will seem very difficult, and it will surely change as the archivegrows, but an initial estimate is essential to produce the first system implementation.¥What financial resources are available, and how much will it cost to acquire and operate thesystem?   No engineering project can be undertaken without some expectation of its costs.
Back-of-the-envelope calculations can be done to estimate how much computer and storageequipment will be required, the cost of personnel to ingest records and operate the system,
and the cost of building the system software.  Of particular concern is the cost of manual
processes required to ingest records, especially manually recording metadata for records.Because it is not a routine procurement, it is difficult today to project the eventual costs of
building and operating a full-scale system, but it is nonetheless important to estimate costs ofthe early iterations.  Experience with each iteration should be used to help inform cost esti-
mates for future versions.¥Technology lifespan.  At what rate are components such as storage devices expected to be
replaced?  What is the unit of replacement?
The committee has seen scant evidence that questions of this sort have been posed care-fully or answered with enough rigor thus far to set the stage for procuring ERA systems.PRAGMATIC ENGINEERING DECISIONSWhile it can be tempting to deal in absolutes when designing a system (Òevery importantrecord will be preserved foreverÓ),  engineering practice recognizes that a system is designed
to meet objectives subject to constraints.  A bridge has a limited load capability, traffic capac-
ity, lifetime, and budget.  Engineering for the ERA will similarly require expressing its objec-

tives and constraints.  This will require some ÒengineeringÓ considerations not often found inwriting about archival processes:1.Design for common cases.  Although the archive has an obligation to save every recordscheduled for preservation, a different quality of service can be applied to different records.Service-level differentiation is a practical necessity.  It is not feasible to delay system develop-Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DESIGNING AND ENGINEERING THE ERA27ment until a solution is developed for every conceivable record type (and no universal solu-tion is on the horizon that would apply across record types and thus significantly reduce theincremental cost of handling new record types).  The alternative, a strategy whereby agencieswould be required to submit documents in specific data types, would put a burden on the
agencies that could mean that some records of historical value would not be preserved.  If
NARA were to insist on a uniform level of service for all record formats, then the level ofservice in the ERA probably would reduce to the lowest common denominator.The strategy Òaccept everything; provide different quality of accessÓ ensures that all records
are captured and leaves NARA the opportunity to provide enhanced access in the future astechnology improves.  There is a trade-off here:  Access may, in fact, become more difficult

over time as data types become obsolete, but one does not want to wait until more robustaccess functionality is available before taking steps to capture and preserve records.  For
example, more compute power, better conversion tools or emulators, or other technological
advances might make accessing some records feasible in the future even though it is notfeasible today.  The quality-of-service approach leaves that option available without jeopar-
dizing the construction or utility of a first system.Service-level differentiation means that NARA may accept and preserve records in anydata type, but certain access services will simply not be available for certain data types.  Some
records will be accessed more than others; some by the public, some only by scholarly re-
searchers.  It may not be cost-effective for NARA to provide online access facilities for obscure
data types, but users should be able to retrieve the original bits and use their own resources tomanipulate them.For example, it is perfectly reasonable that NARA might be able to easily provide full-textsearch capabilities for some types of record but not for others.2  Another example:  NARA
might fairly easily provide services for viewing, manipulating, and copying a set of maps
stored in common bitmapped image formats, while it might not offer such capabilities formaps embedded in a proprietary geographical information system. Once the notion of servicelevel differentiation is accepted, it can become a powerful approach for simplifying system
design.One way to establish priorities is frequency of occurrence:  Although the total universe of
possible record data types is very large, a large fraction of NARAÕs preservation needs can bemet by devoting significant effort to the most commonly used data types.   Assessments by
archivists of significance or likelihood of access might be other ways to prioritize record types.NARA should therefore focus on commonly used data types and acknowledge that byexplicit design, documents in commonly used data types will be preserved with a higherquality of access service.3  As a result, an early step in the design process should be a survey
2One example where full-text would be harder to support is records available only in bitmapped image format.However, applying optical character recognition can often recover searchable text from scanned documents.  And
a variety of research is under way to search collections of pictures for certain features, e.g., images of people.  As

part of its service-level definitions, NARA will decide whether to offer such services.  As the ERA evolves, more
such services are likely to be offered.3NARAÕs recent development of guidance for transfer of records in three common formatsÑPDF, TIFF, and e-mail with attachmentsÑis a good example of identifying and placing priority on common data types.   See
National Archives and Records Administration (NARA), 2002, Transfer of Permanent E-records to NARA,  NARA,
College Park, Md. Available online at <http://www.archives.gov/records_management/initiatives/transfer_
to_nara.html>.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARAor well-justified estimate (based, perhaps, on sampling) of the data types used in digitalrecords found throughout the federal government as well as records already in NARA cus-tody.  From the survey, data types can be prioritized based on frequency of occurrence and
other criteria.2.  Prioritize the functions of the ERA and focus initial design on capabilities that permit rapiddeployment of operational pilots.   Which capabilities must the ERA have from the outset?  Which
can be added later?A key requirement is to save bits for a hundred years or more.  To achieve this requires a
combination of careful technical and operational design based on extensive industry experi-
ence with robust storage systems of shorter life (see Chapter 5).   An effective bit storage
capability is required for any pilot program and provides a critical foundation for futuresystems with broader capabilities.In addition to storage, certain ingest and access mechanisms are required in early ERAversions.  However, as discussed above, it may be acceptable for collections to be correctly
ingested but for access to them to be primitive at first, improving only later as new access
functions are added to the system.  Other functions that are less important can be deferred for
later implementation, as long as the initial architecture, design concept, and implementationstrategy are sufficiently flexible and evolvable and have devoted sufficient attention to overall
robustness, survivability,  maintainability, and compatibility with critical long-term require-
ments.   Later iterations of the ERA might include additional migration, emulation, or other
preservation functionality as these technologies become more mature.It may also be prudent to set priorities that determine the order in which records are addedto the growing archive.  These priorities might be similar to those used to establish quality of
service, e.g., common record types are ingested first.  Record types that are used infrequently

or difficult to process may be deferred.This prioritization of functions can be helpful in other contexts.  Suppose that at some later
point in time, funding for the ERA were to be curtailed (e.g., due to extreme budget pressures).
Which functions would it need to continue to operate, and which could be reduced?3. Support a division of labor.  
Must NARA build the entire ERA or might other governmentorganizations, commercial firms, and individual researchers fulfill parts of the ERAÕs mission?The committee recommends that NARA define its essential mission quite narrowly, with an
emphasis on saving digital records in their original form together with appropriate metadata
and providing access to those records in their original form (the original bits).4  Additional
services, such as interpreting obsolete data types; providing high-quality, high-performanceWeb access to rendered records;  full-text searching; and finding aids of various kinds, could

be provided by NARA as well as others.  NARA may decide to provide access itself if no one
4NARAÕs activities are for the most part currently limited to a basic preservation task.  For paper records, NARA
typically provides records in bulk form, and users have the responsibility to sift through the material and select
what is appropriate.  Similarly, NARA does not provide photocopying services for paper records, but users can
pay a third party to do this.  In any case, people
Õs expectations for services for digital records will be shaped bytheir experiences with other online services.  Partnerships with others provide one avenue for meeting some of

these expectations while concentrating on the central preservation mission.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DESIGNING AND ENGINEERING THE ERA29else does, but NARA has much to gain from partnering with others to provide these services.For example, if in the future common access techniques evolve for digital libraries (togetherwith software to implement them), NARAÕs ERA can serve as one of the accessible libraries.  In
cases where there is an identifiable commercial market for the information, third-party com-
mercial organizations might also play a role in providing these additional services.4. Consider how to integrate electronic and traditional, nondigital records.  What should be the
relationship between electronic records and records in other formats?  It was unclear to the
committee whether NARA proposes a unified approach for access to all records or whether itdevelops specific access systems for particular formats of records (e.g. paper, film, photo-
graphs, maps, electronic records).  This decision will influence the development of finding
aids, metadata standards, and search capabilities in the ERA.  If multiple format-specific
access systems are part of NARAÕs plan, then the ERA would, for example, need a capabilityfor managing references between the electronic records and records in other formats and forproviding facilities for searching across the systems.  To minimize complexity and depen-
dency on other systems, it is probably inadvisable to try to integrate access across electronic
records and traditional formats in early iterations of the ERA.  However, systems should be
designed with an eye toward the future integration of traditional and electronic records.  For
example, it is desirable to assign unique identifiers to both electronic and traditional records to
help unify the totality of the archives for researchers.5. Consider future interoperation with other repositories.
  NARA should also bear in mind the
need for interoperability between the ERA and digital repositories in other archives and re-search libraries.6. Consider what can be automated.  Although all the details of work flow and task scheduling
need not be specified in detail at the outset, even the initial design must be cognizant of whichtasks can and will be carried out manually and which can be automated.  The degree of

automation will have significant implications for the costs of operating the system.  It will also
affect NARAÕs internal business processes, the number and types of staff required (archival vs.technical, professional vs. clerical), and NARAÕs relationships with other federal agencies.(Detailed discussion of this issue is deferred to the committeeÕs second report.)All of these considerations imply setting appropriate expectations for the ERA.  An archive
accessible to the public, in which every record can be presented through a Web browser (orwhatever is the preferred public access technique of the day) within a few seconds of a request,could not be deployed today.    However, critical ingest, storage, and access capabilities can

and should be developed and deployed in pilot programs, and additional capabilities addedover time.SUPPORTING FUTURE ARCHIVISTS AND RESEARCHERSFuture archivists and researchers will be skilled in computing and have better tools andmethods than are available today, and thus will be able to manipulate and interpret digitalrecords.  TodayÕs researchers are increasingly savvy about analyzing digital records, such ascensus files, economic data, electronic mail series, and so on.  They work from the digital
Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARArecords, not paper copies or other visual presentations of records.  Researchers
Õ tools are
constantly improving:  Techniques for automatically extracting information from text, for
summarizing text passages, or for finding complex relationships among several documentshave been the subject of research and are becoming commercial products.  Also, the digital

archivist will be increasingly equipped to examine large quantities of records or collectionsand to build new catalogs and finding aids that depend on the underlying digital archive.Presentation, conversion, and emulation software of varying capabilities exist as commercial
products today.5  Future users will also have available computers that are far more powerful
than todayÕs.  Just as NARA will evolve with respect to skills and technologies to handle
digital records, so too will researchers and many other customers of the archive.While the public may want records presented visually on their screens, some members ofthe research community and digital archivists will desire access to the original bits and associ-ated documentation.  They may, for example, wish to verify the accuracy of preferred derived

forms or the results obtained through migration or emulation.  To support the researcher of
the future, the ERA should strive to save the information that will be essential to future reverseengineers: software operating manuals, documentation on data types, and source code when
itÕs available.6  In some cases, it will also be useful to save executable code associated with the
record, to be available for future emulation.  It is also important to save information about the
processes NARA uses to ingest records (including the source code for the software) so that
future researchers can determine exactly how records were processed as they were archived.The ERA should also be alert to new information becoming availableÑe.g., when a propri-etary data type is made public, its specification should be entered into the archive.  In short,

use the archive to store all technical data about the archive itself.PRAGMATIC STEPS TO FACILITATE FUTURE ACCESS TO RECORDSAlthough it may be the dream of every archivist to make records easily and immediatelyaccessible, a more important objective is to preserve all the information necessary to allow
todayÕs bits to be interpreted correctly far in the future.  NARA does not have to anticipate orinvest in all of the higher-level capabilities that future users might want.  As discussed in the
previous section, future researchers will have access to tools and expertise that will allow them
to manipulate and interpret records.  Also, many institutions share an interest with NARA in
building tools that support conversion, migration, and emulation, and this technology basewill be available to NARA and its users.However, certain fundamental information about a record is required to support futureaccess.  A pragmatic strategy to facilitate future access would include the following elements:5One such effort to capture these tools systematically is the PRONOM system being developed by the PublicRecord Office, the national archives of England and Wales.  This capability alone does not necessarily help with
obsolescenceÑi.e., when the last piece of useful software that supports a file format can no longer be executed, thefile format becomes unreadable.  This need not ever happen, because a software emulator of the bare hardware can

later simulate the execution of the application on the digital record.  This is the emulation approach to obsoles-
cence.6Even though some of this information may be copyrighted, NARA should make every effort to preserve itÑperhaps based on fair use argumentsÑbecause it is essential for the future operation of the archive.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DESIGNING AND ENGINEERING THE ERA311. Save the original bits.  As is generally appreciated, it is essential that the record be savedin its original formÑthe original bitsÑeven if the ERA is unable to decode, render, or executethose bits at the time the record is ingested.7  As the archived data are refreshed onto new
media over time, the physical recording of the bits will change; but the ERA will, of course,
always be able to deliver the Òoriginal bit streamÓÑthe digital data that were ingested.  Saving
the original bit stream alone is not a guarantee of future access, but it is the foundation onwhich future preservation measures depend.2. Save records in Òpreferred derived formsÓ in addition to the original bits.
   In many cases it is
advisable to save derived forms of the record as well in order to facilitate various forms of
access.  For example, anticipating a need to make visual presentations of a record, it might be
advantageous to prepare, at ingest, a PDF version of a word-processing document; then anaccess module need only know how to render PDF files rather than how to decode each word-
processor data type used for the original records.  As another example, anticipating a need to
perform full-text searches of records, ingest processing might extract and save an ASCII textfile.  In some cases, a single derived form might serve both purposes
Ñe.g., an XML encodingof a word-processor document, together with a style sheet,8 will simplify presentation as well
as searching.  Also, much like the Rosetta stone, a derived form is an aid to future researchersseeking to interpret the original bit streams.Although derived forms can be added to the archive long after a record is ingested, it isadvisable to create the preferred derived forms as early as possible: The software for preparingsuch forms may be available at ingest time but may not be readily available years later when
a record is accessed. Current record scheduling procedures used by NARA tend to delayingestion until many years after the records are created.  If this gap were shortened, problems
of obsolete hardware and software at the time of ingest would be reduced.Derived forms are, of course, no substitute for retaining and providing access to the origi-nal bit stream.  A derived form may introduce distortions or errors into the original, or it mayomit useful information from the originalÑe.g., rendering a document may suppress a changehistory recorded by the word processor in the original data type.  Software that creates derived
forms may have bugs that introduce errors.7The merits of saving original bits for records that were converted during ingestion to the National Archives areillustrated by the case of the NIPS files, which recorded detailed information about Department of Defense (DOD)activities during the Vietnam War.  Records in this format, formally known as the National Military Command
System 360 Formatted File System, could only be read and interpreted by software developed in the early 1960s for
DOD.  Later, the DOD withdrew support of the NIPS software, which had the practical effect of making the NIPS
format obsolete.  When the files were transferred to NARS around 1977-1978, they were decoded and reformatted
(Òde-NIPSedÓ) to make the records software independent.  In the late 1990s it was learned that this decoding,
which was done around 1977-1980, had introduced data anomalies in some files.  Fortunately, the original NIPS
files had been retained and periodically transferred to new storage media at least two times over two decades.Thus, when the data anomalies were discovered, the original NIPS-encoded files could be accessed to correct the
anomalies.8Although style sheets are problematical for long-term preservation (for example, they refer to an underlyingrendering model that may change with time; see Chapter 3), it is reasonable to use them in conjunction with
preferred derived forms, for which it is acceptable to have shorter lifetimes and less than perfect rendering.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARA3. Be neutral with respect to migration, emulation, or other approaches. There is much debate
today in the archival community concerning access to obsolete data typesÑthose for whichwidely available software and/or hardware is no longer available.  One approach is migra-
tion:  to convert records expressed in expiring data types into modern data types, repeating as

those data types in turn expire.  An alternative is emulation:  Save the original executable
software used to manipulate each data type (applications and possibly supporting elementssuch as the operating system) and emulate the operations of the obsolete computer and thus
emulate the old application on a new hardware and software platform.9  The emulation
approach would, of course, also apply where the records themselves consist of executablecode.Migration and emulation have disadvantages as well as advantages.  There are other
possible preservation approaches as well.10  None of these approaches has emerged as ac-
cepted practiceÑdebate, experiments, and developments will continue.11NARAÕs most prudent strategy is to use archival procedures that will accommodate bothemulation and migration.  Both depend on saving the data files in their original data type.
Both depend on saving additional information to be able to interpret the bits in the future.
NARA should be saving information that will support both migration and emulation in thefuture.4. Do not rely primarily on a strategy of converting records to platform- and vendor-independent
archiving formats to avoid obsolescence. Conversion of each data type to a platform- and vendor-neutral data type at ingest is a form of migration, with all of its limitations.  Such data types

cannot, therefore, replace the role of the original data type because they cannot encode all ofthe elements of all data types.XML formats are often proposed for this role.  It is important to realize that conversion to
XML has the same limitations as conversion to other platform- and vendor-independent for-mats.   Sometimes lossless derived types (i.e., where there is an inverse transformation be-
tween, for example, a native format and XML) are available; however, one still has to worry
about bugs in the transformation software.  Box 4.1 discusses XML as a preservation format in
more detail.  An XML (or other format) derived form may, however, be a very useful adjunct
to saving the original data type, as discussed above.5. Save ephemeral (nonderivable) metadata.  
Good archival practice is to save as much metadataas possible about each record (and the collection or group in which it resides).  As is the case

with paper records, the most important metadata to save are the metadata that would other-wise be lost.  By contrast, a great deal of metadata can be recovered from the record itself
(assuming it can be interpreted).  Electronic records lend themselves to automated tools for

extracting derivable metadata.9See, e.g., Jeff Rothenberg, 1998, Avoiding Technological Quicksand: Finding a Viable Technical Foundation for DigitalPreservation, Council on Library and Information Resources, Washington, D.C. Available online at <http://www.clir.org/pubs/reports/rothenberg/contents.html>.10Raymond A. Lorie.  2001.  
ÒA Project on Preservation of Digital Data.Ó RLG DigiNews, 5(3).  Available online at
<http://www.rlg.org/preserv/diginews/diginews5-3.html>.11This report does not attempt to review the approaches in any detail or evaluate them, though the secondreport may do so.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DESIGNING AND ENGINEERING THE ERA33BOX 4.1The Role of XML in PreservationXML is increasingly proposed as the representation of choice for the long-term preservationof electronic records.  XML is a powerful tool and does have a role to play in digital archiving.  In

particular, it allows the expression of document content separate from presentation, in a nonpro-
prietary, platform-independent manner.  Moreover, XML is establishing itself as a widely used

tool.  However, it is not a panacea for preservation.  Here is a brief outline of why it is not:
¥XML is an appealing way to embed markup within text but it is not a self-contained doc-
ument format.  Even relatively straightforward uses of XML require the use of a set of additional
conventions.  In particular, XML requires additional support to specify document appearance

and does not deal with nontextual or dynamic data.  Some of these limitations are being ad-

dressed by continual development of XML-related conventions to include style languages and
graphics languages and so forth and by embracing other conventions, such as those separately
developed for image and multimedia data.  Thus representing a document in its entirety requires

components using these conventions, and interpreting and rendering an XML document in the
future will require recourse to a number of conventions besides XML per se, each of whose
proper interpretation would need to be preserved as well.  Ensuring the faithful interpretation of

these conventions in the future may be a smaller preservation problem than that of ensuring the
faithful interpretation of individual document formats, but it is still a preservation problem.¥ XML conveys structure, but not meaning.  XML provides a means of structuring data and
allows for the expression of a vocabulary to describe data components of document classes.  It
does not in itself serve to record what the data mean.  Some text tagged as <TITLE> may be the

title of the document, or it may be the title of a person (ÒHerr Doktor ProfessorÓ), or it may have
neither meaning.  Other documents might use <TI> or even <T> to tag their titles.  Tags donÕt

convey meaning.  A particular markup tag may have meaning specific to the application that

created the document and may not be completely captured by XML or other conventions.  Even

if one retains possession of the schema or Document Type Definition (DTD)  used to create the
document, one could not reconstruct the documentÕs behavior in its entirely without somehow
recording the application-specific semantics of tags.  In such cases, conversion to XML has not
eliminated the difficult preservation problem of interpreting a document in the future.¥ Conversion to XML is potentially lossy.  Converting a document to  XML will inevitably lose
information unless the set of XML-related conventions has provision for every feature required
by the original document.  As the point above suggests, this is not likely to be the case for

application-specific semantics.  In addition, conversion to XML is a migration, with all the intrinsic

risks of approximations, inaccuracies, and errors.  XML cannot, therefore, be considered as an

alternative to saving the original data objects in their original data types.¥ The set of XML-related conventions comprises components that are new, relatively untest-ed, and not widely supported.  XML itself is 5 years old; many of the related standards are only
now coming into being.  Even if XML itself remains unchanged forever, these supporting conven-

tions may change considerably or may fail to find widespread support and be replaced by alter-
native approaches.1 Thus, using XML may not provide an eternal representation whose bits only
need to be made durable but may, rather, require migration or emulation of components.1Indeed, DTDs are now being replaced by schemas (XSchema) as a means for specifying the re-quired structure of XML documents.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARAConsider, by way of example, a memo in the form of a word-processor file obtained froma disk of a White House staffer; the text of the memo identifies the author, the date it waswritten, and the recipient.  The items in the text could be recorded as metadata in anticipation
of indexing and searching metadata to find all documents written by a given author, for
example.  If these metadata are not recorded as the record is ingested, they can be recorded
later.  By contrast, there are ephemeral metadata about the record
Ñitems such as whichstafferÕs PC contained the disk, the date and time the file was written onto the disk, the versionof the operating system usedÑthat are not evident from the record itself and that will be lostunless explicitly recorded during ingest.Databases offer another example.  One of the challenges of preserving older databases is
that schema documentation is absent.  In particular, many critical integrity assumptions are
not made explicit, nor can they be deduced by inspecting the data, though in many cases itmay be possible to deduce them by analyzing a corpus of queries.  Metadata that should be

saved would include formal and informal information on schema information, query libraries,and so forth.6. Save essential external references that are implicit or explicit in the record.  As is well-known to
archivists, a digital resource will often make references to other resources.  In some cases, thisis because these resources represent other components of the same Òcompound document.ÓFor example, the image components of some document types are stored as physically separateresources.  In general, digital records may comprise multiple explicit components, so to pre-
serve such a record, one must be vigilant about archiving all of its components.  Implicit

references to resources such as default style sheets or fonts must also be considered.  It may be
valuable to have a tool or process to ensure that records are in fact saved in their entirety.12In principle, this is a straightforward goal, but no clear solutions exist for managing exter-nal references; it is an active area of research in the digital library community.  Digital records
present some other challenging problems, including these:  (1) The cross-references are buried
inside the representation rather than being explicitly visible, as are the citations in a paper
report, and (2) digital cross-references often use naming schemes (for example, file numbers,local file names, or URLs) that are unstable, not standardized, and may not survive very long.Indeed they may have stopped working by the time that the document is ingested.12One way to do this is to simulate, at ingest time, access and presentation of the record, making sure that allresources used by the access and presentation processes are available in the archive.  The full set of external
references required to support the emulation approach includes the files required to install the application, operat-
ing system, and other supporting facilities on bare hardware.  These are all implicit external references that wouldneed to be preserved in a software repository, perhaps as part of the ERA or perhaps shared with other digitalarchives.The Vesta research project (Allan Heydon et al., 2002, The Vesta Software Configuration Management System, SRCResearch Report 177, CompaqÕs Systems Research Center, Palo Alto, Calif. Available online at <http://gatekeeper.dec.com/pub/DEC/SRC/research-reports/abstracts/src-rr-177.html>) developed this sort of capabil-
ity for all of the code and other resources required to build a large software system.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.KEY TECHNICAL ISSUES35355Key Technical Issues
DATA MODELWhich information and metadata are saved for each preserved record?  How are they
represented?  Using which data types?  The Òdata modelÓ is the specification that answers

these questions.  The ingest process builds representations of records that conform to the
model and the access process finds records, deciphers the representation according to themodel, and presents the results to the user.  The data model is thus a key interface in the

system: it is the interface between the ingest process and the access process, using a linkageprovided by the storage system. It is an Òinterface to the future.Ó1The data model must be designed to evolve, because new data types and requirements willemerge over the life of the system.  Thus a careful design for the data model that tries to
anticipate future ERA needs will simplify the system.  While it is easy to allow different
models to coexist in a single archive simply by labeling each record with the identity of the
data model used to store it, a proliferation of data models will result in a costly proliferation ofsoftware to interpret them.This chapter highlights some of the properties of a data model, principally to tie it intodiscussion elsewhere in the section.  Box 5.1 shows some possible elements of a digital record.
Many variations are possible; for example, the metadata for each file (original and derived)might be recorded separately, with the metadata that pertain to the record as a whole kept in1Although this expression may seem trite, it accurately describes the vital role of the data model.  The ingest
process must prepare a digital representation of the record that supports future access processesÑsome of whichmay not be created until years after the ingestion of the record. Thus, the interface must be designed to ignore theinner workings of access modules.  At the same time, the properties of the interface will enable or constrain what

future access modules can do with the record.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARABOX 5.1Some Possible Elements of a Digital Record1. Original files:  one or more digital files, the original bit stream or native form of the recordrepresented in its native data type. A record may consist of more than one file, e.g., a report inwhich each chapter is represented by a separate word-processor file.2. Optional derived forms:  digital files obtained from the original files by a converter
. ERApolicies might encourage certain kinds of derived forms to be saved, for example these:ÑA form whose data type is chosen to simplify ÒpresentationÓ or ÒrenderingÓ the record
into a visible form for printing or display.
ÑA form whose data type is chosen to simplify content searching.3. Metadata for the record.  In addition to the usual metadata normally captured for records,
there is additional metadata associated with electronic records, such as:ÑData types of the digital files and derived forms, with sufficient information to allow
finding documentation about the data types.  Data types will usually be versioned.

ÑRelationship among the digital files that constitute the record.
ÑIntegrity checksÑe.g., a cryptographic hash, for the digital files and the metadata.
ÑEphemeral/nonderivable metadataÑi.e., properties of the context in which the record
was created that are not specified in the record itself.
ÑDerived metadataÑi.e., properties that have been extracted from the record.
ÑProvenance and history, such as evidence that it was transferred accurately to the
archive (a form of ephemeral metadata).  In the case of derived forms, metadata identify

the converter used to obtain the derived form from the original.
ÑUnique identifier of the record.
ÑThe data type of the metadataÑi.e., the definitions of metadata elements used to
construct the metadata for this record.a separate file.  Metadata that pertain to collections as a whole might be stored in yet another
file, referenced in metadata for each record in the collection.The data model must also deal with embedding and aggregation.  Embedding occurs
when one record is embedded within another, e.g., a spreadsheet is embedded as an attach-
ment within an e-mail message.  Aggregation occurs when several records are saved together,
e.g., a series of e-mail messages is saved in a single file, even though each message is to betreated as a separate record.  Another form of aggregation that may be desirable is the con-

tainerÑe.g., as used by the SDSC demonstrationÑwhich simply collects a group of recordsinto a single digital file for more efficient handling by the file system.2The archive should contain complete documentation about all versions of the data model,including specifications of the data types it uses.  Since metadata sets are likely to proliferate
2A container is distinct from an archivistÕs Òcollection.Ó  A collection may span several containers, and several
collections might fit within a single container.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.KEY TECHNICAL ISSUES37and be complex, it is essential that any use of metadata be linked to a complete definition of itsterms.Several aspects of the data model require more discussion:¥Evolution
.  The key to smooth evolution of the data model is to carefully label each
digital file that is part of the stored record with its type; when the file is read, the type identifierselects software that can interpret the file correctly.  This is sometimes called Òself-identifyingdata.Ó Whenever a data type is chosen as part of the data model, the system designer should
ask, How do I introduce a new version of this data type without disrupting existing records?Clearly, if new types are introduced too frequently, the proliferation of types will lead to
overly complex software to decode them all.  Note that types must be versioned
Ñit is notenough to say Òthis is a Microsoft Word document.Ó A version number and perhaps platform(e.g., PC or Macintosh) are required for unambiguous identification.¥Unique identifier
.  The ERA should assign to each record a unique identifier that can be
used, both inside and outside the archive, to refer to records.  Such identifiers are used inside
a system to identify records without regard to their location or storage mechanism; they are
used outside a system to specify a link to a specific record.  A related question is how separate
parts of the representation of a record (e.g., distinct original files or derived forms) are identi-fied.  The unique identifier for digital records should be harmonized with ways of identifyingother records held by NARA.3  There are a number of digital identifier techniques and imple-mentations today, and it is entirely possible that the particular scheme used by the ERA maychange a few times over the lifetime of the archive.  The system design should accommodate

such changes.¥Modifying the archive. 
 Although the principal idea of an archive is that records, once
ingested, must not be modified, the ERA must allow certain kinds of information to be added
or changed.  Records themselves, once ingested, are rarely, if ever, modified or removed.  It
may be advantageous to add new derived forms long after the record was first ingested,perhaps when improved migration tools and techniques become available.  And some of the

metadata surrounding records (such as conditions of use, where to find derived versions, andrelation to records added at a later date) may need to be modified.  Some metadata may need
to be updatedÑfor example, to record ephemeral metadata that come to light after the originalingestion, or to note changes to access controls for a record that result from new regulations orthe passage of time.  Importantly, all such modifications need to be logged in such a way thatit is possible later to identify causes of mistakes and untangle them.  It also may be wise to

design the system so that information cannot be deleted, only augmented.43NARA does have a procedure for establishing a unique identifier for each record series for its paper records.Essentially, the records hierarchy has 13 levels, from Record Group to item, that assign a unique identifier based
on the specific Record Group and the level of the record.  This does not go all the way down to a unique ID for
each record.  It would be possible to add additional data (such as a date and sequence number) to provide unique
identification.4Computer science researchers have designed Òwrite-onceÓ file systems in which it is not possible to delete a file,
only to add new files or supplant old ones (add new versions of old files).  This may not be a wise approach for the
ERA.  Suppose, however, certain records must be expunged from the archive, perhaps as a result of a court order.

Even though rare, such a modification might be required.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARA¥Commonalities with digital libraries.  The issues confronting the design of a data model forthe ERA are almost exactly the same as those for a digital library.  Unfortunately, there are nostandard data models that can simply be adopted by NARA.  Nevertheless, NARA should
seek to align its design with that of digital libraries, since this will increase the likelihood of
providing uniform access to libraries and archives in the future.Closely related to the specification of the data model is a set of policies used to operate thearchive.  For example, the data model determines how derived forms are recorded in the
archive, but a policy will specify which kinds of derived forms should be generated for acollection, perhaps specified as part of the collectionÕs profile.  Policies will also apply to
modifications to the archiveÑwho may introduce modifications and under what conditions(perhaps even requiring two staffers to confirm certain kinds of changes, as is common prac-tice in the financial services industry).Data Types and ObsolescenceThe data model confronts the most challenging problem of an archive:  For records to be
useful many decades after they are ingested, they must be expressed in the data model usingdata types that can still be decoded and interpreted at the time of access.  By that time the

computers and software used to create the original records may be obsolete.The archival community has written at length on this topic.5  The debate over emulation
vis-‹-vis migration continues (see the brief discussion of emulation and migration in thepreceding chapter), and neither one is firmly established as the only way to preserve digitalrecords. In fact, some researchers in digital preservation reject the notion that emulation andmigration are mutually exclusive (assuming, as we do here, that the requisite information to
support each is retained) and argue that each is appropriate under particular circumstances.Consequently, the ERA should be designed to:¥Record in the archive the information necessary to support both emulation and migra-tion when and if either becomes common. The original bit stream and careful records of thesoftware environment in which it was created (data type and ephemeral metadata to record
the fonts, operating system, application program, and other digital resources or pointers tothem) are essential.¥Function adequately in the absence of either emulation or migration solutions.  This
requires some pragmatic choices, which are discussed here and in Chapter 4.NARA shares with others an interest in making one or another of these preservationstrategies operational, such as building emulators for a few of the most popular computers.5See, for example, Jeff Rothenberg, 1995 (revised in 1999), ÒEnsuring the Longevity of Digital Documents,ÓScientific American 272(1): 42-47; revised and expanded version available online at <http://www.clir.org/pubs/
archives/ensuring.pdf>; Task Force on Archiving Digital Information, 1996, Preserving Digital Information (com-
missioned by the Commission on Preservation and Access and the Research Libraries Group, Inc. [RLG]), Moun-
tain View, Calif., RLG, available online at <http://www.rlg.org/ArchTF/tfadi.index.htm>; and Howard Besser,2000, ÒDigital Longevity,Ó in 
Handbook for Digital Projects:  A Management Tool for Preservation and Access
, MaxineSitts, ed. Andover, Mass., Northeast Document Conservation Center, pp. 155-166.  See also Stephen Manes, 1998,

ÒTime and Technology Threaten Digital Archives . . .,Ó New York Times, April 7, p. F4.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.KEY TECHNICAL ISSUES39This option is worthy of further exploration.  However, as a future option rather than a present
reality, the ERA program cannot depend on a particular preservation strategy at present.The preceding chapter describes a pragmatic approach to making records useful in thefuture:  Anticipate common purposes to which records may be put in the future (e.g., display

or text searching) and prepare, as each record is ingested, one or more derived forms of therecord, chosen to streamline future access for those uses.  As a complement to possible futureefforts that provide access through such techniques as emulation or migration, the pragmatic
strategy is to support access by using a smaller number of data types to express the derivedforms of records.  These are referred to in this report as 
Òpreferred data types.ÓThis approach requires characterizing the most common (future) uses of different kinds ofrecords and choosing associated preferred data types for the derived forms.6  These choices,
and the kinds of access users seek, may, of course, change over time in ways not anticipatedtodayÑbut some reasonable projections of use that address likely forms of access can bemade.As an illustration, here are some common uses of records and possible choices for pre-ferred data types to support the use:¥Presentation of a document in visual form (printed or displayed).  Some preferred data types:image data types (fax, TIFF), Portable Document Format (PDF), ASCII text, XML-encoded
document with a style sheet that specifies rendering parameters.7¥Searching the text of many documents.  Some preferred data types:  PDF,
8 ASCII text, andXML-encoded document.¥Loading a relational table into a database.  Some preferred data types:  comma-separated
variables (CSV), dBase, XML encoding. The derived forms may fail to reveal one or more properties of the original record but
nevertheless will make the record accessible many years after its ingest.  For example, a
presentation created from an XML-encoded derived form may not break lines and pages in the
same places as the original word-processing software; a PDF file derived from a word-proces-sor file will not retain the change history recorded in the native data type.  But supporting PDF
as a presentation data type is far easier than supporting the very large number of data types
from which PDF files can be derived.The choice of preferred data type will require consideration of the loss of fidelity comparedwith the native form.9  A future researcher considering the use of a derived form will need this
information to determine whether to be satisfied with a derived form or to take extra steps tointerpret the native data type.Retaining one or more derived forms will add somewhat to the storage requirements of thearchive, but wise choices of preferred data types will probably not increase storage require-6It is important to note that manipulating (editing or changing) a preserved record is not a common use, sopreferred data types can have much more constrained aims than native data types.7Box 4.1 discusses some of the limitations associated with XML encoding.8Most PDF writers create files that are easy to search for text strings.  However, it is certainly possible to create
PDF files that defy simple searching.9For some records, it may be difficult to carefully enumerate and document this loss.  The cost and limitations ofthis evaluation should be factored into the decision to create preferred data types.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARAments by more than a factor of 2.   In many cases, a single derived form can serve all the
common uses anticipated for the record.  In some cases, the native data type may itself be a
preferred data type that satisfies all the anticipated uses.The reason for recording derived forms when the record is ingested is simple:  It is at this
time that software to create the derived forms is most likely to be available.  Unfortunately, the
ingest process often occurs many years after a record was originally created, by which time thesoftware to create derived forms may already be obsolete.  Then the process may require

custom software or may be very difficult (e.g., if the native data type remained proprietaryand fell into disuse).If the derived forms of a record are to be useful decades after they are created, the pre-ferred data types must be chosen carefully.  NARA will need to select and extend the collection
of preferred data types.  Preferred data types would have at least some of the following
properties:¥In common use.  The data type should be in common use and reasonably expected to
remain so for some time.  NARA should not have to make decisions about common data types

quickly, so the list can evolve slowly as NARA watches for common forms.10¥Well documented.  The data type should have sufficient documentation to allow modestly
skilled programmers to write software to process the data type for its intended uses, such as
presentation.  Standards are usually well documented, but often proprietary data types also
have fine documentation (e.g., PDF11 and RTF
12 today) and may be reasonable candidates for
data types of derived forms.  Many proprietary data types also have corresponding 
ÒexternalÓor ÒinterchangeÓ data types that are candidates for preferred data types.  It is an added benefit
if the data type is simple.¥Slowly changing.  If the definition of the data type is stable, the cost of supporting it is
reduced.¥Free from intellectual property encumbrances.  It is a disadvantage if processing a data type
requires licenses from intellectual property owners.  (In the long run, NARA may wish to seek

agreements that processing archival documents represents Òfair useÓ of such property, or seek
specific legislative relief.)  NARA
Ñor the federal governmentÑmay wish to induce vendorsto transfer obsolete data type specifications to the public domain.¥Software available in the public domain or in open-source form.  For each preferred data type,
NARA will need to obtain and maintain associated access software.  In many cases, NARA can
take advantage of software written by others.  Note, however, that to be useful to NARA the

software must be in a form that is likely to be useful decades from nowÑfor example, that canbe ported as needed to new hardware and software platforms.Choices of preferred data types for the ERA should also be influenced by common practice10If preferred data types are chosen carefully, it is possible that the period of time before a preferred data typemust be decommissioned may be lengthened considerably.11Adobe SystemsÕ ÒPortable Document Format,Ó <http://partners.adobe.com:80/asn/developer/acrosdk/docs/
filefmtspecs/PDFReference.pdf>.12MicrosoftÕs Rich Text Format, <http://msdn.microsoft.com/library/en-us/dnrtfspec/html/rtfspec.asp>.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.KEY TECHNICAL ISSUES41in digital libraries, other digital archives, and mainstream computing.13  Common choices
would lead to opportunities for sharing access software among such partners and may in-crease the likelihood of commercial products that will reduce the cost of developing or evolv-ing the ERA.  Selecting a relatively small number of preferred data types has the additional

advantage of allowing NARA staff to become truly expert in the technical aspects of particularformats.Derived forms can also be used to address other needs of the ERA.  For example, a data-
base in which some fields are public and others have special access restrictions might have aderived form for public access, with sensitive fields omitted.  Redacted versions of a record
might be stored as derived forms with relaxed access controls.Derived forms may also be a simple way to deal with unique or complex data types.  For
example, an archivist seeking to preserve records stored in a unique IT system with unknowninternal data structures might run a collection of ÒreportsÓÑtext files intended for printingÑwhich taken together reveal all the information retained in the unknown data structures.Archiving these reports as derived forms might be the most practical approach to preservingthe essential contents of a record.MetadataMetadata are conventionally expressed as a series of Òattribute, valueÓ pairs (also some-
times called Òtag, valueÓ pairs). A metadata set is a collection of attribute names and corre-
sponding definitions used to express metadata.  There are no standard universal metadata

sets, though many popular subsets exist (e.g., Dublin Core14).  Some attempts are under way
to try to relate all metadata definitions to a common ontology, but this complex approach isvery risky.  It seems clear that metadata sets will change frequently over the lifetime of the

ERA and that the system should be designed to accommodate such change, an observationconfirmed by the experience of the SDSC demonstrations.  XML offers one convenient syntax
today for recording metadata, in part because it is easily extensible; it is already the represen-
tation of choice in the digital library community.For metadata saved in the ERA to be useful, users must be able to obtain precise definitionsof metadata tags.  It is for this reason that each metadata record should identify the metadata

set it uses and provide a way to find, in the archive itself, the definitions of the tags in that set.As discussed in Chapter 3, the SDSC work showed that indexing pertinent metadata in arelational database offers a surprisingly simple and effective way to find archived records.Some metadata saved in the ERA must be interpreted by the ERA software itself, e.g., tagsthat specify data types of the digital files that constitute the record.  In order to accommodate
changing metadata sets without enshrining specific metadata tag names throughout the soft-
ware, some form of lookup should be used to convert from the tag name used in the specificmetadata set to a name that is meaningful only to the software.13Preferred data types have been selected in a number of programs.  For example, the DSpace project
(<www.dspace.org>) provides varying levels of support for different formats.  The Federal Court system
Õs CaseManagement/Electronic Case Filing (CM/ECF) system, which allows courts to accept filings and provides accessto filed documents over the Internet, has adopted the PDF format.   For more information on the CM/ECF system,see <http://pacer.psc.uscourts.gov/cmecf/> and <http://pacer.psc.uscourts.gov/documents/press.pdf>.14<http://dublincore.org>Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARASTORAGEThe storage function of the ERA is used to save files for a long time (perhaps it should becalled a Òlong-term file systemÓ15).  It thus serves as a transparent bridge between ingest and
access functions: The files produced by ingest are delivered without modification to access.  In
many respects it is like any other file system.  Some of its requirements, though not common-
place, are shared with other very large, mission-critical systems, including these:¥Scalability.  It must be able to grow to hold many (even hundreds of) petabytes of data,
in many billions or even trillions of individual files.¥Robustness.  It must not corrupt data or fail to deliver data requested.
¥Access control.  Only authorized software, under the control of authorized staff, may
store files or make other modifications to what is stored.It is in the area of robustness over a very long period of timeÑthe lifetime of its data islonger than that of any known data storage device or mediumÑthat the system presentsunusual requirements.16The following strategies can be used to preserve digital files for many decades:¥Store redundant replicas.  To survive the failure of a storage device, information is stored
redundantly.  But care must be taken to categorize failure modes and determine appropriate
storage strategies.  For example, if a file is stored on two different disks, both of which are

located in the same room, a fire might destroy both copies. So some kind of geographicreplication is a mustÑusually achieved today by saving copies of a file at one or more remotesites connected by a high-speed network.  Replication is governed by policies enforced by the
file system that specify how many copies should be kept, where they should be stored, and soon.¥Detect errors and correct them automatically.  In order to detect failed devices in a large filesystem, it is necessary to use a background task to read all the data in the system constantlyand check for errors caused by deterioration.  This process requires computing a hash or
checksum of each file and comparing the value with a value computed from the same data
when it was first stored.17  When a corrupted file is detected, one of its redundant copies is
used to create a fresh copy somewhere else so as to conform to the replication policy.  (And
other files stored on the same device that produced errors are probably also moved, since the
device as a whole may be failing.  The device is then removed from service or replaced.)
¥Refresh media.18 As storage media age, copy all the files stored on them to new devices,
15Calling it an archival file system risks confusing it with archival file systems offered by some computer systemvendors, often as part of a hierarchical storage management product.16The robustness requirements may well not be uniform for all records.  The requirements might, for example,
be a property of a record that is assigned at ingest time and might be reflected in how much the storage system
ÒinvestsÓ in preserving that record.  This is a good example of how complicated some of the architectural issues for
the ERA can be.17Disk and tape recording formats include checksums that are verified on each read, but these are viewed asinsufficiently robust.  A file-level hash is advisable as well.
18The term ÒrefreshÓ is preferred to 
Òmigrate,Ó because the second term is used to describe a conversion of data
type.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.KEY TECHNICAL ISSUES43and remove the old devices from service.  This step requires that new devices can be attachedto the file system at all times over the life of the system.¥Rebuild directories and indexes by scanning the archive.  If sensitive data that describe the
structure of a file system are lost, the entire file system can be scanned to rebuild the data.
Such a design requires storing files on the disk in a way that records their structure within thefile system.¥Use implementation diversity.  To guard against losing files because of errors in the file-
system software, replicas of a file can be saved in file systems with distinct implementations.These techniques are all widely used (or at least widely advocated) today.  The engineering
challenge for NARA is that no one has yet demonstrated that they can, together, implement afile system that will preserve files for a  hundred years or more.
19 The scalability of the file system, as well as its ability to connect new storage devices to
replace old ones, can be achieved using network-connected storage systems.  When it is no
longer possible or economically feasible to expand the capacity of any existing storage system,a new system is procured, attached to the network, and configured to participate in the overall
file system.The overall file system operates as a ÒfederationÓ of the network-connected storage com-
ponents.  This technique uses a software layer that makes the collection of network-connected

systems appear to be a single file system.  It would provide services such as these:
¥Naming of files, and mapping names to locations where files are stored;¥Routing file access requests to the appropriate network-connected store, incorporatingnewly added stores, and providing the necessary ÒdriversÓ for new classes of network storage
services;¥Access control;¥Redundancy control, as described above (maintaining redundant copies, scanning forcorrupted files, refreshing old media, removing old storage from service);¥Audit log, used to track all changes to the file system;¥Performance measurement, used to determine the load placed on the file system, itsinternal overhead (e.g., for integrity auditing or media refresh), occurrences of faulty media,
and so on;¥Management processes, used to modify configurations when new storage is added tothe federation or to direct that old storage should be evacuated and abandoned, etc.The software layer insulates the ERA clients of the file system from the various implemen-tations used in the federation.  Implementations can be replaced by changing at most a driver
in the software.  The Storage Request Broker (SRB), used in the SDSC demonstrations, is one
example of such a distributed file system, but the technology is quite common.2019Digital computers and their storage devices were unknown in 1903!20The federated file system model is a mature, well-understood technology.  Multiple implementations exist, of
which the SRC is only one example.  The research community is exploring new technologies for decentralized
storage, location, and retrieval of information that may offer additional capabilities in the future.  But NARA

should focus today on more mature technologies that enjoy commercial support and are likely to be around for awhile.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARADifferent storage policies may apply to different parts of the distributed file system.   Work-
ing storage for both ingest and access modules may be provided by part of the file systemfederation.  Because working storage need not be retained for decades, some of the redun-
dancy, auditing, and media refreshing policies that are required for the long-term storage will
not apply to the working stores.The distributed file system may use COTS products to provide network-connected stor-age.  Note that some of the requirements and policies of the distributed file system interact

with properties of the network storageÑe.g., a conventional network-accessible file systemproduct will not be able to identify all files that should be moved when a corrupted file isdetected.  Modern file systems may have redundancy techniques built in (e.g., RAID
21) thatinteract with redundancy policies of the federation.  These issues will have to be carefully
addressed to determine how COTS products can be used in the file system.Storage must be geographically distributed in order to prevent catastrophic loss of data.22One possibility is that remote components are nevertheless managed as part of a single filesystem.  Since one of the key reasons for geographical diversity is to guard against total failure
of a site, it will be important that the entire file system can survive loss of a site.  Managing

replication to avoid single points of failure is one of the jobs of the federation software.Note that most properties of the file system apply to file systems required for digitallibraries.  There are opportunities for NARA to collaborate with others to arrive at common

specifications and implementations.  The file system should be designed without knowledge
of the data model, so the file system implementation can be shared even if the data model isnot.File System Performance RequirementsThe file system must be designed to meet the scale and performance requirements that theERA will face.  Examples of some of the file-system-specific performance metrics required to
guide design are these:¥Size.  What is the target size of the initial repository?  How many bytes? How many files?
How will each of these scale over time?¥Bandwidth.  How much bandwidth will be necessary to support ingest, access, file scan-ning, and media refresh?¥Refresh time.  How long will it take to copy or recreate the entire archive?  This parameter
is important, because if the file system becomes so large that it takes 5 years to copy and therefresh cycle needs to be repeated every 4 years, the design will not work.¥Ingest rate.  At what rate will new records be incorporated into the repository?  Note that
the geographic redundancy requirement means that the ingest rate heavily influences thebandwidth required for communication with remote storage, as new data are copied to remotesites.21The acronym originally referred to Òredundant array of inexpensive disks,Ó but today it commonly refers to
Òredundant array of independent disks.Ó22The only other alternative is to make backup tapes and carry them far offsite.  Although tape backup is simpler
than a hierarchical storage management system using tape, a remote file system is even simpler because it avoids
tapes altogether.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.KEY TECHNICAL ISSUES45¥Response time.  Must the system support real-time queries?  If so, what are reasonable
response time targets?¥Life span.  At what rate are components expected to be replaced (particularly the storage
devices themselves).  What is the unit of replacement?  What is the impact of replacement on

performance?Performance requirements for access are harder to anticipate than those for ingest andstorage.  Although the conventional model for access is a user conducting a search and reading
records on a computer screen, it is also likely that users in the future will want to run statisticalqueries, perform data mining and automated cross-referencing and correlation, and do other
things that a future access system may or may not support and which could have significantbearing on an access systemÕs performance requirements.  Moreover, it is likely that access will
involve creating full-text indexes of collections, which imposes an additional load on the long-
term file system.These targets may eliminate certain technology choices (for example, access performancerequirements might eliminate the possibility that tape could be used as a primary preservation
medium).  They are essential to guide the implementation of software that controls the federa-
tionÑfor example, the design of the naming system is quite sensitive to anticipated systemsize.Selecting Storage MediaPresently, NARA stores most of its electronic records using off-line tape storage; this isalso the approach used in the SDSC demonstrations.  For new systems, disks are becoming the
preferred storage choice.  Instead of storing files on tape and copying and storing backups off-

site, digital archives are kept on geographically separated disk replicas.  Data are transferred
to other locations using either a network connection or by shipping disks or servers containingthe files offsite.  While other storage media, such as optical disks, have been considered for

long-term preservation, they suffer from many of the same drawbacks as tape.Disks have a number of advantages compared with tape, including these:¥Lower cost.  The overall system costs of tape and disk storage are roughly equal, but the
cost per byte of disk storage is declining faster than that of tape.  (Cost comparisons of disk and
tape are complicated by debates about what to count, especially the human support staff
required.)  Projections favor disks in coming years.
¥Volumetric density.  Disks take less physical space to store the same amount of data.
Densities are improving by a factor of about 2 every year.¥Fast access.  Disks allow fast access, suitable for interactive applications.  By contrast,
tape processing incurs a variety of access delays.  Tapes must be mounted (either by a robot or
manually) and once mounted, must be read sequentially.¥Less complexity.  Disk-only file systems are much simpler than hierarchical storage man-
agement schemes that must manage the migration of data between disk and tape.  Tapes also
require large file sizes to be efficient, which results in complex file-aggregation mechanisms.  If

accessing a record requires reading files from several disks or tapes because they were createdat different times (e.g., metadata or derived forms that were added long after the record wasingested), disk-only systems will perform far better than tape systems.  A tape system could be
Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARAdesigned to collect and rewrite in one spot disparate portions of a record, but this addscomplexity.¥Automatic error detection and recovery.  Regardless of actual disk lifetimes, the file systemmust be designed to save files on more than one disk and perform file integrity checks fre-
quently enough that files corrupted due to bad disks are identified before the last replica of thefile is also unreadable.  When a disk is found to be bad, all files stored on it are copied
elsewhere and the disk is removed from service or replaced.There is more to learn about the use of disk storage for long-term preservation.  The details
of disk drive failure mechanisms and statistics are not yet fully known, because manufacturers
are loath to release data.  It is not clear, for example, whether disks should be powered down
if they are not expected to be used for a while or whether a disk that has been powered off fora long time should be run periodically to lubricate its bearings.  There are indications that the
lifetime of some disks is somewhat reduced when they are operated near other disks becauseof coupled vibration.No choice of storage medium avoids the need for storage refresh.  Storage refresh should
be anticipated from the outset and embedded in the design and operation of the ERA.The trends in cost and performance of disks also suggest that a system designed for alifetime as long as that of the ERA should use disks exclusively.  Final decisions about which

media to use will require more detailed analysis of costs (initial procurement, ongoing main-tenance, and labor), physical space requirements, access times, media degradation rates, dataloss rates, integrity requirements, and so forth.  The ERA design should, in any case, in no way

preclude moving to disk-only storage.INGESTIngest processes are designed according to the data types23  of incoming records and the
work flows of the organization building the archive.  Some digital document repositories have

been created with a streamlined process for scanning large numbers of uniform paper docu-ments or ingesting particular digital formats and building a repository using very little manuallabor.  At the other extreme, an archivist presented with hard disks retrieved from the White

House computers or a pile of old floppy disks confronts diverse records and unique challengesthat may not be easily automated.The experience of archivists has tended to be ad hocÑactivities carried out by skilled ITprofessionals with a collection of tools for dissecting and processing arcane data types.  Somewriters envision the ingest process supported by an Òaccessioning workbenchÓ24 that suggests
23Throughout this report, Òdata typeÓ is used to identify the data-encoding rules whereby various kinds of
records (documents, electronic mail messages, pictures, database entires, etc.) are expressed as a collection of bits.
Thus an image might be represented by bits whose data type is TIFF or GIF or JPEG or any of a number of othersuch specifications.  ÒFile formatÓ is often used interchangeably with 
Òdata type,Ó but 
Òdata typeÓ is used exclu-
sively throughout this report because the literal interpretation of Òfile formatÓ is overly restricted to files of bits.
For example, when an image is embedded in an e-mail message that is itself embedded in a ÒfolderÓ of many
messages saved in a file, the bits representing the image cannot properly be called a Òfile.Ó24Kenneth Thibodeau. 2001. ÒBuilding the Archives of the Future,Ó D-Lib Magazine 7(2), February. Available
online at <http://www.dlib.org/dlib/february01/thibodeau/02thibodeau.html>.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.KEY TECHNICAL ISSUES47the problem-solving skills and craftsmanship required.  NARA will probably need to devise
multiple ingest processes and associated software to cope with the variability of records pre-sented to it.Designing ingest processes depends critically on the kinds and quantities of records to beprocessed.  This is why it is important that NARA inventory digital records waiting to be
ingested and survey the records that agencies will soon pass on to NARA.In the past, a large fraction of the ingest effort has been devoted to dealing with theproblems of extracting data from physical media, such as floppy disks of great age that havesuffered untold abuses.  These media-related problems will subside in the future for several
reasons:  (1) data are increasingly stored on hard disks, whose reliability and capacity have

steadily improved; (2)  because a high-speed network interface is standard on computers large
and small, moving data to modern media is greatly simplified; and (3) computer ownersÑandespecially professional IT departmentsÑcan and commonly do move important data to newmedia to ensure its continued accessibility.  Where records are stored on off-line media such as
tape and ingest is deferred for years after record creation, media issues will persist.Unfortunately, a far more serious and growing problem confronts the digital archivist: aprofusion of data types, many of which are very complex.  Simply checking that records are
represented in their claimed data type can be difficultÑit may require running hard-to-findsoftware on rare computer systems.  While 
Òdata dumpsÓ may have sufficed in the past to
distinguish ASCII from EBCDIC databases, checking the integrity of a modern word process-ing file is much more difficultÑit may require running the word processor software thatcreated the record.25 Moreover, many of these data files may contain hidden references to
external data that should be considered for archiving as well.Another important problem is that of data managementÑdetermining which digital filesrepresent records that should be preserved.  When many files are saved in an ad hoc fashion

on a government computer, such as the personal computer of a White House staffer, and noformal records-management process is used, the files must sifted to find records to archive.For example, NARA was presented with several hundred hard disk drives from the White
House containing the digital record of the Clinton administration.  Extracting files from thesedisks was relatively easy, but discarding system files and duplicates recorded on severalmachines required additional steps.26Although experience offers little advice on general strategies for ingest, the committeeoffers some suggestions:¥Try to reduce the variability of records scheduled for preservation.  Identifying preferred datatypes and encouraging creating agencies to adopt these as native data types is one approach.Advance awareness of new data types being presented to NARA can guide adoption of new
preferred derived forms and development of associated software.  (The ERA will, of course,
25It would be useful and relatively easy to save the validation software at ingest time.26Because these files come from the White House, NARA has to also examine each record to determine whetherit should be classified as personal, political, or governmental, because the three types of records require differenttreatment.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARAstill have to be capable of ingesting the full variety of data types used in the federal govern-ment, which will roughly correspond to the full variety of data types in use more broadly.)¥Automate common cases, for example by creating scripts that carry out the transformations andchecks required.  For example, since it appears likely that e-mail records (with attachments) will
be an increasingly common record form, it makes sense to invest processing as much e-mail aspossible automatically.¥Develop a plan for handling metadata.  Ephemeral metadata must be captured as part of the
ingest process.  It may also be easy to capture some derived metadata as well and store the
results along with the archival record.  However, sophisticated metadata extraction, text sum-
marization, and searching need not be part of an initial system.  Such processes can be de-

ferred until later generations of the system without losing information, and better technologyto automate these processes may be available in the future.¥Develop explicit work flow designs.  Records may need to be reviewed by an archivist orother non-IT professional in order to make essential dispositions.  For example, presidential
records need to be categorized as government, political, or personal and handled accordingly.Some records may need to be reviewed for security or other access-control issues and then
tagged with suitable access-control metadata.  (This work flow requirement has implications
for system design; see below.)  The need to accommodate diverse work flows may be the most
challenging aspect of designing ingest software.  Both the work flows and the software must

be able to evolve over time.¥Design work flows, software, and auditing processes so that the integrity of records is guaran-teed.  Ideally, the creating agency should be able to certify that the records, as they appear in
the archive, are genuine.¥As noted above, record in the archive the details of processes used to ingest records so that
future researchers are able to understand any processing or translation applied to the records
during ingest.Finally, NARA will need to establish crisp guidelines governing modifications that staffmake to records as they are ingested.  Vigilant checking for errors or inconsistencies in data
might lead to a desire to fix errors or fill in gaps in data.  Such actions would not be tolerated
for paper records and should not be permitted for digital records.  It is thus important to

document what actions are taken with respect to media renewal or creating preferred formattypes.  If any changes occur in the underlying bit stream of digital records (without regard to
their impact on rendering), the preservation documentation should call attention to this. If
data are missing and the agency cannot locate the missing data, then the documentationshould call this to the attention of users.  Digital records are susceptible to accidental or
deliberate alteration; ingest processes should pay attention to end-to-end integrity assurance.The highly variable nature of ingestion processes will, as noted above, probably result inan evolving set of ad hoc processes and software.  However, there are a few system engineer-ing ideas that could be applied to ingestion:¥The ingestion of a set of records (e.g., a collection) by possibly ad hoc processes shouldcreate a set of files conforming to the ERA data model stored in such a way that the normal
ERA access processes can retrieve them.  These files might be considered to be provisionally
entered into the archive.  They are stored and accessed using the standard file-system inter-
Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.KEY TECHNICAL ISSUES49face, but they have yet to be formally released into the archive.27  In their provisional state, the
files can be accessed normally to be checked by the creating agency or the NARA ingestionstaff or to be reviewed by an archivist to assign record-specific properties such as accesscontrols.  Because the files are provisional, they may be deleted if errors are found.  Finally, the

provisional files are formally entered into the archive.¥A set of records ready to be entered into the archive (the provisional files above) shouldbe checked for consistency using an automated checker to ensure that they conform to the data
model.  For example, metadata should be checked to ensure that essential metadata tags are
present, that all files are properly described, etc.  It may be useful to verify each file using an
integrity checker associated with the fileÕs data type.  For example, if one of the files is ex-
pressed in an XML encoding with an associated data type definition (DTD) or schema, thechecker should verify that the XML file conforms to these specifications (i.e., it is a valid XMLdocument).  Validation provides an opportunity to identify records that may have been garbled

at some stage; marking nonconforming documents allows one to potentially identify problems(e.g., when records are exported from the creating agency) and forestall downstream process-ing errors.¥Although ingestion software may be ad hoc, there are common modules that should beimplemented once and shared, e.g., data-type checkers and converters.The cost of operating the ERA will depend critically on the amount of manual laborrequired to staff the ingest process.  If significant amounts of metadata must be entered and
checked by humans or if digital records arrive at NARA in corrupted or incomplete form, the
ingest process will bog down and ultimately limit the ERAÕs ability to meet its mandate.Providing the right kind of user interfaces or automation for streamlining this process willdepend on the details of the human processing required.  This is another area where estimates

based on records already produced by government agencies are required to design the ERA.ACCESSAccessing the ERA should be much like accessing a digital library:  It requires a means to
find a record, retrieve the record, and possibly convert it into another data type for delivery to
the requestor.  Digital libraries today routinely deliver their content via Web browsers or
download using a number of standard presentation formats.  Although these systems are
largely custom built, commercial software components are increasingly used.Perhaps the most vexing problem facing ERA is that the performance required for access-ing offerings, especially online access, is unknown.  Some collections will be used a great deal;
others will not.  Moreover, the design and deployment of access software changes as demand
changes.  Doubtless access modules will need to be redesigned several times as access statistics
become known or change.For collections that are accessed frequently by online users, it will probably be advisable toÒstageÓ the files by copying them from the long-term file system to a separate file system
27The SDSC demonstrations exploited this idea to great benefit.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARAdesigned for high-performance access.  As access demand for the collection grows, more
access modules can be deployed on available computers, all working from the same set ofstaged files.  The staged files act as a cache of the files held in the long-term file system.  (Such
staging, by decoupling the archival copy of the record from potentially malicious users, helps
protect record integrity.)Some kinds of access may require preprocessing an entire collection of records (or more).For example, full-text search software usually builds and saves an index to a corpus in order to
offer faster searching than would be possible by simply scanning all the contents for eachsearch request.  Indexing requires that records be rendered in an appropriate format.    Soft-
ware that summarizes text or automatically extracts metadata (e.g., names of people or busi-
nesses cited in news feeds) likewise builds a database of extracted information.  Even simple
searches based on metadata of collections or records will require building an index.28 These
indexing and access techniques will need to save extracted information temporarily on a
separate file systemÑnot part of the long-term file system.29  While these indexes can be
deleted and rebuilt if necessary, dismal performance will result if a large portion of the archivemust be scanned in order to rebuild one or more indexes.  As a result, techniques are required

for storing and updating these files incrementally, as changes are made to the archive.NARA will need to set expectations for access to ERA records.  In preparing this report, the
committee has assumed that users will receive either a digital file representing the record (in
its native data type or in one of the available derived forms) or will be presented a visualrepresentation of the record.  The committee has not addressed the much more difficult prob-lems of presenting online access to software that can manipulate one or more records (or
providing access to records that are themselves executable).By way of example, consider the variety of online access methods offered today by theCensus Bureau to the 2000 census data.30  Some offerings are simple tables, presented visually.
Others are responses to trivial queries against an underlying database.  Some are sophisticated
statistical extraction and calculation applications working from a census database.  Which
kinds of access could ERA users expect to this data decades hence?  Probably the first, and

perhaps the second (itÕs not hard to provide a simple search mechanism for tables).  Offering
complex applications, however, would not only place a computational burden on the ERA, butalso would require emulation, porting, or some other technique to allow todayÕs software torun in the far future.  NARA will have to make quality-of-service choices about whether and
when to invest in such capabilities.  It may be adequate to allow users to  simply download all
the data and process it themselves.  Alternatively, if there is sufficient public demand, the

Census Bureau itself might take on the task of providing such ongoing access to old censusdata sets.28The SDSC demonstrations used a relational database to record a subset of metadata information used forfinding records.29Note that some subtle aspects of access control arise when indexing or extracting data from collections.  A user
not authorized to view a record must not see any extracts from that record.30See <http://www.census.gov/main/www/access.html>.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.KEY TECHNICAL ISSUES51Finding Aids and SearchOver the lifetime of the ERA, access methods can be expected to change.  In the last few
years, for example, impressive Internet search services have emerged, and users now expect
full-text searching to be available for any large collection.The traditional method of access to archives uses finding aids that describe broad catego-ries of records, for example at the series level.  Finding aids are usually based on controlled-

vocabulary metadata, for example, MARC AMC and Encoded Archival Description (EAD).31Controlled-vocabulary descriptors are assigned manually to information objects, usually at
ingest, which makes ingest a more labor-intensive process.  NARA has invested considerable

resources in describing records series in accordance with uniform practices.32The traditional method of cataloging information and providing access is designed forarchives of physical media (e.g., paper, pictures, movies).  Different methods of cataloging and

access are possible with electronic records, and NARA should include these methods in itsplanning.Recent practice in the use of controlled-vocabulary metadata uses automated or semi-automated assignment of descriptors to information objects.  One example is text categoriza-
tion techniques used to assign subject codes to newswire articles,33 diagnostic codes to patient
discharge summaries, and grades to practice GMAT exams.34  Studies show that current
techniques assign descriptors as accurately as humans for some tasks.  Because it is not limited
by human labor, text categorization can be applied inexpensively, so it could be routinely usedin an ERA.  It can also be used to provide something that the traditional finding aids do not: by

assigning metadata to individual records, which would be prohibitively expensive if donemanually, NARA could provide significantly enhanced access at the individual record level.Finding aids based on full-text search have been developed by the Digital Library andInformation Retrieval research communities,35 and are being adopted commercially, for ex-
ample by WestLaw.36  Given a query, the available archives are ranked by how well their
31See, respectively, the MARC Standards home page, at <http://www.loc.gov/marc/>, and the EAD standardÕshome page, at <http://www.loc.gov/ead/>.32As of 2002, only 20 percent of ÒNARAÕs vast holdings are described in ARC,Ó NARA
Õs online catalog system.See <http://www.archives.gov/research_room/arc>.33Yiming Yang and Xin Liu. 1999. ÒA Re-examination of Text Categorization Methods.Ó  Proceedings of ACMSIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIRÕ99), pp. 42-49.34Leah S. Larkey. 1998. ÒAutomated Essay Grading Using Text Categorization Techniques.Ó  Proceedings of the21st Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR
Õ98),Melbourne, Australia, pp. 90-95.35Luis Gravano and Hector Garcia-Molina. 1995.  ÒGeneralizing GlOSS to Vector-Space Databases and BrokerHierarchies.Ó  Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB 1995); L. Gravano, P.Ipeirotis, and M. Sahami.  In press. 
ÒQProber: A System for Automatic  Classification of Hidden-Web Databases.
ÓACM Transactions on Information  Systems;  Jamie Callan.  2000.  ÒDistributed Information Retrieval,Ó in Advances inInformation Retrieval, W.B. Croft, ed.,  Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, Mass., pp. 127-150.
36Jack G. Conrad, Xi S. Guo, Peter Jackson, and Monem Meziou.  2002. 
ÒDatabase Selection Using Actual Physi-cal and Acquired Logical Collection Resources in a Massive Domain-specific Operational Environment.Ó  Proceed-ings of the 28th International Conference on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB 2002);  Jack G. Conrad and Joanne R.S.
Claussen. Forthcoming in 2003.  ÒEarly User-System Interaction for Database Selection in Massive Domain-SpecificOnline Environments.Ó ACM Transactions on Information Systems.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARAcontents match the query.  This type of finding aid supports detailed information needs and
information needs that controlled-vocabulary metadata do not anticipate.During the last decade the public has become familiar with full-text search in Web, e-mail,corporate, and personal document databases.  It is likely that NARA will eventually be ex-

pected to provide full-text search capabilities within its archives.  It may also be expected to
provide for searches across sets of archives (sometimes called Òfederated searchÓ), such asacross both NARA and presidential library collections.37  For common record data types, full-
text search can be provided inexpensively, with little manual intervention, using commercialsoftware.38Full-text search is merely the simplest form of content search, which may include search-ing images, sounds, animations, videos, hypermedia structures, etc.  At present, full-text re-
trieval is fairly mature while the technology for content-based retrieval of nontextual materialsis still immature but developing quickly.  Extensions of simple text search are, however,

inevitable and will no doubt be demanded by future users if NARAÕs holdings evolve toinclude significant multimedia holdings.The standard method of cataloging archives has been manual assignment of controlled-vocabulary metadata, and NARA may initially face some resistance in adopting alternatives.However a fairly large body of research comparing full-text and controlled-vocabulary meth-ods over a 35-year period indicates (1) each method works ÒbestÓ for particular types of
information needs, (2) the two approaches provide about the same Òaverage caseÓ effective-
ness, and (3) a combination of the two approaches is the most effective solution.39  The latter
conclusion is reflected in the National Library of MedicineÕs PubMed system, which uses bothfull-text and controlled-vocabulary indexing.40The cataloging and access methodologies used for physical media (e.g., paper, pictures,movies) are labor-intensive and expensive.  Newer, content-based cataloging and access meth-

ods designed for digital resources are, in contrast, compute-intensive but increasingly inex-pensive as computing becomes cheaper.  NARA can exploit this property of electronic records
to reduce its costs, to improve its ability to ingest information quickly, and to improve the
quality of access services it provides.  Traditional cataloging and access methodologies will
continue to be needed, but NARA will almost certainly never have sufficient resources toapply them to all of the electronic records worth archiving.Techniques for automatic metadata assignment and/or building indexes for content search37Luo Si and Jamie Callan.  2002. 
ÒUsing Sampled Data and Regression to Merge Search Engine Results.Ó  Pro-ceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in InformationRetrieval.  ACM, Tampere, Finland, pp. 19-26.
38If full-text indexing is to be provided, engineering calculations should include the storage required for theindex, which can be anywhere from 50 to 300 percent the size of the raw data, depending upon  the capabilities one
wants to offer.  Of course, this information would not be stored in the archive, but rather in the working storage

associated with an access system.  Also, indexes can be regenerated, so the number of index replicas required is
driven by such considerations as performance, not reliability.39Cyril W. Cleverdon.  1967.  
ÒThe Cranfield Tests on Index Language Devices.Ó Aslib Proceedings 19: 173-192,
reprinted in Karen Sparck Jones and Peter Willett, eds. 1997.  Readings in Information Retrieval.  Morgan Kaufmann,San Francisco;  T.B. Rajashekar and W.B. Croft. 1993. 
ÒCombining Automatic and Manual Index Representations inProbabilistic Retrieval.Ó Journal of the American Society for Information Science 46(4): 272-283.
40See <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/PubMed/>.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.KEY TECHNICAL ISSUES53can be applied during ingestion or as a part of the access process.  If they can extract essentialmetadataÑi.e., elements that are deemed by NARA to be obligatory for every recordÑtheyshould be used as part of the ingest process. However, since these techniques are being im-proved rapidly, it is probably wise to defer their broad use to the time of access, when more
modern techniques are available.  Metadata extraction or index generation can be applied, if
desired, as a collection is staged from the archival file system.At a minimum, the ERA and NARA overall should provide for full-text searching of allfinding aids for its holdings regardless of physical format or data type.  The Archival Research
Catalog is a step in the right direction, but it is incomplete, especially with regard to electronicrecords.41Access to Underlying Digital FilesWhile most users will want access to screen presentations of records or to modest numbersof digital files represented in common data types (e.g., word-processor documents, databasetables), some researchers can benefit from access to the elements of the underlying data model
used by the ERA.  For example, researchers who reverse engineer obscure data types, exploreautomatic metadata extraction, or devise new methods for content searching (especially ondifficult data types such as images, video clips, or executable files) will probably wish for
access to the files stored in the archive without mediation or modification (subject, of course,to suitable access controls). These researchers will also make use of data type specifications,metadata definitions, and other information available from the archive that describes the
details of the data model used to store records.SECURITY AND ACCESS CONTROLSecurity will need to be carefully designed into the NARA system to address all of theusual concerns about unauthorized access to systems and vulnerability to denial-of-service
attacks or to natural or manmade disasters.These security concerns must be addressed from the very beginning of system design.  Asan illustration of this principle, consider the basic question of whether the data in the ERA
should be stored in cleartext or should be encrypted to prevent inadvertent disclosure ofrestricted information to the staff and vendors who are in frequent contact with the archive.  If
stored in cleartext, it is virtually certain that there will be one or more instances of compro-
mised data over the (very long) life of the ERA.42 
  However, archivists are reluctant to encrypt
data for fear that future generations might lose the key and thus all access to the data.  Note
that either approach entails risks.To decide whether it is worth the cost and operational overhead (especially to ensure that41As of this writing, only one electronic data file series is included in the ARC.42For example, reports surfaced in late 2002 of the theft of 500,000 medical records by stealing hard disks from aDefense Department contractor.  See Associated Press, 2003, 
ÒMilitary, Family Medical Files Stolen,Ó WashingtonTimes, January 1. Available online at <http://www.washtimes.com/national/20030101-94263751.htm>.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARAkeys are not lost) of encrypting the data is a difficult question that requires careful analysis.  A
cryptographically protected archive is a much more difficult design than cleartext, since oneneeds to worry about key storage and distribution, which pieces of the system operate en-crypted and which in the clear, which pieces need to have access to keys, the performance of
decryption, and so forth.  These decisions will have many ramifications in the details of the
design, e.g., the module interfaces.On the other hand, converting from cleartext to encrypted would require recopying theentire archive.  This is a massive undertaking, especially because it will take quite a while and
one does not want archive operations (for either ingest or access) to be hampered for such aperiod.  Accordingly, this decision is better made at the outset than being retrofitted later on.
Addressing this and other related security issues is part of a comprehensive system design.There are reasonably well-understood methodologies for doing the threat analysis and work-ing the results into system requirements and design.  Indeed, in many respects, the ERA
Õssecurity issues can be handled by straightforward application of engineering best practices.These issues are not discussed in detail in this initial report, and the reader is referred to theextensive literature on computer system security.43In contrast to many digital libraries, the ERA must control access to many of its records.Access controls are comprised of three basic ingredients:¥A way to authenticate users who wish access, i.e., to verify their identity.44 
 What are the
requirements for authentication?45 
 Does every user need to be identified individually, or as a
member of a class, e.g., ÒInternet visitor?Ó46¥Properties of individual records or collections of records, recorded as metadata with the records,that indicate what kind of access is permitted.¥A set of rules that checks whether a certain user may access a certain record.  The rules may
cover large classes of records, e.g., ÒAllow access to a record labeled Ôby citizen ownerÕ only ifthe value of the metadata tag named Ôsocial security numberÕ matches the property 
Ôsocialsecurity numberÕ of the authenticated user.
Ó Or the rules may be very specific, e.g., 
ÒJohnWright has access to record NARA/ERA/Vietnam-72/104567.Ó43An overview of cybersecurity issues is provided in Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, Na-tional Research Council, 2002, Cybersecurity Today and Tomorrow: Pay Now or Pay Later.  National Academy Press,
Washington, D.C.  An in-depth examination of trustworthiness issues and research challenges is provided in
CSTB, NRC, 1999, Trust in Cyberspace, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.44NARA is understandably reluctant to tackle the problem of authenticating all the principals who may havecreated government records (for example, by recording digital signatures with records and keeping enough infor-mation to check signatures many years later).  However, there is no reason to avoid authenticating users of an
archiving system.  Experience elsewhere in the government, such as the Department of Defense
Õs DoD CommonAccess Card program, may help arrive at an appropriate design.45These and related issues are discussed in National Research Council,  2003, 
Who Goes There? AuthenticationThrough the Lens of Privacy, The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C.46For access to public records, privacy considerations may mean that a detailed audit trail should not be re-tained, especially since there is no risk of a user damaging or stealing the only copy of an electronic record.   So
there may be a requirement to authenticate users to classes such as Ògeneral publicÓ or 
ÒInternet visitorÓ rather
than for individual identification.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.KEY TECHNICAL ISSUES55In the ERA, these access rules will be complex and may change owing to the passage oftime, specific events (e.g., the death of the person to whom the record belongs or refers), orlegislation or court orders.  The committee saw no evidence that NARA had begun to formal-ize access controls in a way that could reasonably be automated in the ERA.  Perhaps access

controls for NARAÕs existing archives are suitable and can be easily codified for the ERA, butthe committee did not see evidence that this had been done and indeed heard a good deal thatsuggested otherwise, including extensive use of, and indeed reliance upon, human review just
prior to the delivery of physical records from the existing archives.  (Note that it is not clear
whether this will be required in the ERA.)One of the very real complications is that substantial numbers (though again, the commit-tee has no quantification here) of records ingested into the ERA will be classified at variouslevels (in the official sense of government classification: SECRET, TOP SECRET, etc.).   In
briefings, the committee was told that classified and other national-security information would
be physically segregated in separate instances of the ERA reserved for that purpose (that is,using Òair gapsÓ), that it is not a requirement of an ERA system that it be able to hold bothclassified and unclassified information, and thus it would not have to attempt to deal with
multilevel secure systems operation.Nonetheless, the classification of these records triggers a host of highly specific and highlystructured design and operational requirements, which the committee has not examined at all.
Here the committee raises only two issues:¥Does NARA intend to actually build multiple complete and independent ERA systems operatingat different levels of classification?  If so how many and of what relative sizes, and what con-
straints will this put on the ERA procurement strategy?  The committee has seen no details on
the practicality of this approach.¥How will declassification be handled?  As declassification occurs, material may need to flow
from the various classified versions of the ERA to the unclassified one. In addition, prov-enance and source metadata will need to be propagated from one such system to another.
Situations may also occur where the metadata are unclassified (or classified at a lower levelthan the actual records), and provision will need to be made for these situations.  In addition,there is the situation where metadata can be public and the documents described are awaiting
declassification review (for which the backlog is often very long).As explained above, access controls depend in part on a way to authenticate users.  NARA
should think through how it wishes to authenticate users of the system, whether all users willneed to be authenticated, and how attributes are tied to registered users.  NARA should not
invent a new technology for authenticating users to a computer systemÑthere are severaladequate schemes available alreadyÑbut should determine how the authentication system isadministered and how authenticated user identities are tied to access control rules.  For ex-
ample, how does a new user register for access to the system?  How does an existing user

apply for augmented access?4747For a discussion of authentication policies, particularly regarding privacy issues, see National Research Coun-cil, 2003,  Who Goes There? Authentication Through the Lens of Privacy, The National Academies Press, Washington,D.C.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARAINTEGRITY OF RECORDSEnsuring the survival, integrity, and authenticity of the records (and accompanyingmetadata) entrusted to it is at the core of NARAÕs mission.  In a digital environment, achieving
these goals becomes considerably more complex and nuanced than has been the case in anenvironment of paper records; designing appropriate measures is an interdependent mixtureof techniques from archival practice on the one hand and computer science, cryptology, and
computer security on the other.  The committee has not comprehensively investigated these
questions in preparing this report, but it is clear that they need much more extensive structuralconsideration than they seem to have received to date.48One set of questions pertains to the transfer of records agencies to NARA and their ingestinto an ERA system.  Current NARA practice, as explained to the committee, consists of
verifying that the file sent by the agency and the file received by NARA have the same length
(the same number of bits); this falls well short of available and commonly used tools thatprovide much more effective ways of verifying integrity.  Human intervention to examine
records to see if they are complete, match expected formats, and generally Òmake senseÓÑanapproach adopted in NARAÕs current process for ingesting databasesÑis insufficient to detectbogus records and does not scale up to large volumes of records; automated validation andingest tools are required.Common best practice is to use checksums to establish that records have not been tam-pered with, together with some form of authentication of the record source.   For example,
transfers could be audited using the following procedure.  The ingest protocol for a set of

records would include a step in which the donating agency provides a list of records to begiven to NARA, each one accompanied by its hash checksum,49 and a later step in which
NARA verifies that each of the records it has received does indeed have the same (recom-
puted) checksum as the one provided in the earlier step.Once the files have entered the ERA (along with metadata that explain where they origi-nated and what measures were taken to authenticate the source and to validate the file) it will
be necessary to design various processes within the ERA to ensure that the bits are not cor-rupted while in the custody of the ERA.  Checksums are the obvious approach here and can
also be used to help protect against software errors.The survival of records once they have entered the ERA depends on several factors. One isthe use of redundant, geographically distributed storage to allow records to survive varioussorts of physical catastrophes, accidental or deliberate.  The committee has seen little discus-

sion of what the design parameters need to be for redundancy and distribution of storage, and48One example of a subtle integrity issue that might arise in the future that the committee did not consider is thatof executable records.  Can the integrity of executables be safely preserved?  What if an executable has an expira-
tion date, time bomb, or some other feature that affects interpretation as a function of time?49A hash checksum for a file is the output of a cryptographic hash function (such as the function SHA-1, stan-dardized by NIST) when it is given the file as input; the crucial property of such a function is that it is presumed tobe computationally infeasible to find any other input that produces the same output.  Therefore this output can
serve as a characteristic digital fingerprint for the file, which can easily be recomputed at will and checked against
the expected value.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.KEY TECHNICAL ISSUES57whether these parameters will vary from one class of records to the next. A detailed threat andrequirements analysis is needed in this area.The integrity of records once within the ERA also depends on the design and operation ofeffective computer security measures as part of the ERA to ensure that unauthorized people
cannot add, delete, or alter objects within the ERA.  Hash checksums, independently main-
tained, can offer a second line of defense for at least detection (if not necessarily repair) ofalterations, be they due to attacks or accidental failures of the types discussed earlier.However, in order to protect against malevolent change, the hash value associated with adigital object must be separately protected so that an attacker who manages to gain access tochange one cannot also change the other.  Since a hash value can be written in a relatively

small number of digits, one can protect it from change by publishing it in a very public place,such as a classified advertisement in the New York Times (which will, a short time after publi-
cation, be captured on microfilm that is distributed to many libraries), or by otherwise depos-
iting the hash value in hundreds of libraries. 5050For an archive that contains millions of digital objects, this idea would lead to purchasing an impracticallylarge number of classified ads.  A technique is available for combining the hash values of very large numbers of

objectsÑsuch as the entire archiveÑand publishing only a single number that can be computed only by knowing
all of the contents.  See section 2.4 of Stuart Haber and W. Scott Stornetta, 1997,  
ÒSecure Names for Bit-strings,ÓProceedings of the 4th ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security, pp. 2-35, ACM Press, New York,April.  The technology is offered commercially by Surety, <http://www.surety.com/solutions.php>.
Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARA586Strengthening Information Technology Expertise
Developing and operating the ERA will require technical expertise that NARA now lacks.While NARA recognizes that its growing focus on digital archives will require a culturechange and has initiated an associated Òchange managementÓ program, the need for expertiseto launch the project is both urgent and specific.  Based on briefings and other interactions

with NARA staff, the committee concludes that while there is recognition of the challenges ofthe ERA program, few NARA staff members appreciate the complexity of building, managing,and operating a production digital archiving system.  Multiple paths can help NARA to obtain

the necessary expertise.EXPERTISE TO DESIGN AND EVOLVE THE ERAAs the preceding chapters have outlined, development of the ERA represents a significanttechnical and management challenge well beyond that of a typical IT system procurement.
NARA has a few staff in leadership roles who appreciate the significant technical challenges ofthe ERA program.  However, briefings to the committee suggest that NARA today does not
have sufficient technical depth to assure success in launching the ERA programÑthat is, to
define and manage the overall architecture, develop the appropriate request for proposals(RFP), evaluate technical responses, negotiate changes in the architecture with vendors, andmanage the implementation of the system.Recognizing the need for additional IT expertise in the ERA program office, NARA hassupplemented the office with a small cadre of contractor technical staff who are working onERA design and technical management issues.  The documents and briefings received by the

committee to date show some in progress identifying desired features of the ERA and some ofits associated technical and organizational challenges.  But these documents, although useful
early steps in system development, are a long way from the detailed engineering analysis and
architecture definition that are critically needed.NARA needs a small staff that holds complete technical knowledge of the ERA.  Even if the
Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.STRENGTHENING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY EXPERTISE59system is built and augmented by contractors, an in-house contract monitoring staff (e.g., thecontracting officerÕs technical representative) is required that is technically at least as good asthe contractorÕs people.  This staff is essential to developing a basic system design and imple-
mentation strategy, preparing an RFP, evaluating proposals, monitoring contract progress,
and managing system deployment.Highly skilled staff will be critical to managing the evolution of the ERA. Chapter 7 recom-mends an iterative development approach for the ERA designed to reduce technical risk by
exposing unforeseen problems and overlooked requirements earlier in the software develop-ment process and by providing flexibility in reacting to them.  However, because this added
flexibility requires an active procurement process and an active management style, it also
demands particular management skills.  For example, because system components can be
contracted at a smaller granularity, contracts must be written to provide flexibility, becauserequirements and designs for each system component are subject to revision.  Not only are

there more (but smaller) projects to specify and manage, but the management must also haveconsiderable technical sophistication to recognize technical limitations, to determine new re-quirements, to identify what should be evolved or replaced and when, etc.  The increased

flexibility of iterative design helps avoid or correct mistakes but requires deep technical un-derstanding of the system as it evolves.  Also, short design cycles require frequent testing,
frequent deployment of new systems, frequent comparison of alternatives, frequent tuning of
system requirements and goals, and frequent interaction with users.Since ERA systems and their basic architecture will change over timeÑowing to bothiterative development and improved understanding of the requirements as experience is
gainedÑit will be essential for ERA staff to be expert on their technical properties as theyevolve.  For this reason, NARA should plan to hire permanent staff having this expertise,
although short-term contractors or consultants may also help build a critical mass of expertise
to launch the ERA program.The complexity and novelty of the ERA require that the key IT staff have a breadth ofexpertise in areas such as the following:¥Developing modern IT systems using networked heterogeneous elements;¥Web-based access techniques, including scaling to meet variable and increasing loads;¥Operating large-scale systems, and a knowledge of elements of their design that allowrobust, continuous operation;¥Working with digital media and file formats, including content searching; and¥Security.Staff with this expertise might be recruited from developers of digital libraries or otheronline information-retrieval services. To address the kinds of issues laid out in this report, thisstaff would ideally have an understanding of digital archival issues.The committee recognizes the challenges facing NARA or any other federal agency inrecruiting and retaining IT talent.1   However, the need for key staff is urgent if NARA is to
1For a discussion of human resource issues related to IT expertise in the context of the Library of Congress, seeComputer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, 2001, LC21: A Digital Strategy forthe Library of Congress, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.  Available online at <http://books.nap.edu/
catalog/9940.html>.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARAstick to its current implementation plan, because their expertise is needed in order to formu-late an architecture and RFP(s), evaluate responses, select one or more contractors, and begindevelopment.External AdviceNARA should seek ongoing advice from the outside to ensure the success of its ERAdevelopment.  NARA currently has several advisory committees, but none with a concentra-
tion of expertise in electronic records archiving.  Indeed, the Advisory Committee on Preser-
vation has only one member who is directly involved in digital preservation.  The underlying
technologies associated with electronic records and their preservation continue to changerapidly, making it important to seek out high-level strategic advice continually.  The appropri-
ate expertise can be found in several areas, including the digital library community, govern-
ment and commercial operators of online information-retrieval services, and the researchcommunity.Advisors can help chart the course of the ERA.  For example, as noted above, external
review of the overall ERA architecture would be valuable.  Ideally, advisors could also help
craft RFPs and evaluate the proposals responding to them.  A strong advisory board might
also help recruit the necessary senior staff and might spin off more in-depth study groups
focusing on particular technical issues.EXPERTISE TO OPERATE THE ERAOperating the electronic records archiving systems, as distinct from specifying and devel-oping them, will require strengthening the IT skills of NARAÕs staff.  Some of these skills willfocus on the following:¥Managing the hardware and software resources of electronic records archiving systems,including setting up procedures for testing new software releases, for auditing the data storedin the archive, for incorporating new hardware (e.g., disks), for scheduling media refresh andconsequent decommissioning of old disks, and so forth.  The critical preservation responsibili-

ties of NARA place the highest technical demands on staff who manage the system.¥Operating an online service to access electronic collections, including such activities asaccommodating varying loads (i.e., scaling up services to respond to public demand) and
defending against possible malicious attacks arriving via the public network.¥Wide-ranging problem-solving associated with ingesting records.  Skilled people will be
needed to solve problems posed by old and incomplete digital data transferred from agencies:
extracting useful data, checking its integrity, figuring out in what forms it should be archived,and so forth.  Automating robust procedures for processing large numbers of records or
record series that are received on a recurring basis will also require skilled IT people to
develop the necessary tools and procedures.As ERA systems are built and deployed, and as digital records become a major part ofNARAÕs work, much of the staff will need to become savvy and comfortable with digitalrecords and preservation.  As the volume of electronic records increases relative to that of
conventional paper records, NARA will need an increasing fraction of its archivist staff toBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.STRENGTHENING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY EXPERTISE61have a combination of technical and archival skills and it will need a larger, highly skilledsystems administration and technical support staff.  Achieving this shift will require a culture
change, as NARA has recognized and reflected in its appointment of a change manager.A critical aspect of NARAÕs new culture will be that IT must be recognized as a ÒcorecompetenceÓ that must thrive to support digital preservation.  NARA management will have
to overcome the tendency to look at electronic records as a special problem that can be shuntedto an isolated office where only specialists will handle them.  NARA will need far more staff

who feel equally confident dealing with paper and electronic records and many more special-ists with competence in managing and preserving electronic records.  The preponderance of
training and technical assistance that NARA provides to agencies should also shift its empha-
sis from paper records to electronic records.  Achieving this sort of agency-wide transforma-
tion will be difficult.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARA627Strategy for Evolution and Acquisition
Because the ERA must have a long lifeÑmany decadesÑit must evolve over time.  Al-
though it is possible to express some of todayÕs requirements for the ERA, others will becomeclear only as operational experience is gained, and the requirements will themselves evolve.The types of records to be preserved, the interests and capabilities of users, and other aspects
of the context will change.  So too will the technology available to NARA; computer capabili-
ties and cost-performance evolve very fast, so what is difficult or expensive today can be mucheasier in 10 years.  The sections that follow describe how, even though all the requirements

cannot be anticipated, the system can be built using techniques that make evolution easyrather than hard.STRATEGY FOR EVOLUTIONModular DesignOne of the most important techniques for developing a large system is to modularizeÑmaking a complex problem more tractable by breaking it down into a set of smaller compo-
nents and enabling independent evolution of the pieces over time.  NARA and the SDSC have
embraced modular design in general and the OAIS overall framework for an archive.1   The
SDSC demonstrations successfully exploit the clear separation of the major modules of ingest,
storage, and access.A modular approach presumes that each modular component will be changed several1Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS).  2002.  
Reference Model for an Open Archival Informa-tion System (OAIS).  CCSDS 650.0-B-1 (Blue Book).  CCSDS Secretariat, National Aeronautics and Space Adminis-
tration, Washington, D.C.  January.  Available online at <http://wwwclassic.ccsds.org/documents/pdf/CCSDS-
650.0-B-1.pdf>.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.STRATEGY FOR EVOLUTION AND ACQUISITION63times as requirements change or more attractive technologies emerge.  Properly designed
components can be replaced with improved versions with minimal disruption to other mod-ules.Modularization thus enables considerable flexibility in evolving a system.  For example:
¥Several prototypes can be built to explore alternative methods of accomplishing a par-ticularly crucial goal.¥Prototypes of individual modules can be discarded without jeopardizing investmentsmade in the rest of the system.¥A sequence of smaller, focused development projects can be used to add capability tothe system.¥The design and implementation of different system components can be divided amongmultiple vendors or research centers with specialized abilities.  For example, a modular design

should permit developing a new access technique for a particular kind of record withoutaltering other parts of the system.¥Commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) or other third-party packagesÑfor, say, full-text in-dexing and searchÑcan often be integrated individually into the system.The hallmarks of modular design are the decomposition of the system into separate mod-ules and the specification of the interfaces that surround each module, i.e., the details of theconnections a module makes to other modules in the system.  While it would be fairly easy todraw a high-level block diagram showing a modular system structure (such as was done in the
OAIS framework2), more detailed evaluation of the required modules and interfaces is critical
to obtaining the rewards of modular design.  If modules are too big, they become hard to
change or replace.  If the interfaces become too complex or allow internal details of a module
Õsimplementation to become known to other modules, the set of modules becomes Òbrittle,Ó and
the ability to change one module independently of others may be lost.  The details of modular
structure and interface designs are critical.Possible Modules and Interfaces for the ERAThis section briefly discusses some considerations for modular design of an archive systemand outlines some of the possible modules and interfaces that would need to be specified forthe ERA.  In describing these, the committee intends only to provide some concrete illustra-

tions of issues to be faced in the system design, not to do detailed design work.To exploit modular structure for incremental evolution, it is necessary to define the soft-ware interfaces by which each module connects to other modules.  These interfaces require

defining subroutine calls and data types transferred between the modules.  The data model
used to store records in the file system serves in effect as an interface between ingest andaccess modules:  Even though an ingest module does not directly invoke an access module, the
2ISO Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS).  2002.  
Reference Model for an Open ArchivalInformation System (OAIS).  CCSDS 650.0-B-1 (Blue Book).  CCSDS Secretariat, National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, Washington, D.C.  January.  Available online at <http://wwwclassic.ccsds.org/documents/pdf/
CCSDS-650.0-B-1.pdf>.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARAdata created by any ingest module must be precisely understood by every correspondingaccess module.Modular structure is also used for another purpose: to develop sets of modules that per-form related functions.  For example, the ERA might have a set of access modules and choose
one to invoke based on the collection the user has requested.  Similarly, a data-type converteris selected and invoked based on the types of its input and output.The following are among the likely key interfaces in the ERA system:¥The file system interface.  This interface provides functions to manipulate files in therepository: naming, reading, writing, access control, etc.3¥The ingest module interface.  The principal role of an ingest module is to prepare and write
data into the file system.  However, a detailed system design will uncover other interfaces
Ñfor example, for tracking records as part of work flow management.¥The access module interface.  Access modules will be used to build indexes of collections
and to query previously built indexes.  Access modules will need access to any files that are
copied from the main file system into a cache.¥The data model and associated interface.  These are for manipulating stored data accordingto the data model.One objective of defining these interfaces is to allow multiple ingest and access modules tobe written without disrupting other parts of the system.There are also important smaller modules and their corresponding interfaces.  For ex-
ample, the following are likely to be required:¥Data-type converters, which transform data from one type into another.  Converters maybe used within ingest modules to generate derived forms, or within access modules to gener-ate the data type requested by the user or necessary for preparing a visual presentation.¥Data-type checkers, which are simply a variant of data-type converters.  They are used by
ingest modules to verify the integrity of native and derived forms.¥Metadata extractors, which derive metadata from records.  They may be used within
ingest modules to derive metadata for records being ingested, or they may be used by indexers
to extract metadata that are useful for searching a set of records.¥Indexers used by access modules to (1) prepare an index to a set of records and (2)
respond to search queries.There are certainly many others.3Strictly speaking, the use of the term ÒfileÓ assumes a particular architecture
Ñspecifically that the archive liveson a file system and not on, say, a database.  It also assumes that the file system does not have, for example,

multiple resource forks per file (i.e., on some systems, you can have one logical file, but within it, you might haveseparate ways of accessing it that give you the data, the metadata, an alternative view, etc).  The term file is used in
this report to stand for some sort of stored object or item, which may not necessarily actually be a file stored on a
conventional file system.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.STRATEGY FOR EVOLUTION AND ACQUISITION65ArchitectureAn architecture specification is an essential part of the long-term plan for evolving asystem. It is the architecture of the system that ensures that the pieces fit together, that the
system can be incrementally upgraded, and that it can evolve over time.  The architecture
needs to specify the interfaces between major parts using an open approach that allows mul-tiple vendors to supply components over a long lifetime.  It needs to be nonmonolithic, em-

ploying the modular structure discussed above.  An example of a digital preservation architec-
ture sketch in this spirit is that of the Library of CongressÕ National Digital Information
Infrastructure Preservation Program (NDIIPP).4A common architecture is especially important for a complex program such as the ERA,which must unify multiple systems.  By building early iterations of these systems to be compli-
ant with a common architectural framework, these systems can coalesce into a smaller number
of more comprehensive systems as experience and confidence grow.Because changing the modular structure is far harder than evolving separate modules,devising a good initial architecture for the earliest deployed systems is important.  But no

matter how good the initial design, it will be subject to evolution over time as requirements arebetter understood or new requirements emerge.The architecture of a system like the ERA should be ÒownedÓÑthat is, specified andevolved over timeÑby its user.  By building the internal expertise to perform this process
itself, NARA will better understand the implications of alternative proposals, maintain bettercontrol over the development process, and be better able to use the resulting system and
understand its limitations and strengths as it is delivered.  By owning the architecture, NARA
also reduces its dependence on the vendors selected to build implementations of the ERA andhelps to avoid proprietary lock-in.Preparing the architectural design of the ERA requires first-class talent having both archi-val and IT expertise.  So too does managing the inevitable evolution over time to meet new
requirements.  Thus in both the short and long terms, NARA staff will need to understand

deeply the IT aspects of the ERA systems and of digital preservation more generally.Alternatively, NARA could contract for one or more architectural designs.  This is a poor
alternative to a NARA-owned architecture.  It also does not relieve NARA of the need for first-

class technical talent, for NARA would still have to specify the scope of a design contract,evaluate resulting designs, and proceed with acquiring and evolving a system.  In this alterna-
tive, it might be worthwhile to obtain several proposals, because different contractors may
have different technology opportunities, different ideas for incorporating COTS elements, andso forth.NARA will need to carefully evaluate the one or more architectures it commissions.  It may
wish to seek the help of outside experts or others with similar needs (e.g., Library of Congress,National Library of Medicine, and other operators of digital libraries) to help in the evaluation.NARA might also choose to contract for help in evaluating multiple architectural proposals.4National Digital Information Infrastructure and Preservation Program, Library of Congress.  2003
.  NDIIPP
Plan Appendix.  Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.  Available online at <http://www.digitalpreservation.gov/
ndiipp/repor/ndiipp_appendix.pdf>.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARASome Other Strategies for Long System LifeSpecial considerations need to be given to ensuring that the ERA can continue to operateover many decades.  Even if the system
Õs requirements were to remain invariant over such along time, the COTS hardware and software on which the system runs would need to bereplaced many times.  The design of the system can simplify this process.  In addition to
modularity, discussed above, the following design ideas will facilitate long-term operation:¥Use networks based on Internet Protocol (IP) to interconnect hardware components.  The struc-
ture of hardware components should allow flexible interconnection of hardware from various
vendors using standard networking hardware and protocolsÑe.g., IP.5  Replacing old hard-
ware with new, or adding hardware capacity is a matter of attaching the new hardware to thenetwork and perhaps changing the network configuration.  Although the physical layers of

networks will evolve over time to increase performanceÑfrom Ethernet to gigabit Ethernet to10-gigabit Ethernet and beyondÑrouters will connect the different physical layers into a singlenetwork.  The Internet protocols may change, but very slowly, and with evolutionary support

from hardware and system software vendors.  IP-based networks are the best bet for long-
term hardware interconnection.¥Design software to simplify porting to new hardware and software systems.  Over the life of the
ERA, software that implements the ERA will need to be deployed on new computers, perhapscomputers that are not completely compatible, either in hardware or software, with the older
computers.  Writing portable software is a fairly common practice; it involves choosing appro-
priate programming languages and isolating hardware and software system dependencies insmall Òcompatibility layersÓ of software.
¥Avoid proprietary lock-in and choose truly common COTS products.  NARA will need toretain sufficient intellectual property rights for the software it procures for the ERA system to
be sure that the ERA software can be modified and ported to new hardware and softwareplatforms.  Likewise, interfaces and data types that play essential roles in the modular struc-
ture (and therefore, evolution) of the system should be free of proprietary features that might
trap NARA into hiring only a particular contractor that holds the necessary intellectual prop-erty rights.In designing the architecture of the ERA, NARA wisely wishes to make use of COTShardware and software products.  Because of the long-lifetime objective of the ERA architec-
ture, however, COTS components will have to be chosen with care to be sure that they, orequivalent replacements, are available for a long time.  COTS hardware, including storage

media, is essential.  Trade-offs may be required between (1) using a few large off-the-shelf
software components, which will facilitate system integration but may introduce critical de-pendencies affecting the systemÕs future viability should the components cease to be sold orsupported, and (2) using a larger number of smaller components that could be replaced withcustom versions if necessary.  One way to achieve some flexibility is to partially insulate the
5Note that the fact that the components of the system use Internet protocols to interconnect internally is separatefrom the question of whether the NARA ERA is connected directly to the Internet.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.STRATEGY FOR EVOLUTION AND ACQUISITION67ERA architecture from the details of a particular COTS offering by specifying a simple, genericinterface, which is then attached to a specific COTS product with a shim (driver)Ñthis idea iscommonly used in operating systems and is used in the Storage Request Broker in the SDSCwork.COTS modules must be chosen carefully to be valuable to a long-lived system.  COTS
offerings with a large marketÑtruly common products
Ñand slowly changing specifications(perhaps todayÕs operating systems and network-attached file systems are examples) canprobably be replaced with compatible or similar products for many years.  But low-volume
COTS modules involve risk:  If, say, NARA were to buy a single vendorÕs document manage-ment system to implement a major portion of the ERA, there might be no other COTS source
for upgrades or replacements.  Generally, COTS components are easier to build into systems
with short lifetimes than long-lived systems such as the ERA.6These strategies all depend on judgments about the expected life of hardware and softwarecomponents.  In extreme cases, modules may need to be redesigned or rewritten to replace
components no longer available.  But without modular structure and nonproprietary inter-

faces it will be far harder to keep the system running smoothly over a long period.ITERATIVE (SPIRAL) DEVELOPMENTA series of implementations is built, fashioned to acquire experience with an initial systemand then incorporate improvementsÑthis technique is called Òiterative design.Ó  When pre-
cise requirements are not known in advance, the detailed requirements may be elicited byundertaking a series of iterative designs in which development follows a cycle of specify,design, implement, and operate.  An explicit iterative design goal is to keep the cycles short
Ñto complete a single cycle in months, not years.  At each iteration of the cycle, the architectureis refined.Military procurements call this technique Òspiral development,Ó in reference to how  re-
quirements are refined and expanded as a result of experience with earlier, simpler systems.7Iterative design allows users to operate a partially working system, or partially working
system components, early in the development process.  The approach provides rapid feedback

about what works, what doesnÕt, what needs to be refined or rejected, and what is missing.The initial systems usually have modest expectations; they gather experience to inform thenext iteration. The initial systems are put in operation and subjected to a range of uses and
tests in order to obtain as much experience as possible to influence subsequent iterations.  This
form of deliberate, rapid evolution is used to refine the initial set of requirements.  Eventually,
the requirements will become well understood.In contrast to a more conventional procurement, the ERA program will also have to man-6There are, of course, many other issues associated with the use of COTS and other trade-offs between usingcustom and off-the-shelf software.  These are not discussed in this report.
7See, for example, Barry Boehm (edited by Wilfred J. Hansen), 2000, ÒSpiral Development:  Experience, Prin-
ciples, and Refinements,Ó Special Report CMU/SEI-2000SR-008, 
Spiral Development Workshop (February 9, 2000),
Carnegie Mellon Software Engineering Institute, Pittsburgh, Pa. Available online at <http://www.sei.cmu.edu/
cbs/spiral2000/february2000/BoehmSR.html>.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARAage the evolution of the requirements themselves by virtue of the very long life of the ERAprogram.  Requirements will inevitably change as electronic records evolve, new techniques
for using records emerge, new preservation techniques become available, and so forth.  Plan-
ning for the ERA program should, therefore, anticipate a sustained iterative development
process.Experience shows that an iterative design will be required to arrive at the best modulardesign for the ERA.  While the very-high-level structure
Ñwith separate ingest, storage, andaccess componentsÑis likely to change little, the detailed interface designs will evolve. Withthe present level of experience in the archiving community, it is possible to craft a good initialdesign but to not be assured it is correct.  The modularity and interfaces themselves will have
to be improved by iteration as requirements are better understood and change.PILOTS:  STARTING SMALL AND GAINING EXPERIENCE
An important early stage of the iterative development process is the building of ÒpilotsÓÑsystems that are sufficiently small and simple that they can be rapidly deployed but capable
enough for production use.  A pilot is relatively small compared with the ultimate system,
meaning that its cost is also relatively small and that any failures that occur in the earlieststages have only modest consequences for the program as a whole.  The crucial difference

between pilots and ÒprototypesÓ is that pilots, unlike prototypes, are designed with enough
functionality and sufficient scale to be operated in a production environment, allowing real-world experience to be gained that informs the requirements of later, more capable iterations
of the system.  This sort of staged approach is being used for the electronic deposit system at
the Netherlands national library (Box 7.1).For a program as complex as the ERA, it is very useful to ÒsampleÓ the problem space by
launching several pilots concurrently.  Each pilot provides experience with different aspects of
the full problem; each pilot also offers opportunities to try different approaches to particularelements of the problem.Although the pilots will differ from one another in some respects, all the pilot systemsshould be constructed within a common architectural framework.  By working within a com-
mon framework, the pilot systems can, in subsequent design iterations, eventually coalesce
into a smaller number of more comprehensive systems as experience and confidence grow.It is especially important that the data modelÑthe data types and related metadataÑusedin each pilot conform to a common architecture so that the digital data obtained by ingesting
records into one of the early systems will carry forward into future evolutions.8   At some
system iteration it may be necessary to rebuild the archive according to a new data model(especially if the data model is changed significantly), reading all the records archived using
the old model, converting to the new model, and writing a new archive.  This scenario
Ñthewholesale reformatting of the archiveÑshould be possible with early designs.8No matter how well the data model is defined at the outset, it is still likely to change as the system design isiteratively refined.  To minimize the disruptions caused by such changes, version numbers should be made explicit
in the data model.  In this way, the ERA software can respond to a range of versions correctly, rather than

requiring the entire archive to be converted to a new data model when versions change.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.STRATEGY FOR EVOLUTION AND ACQUISITION69Experience with the pilot systems can be expected to lead to changes to the architectureand to substantial refinement of requirements for subsequent, more comprehensive systems.Successfully building on the pilot experience will require skill in developing an initial architec-ture, managing the first system developments, learning from early operations, making revi-
sions to architecture and specifications, and evolving the overall program.ERA pilots should exploit available collections of records that could be organized andmade available quickly, and they should sample different dimensions of the overall archiving
challenge.  NARA will need to choose a limited set of objectives for the pilot systems.  Ex-
amples of some of the limitations on archive content might be these:¥Deal only with records already held by NARA by reingesting them into a new system.¥Select a single collection.¥Select a single agency with a limited set of scheduled digital records.¥Select a diverse collection but provide the best access only to the six most common datatypes.¥Select a small collection that has challenging ingest problems because of old media, oldsoftware, unknown data types, etc.BOX 7.1Staged Implementation of the Electronic Deposit System at theNetherlands National LibraryA recent example of a staged implementation is the Electronic Deposit system at the Neth-erlands national libraryÑthe Koninklijke Bibliotheek (KB) in the HagueÑthe first operational
system of this kind in the world. Its goal is to archive for the long term all documents electronical-
ly published in the Netherlands. In 2000, the KB issued an RFP and then signed a development
contract with IBM in the fall.  A previous study had already recommended that the program (1)

use the OAIS reference model and (2) focus entirely on document storage and retrieval func-
tions, while leaving to the library system (already in existence) the responsibility for cataloguing,
indexing, and search.  The system was built following these recommendations.  Using a tape

robot, optical library, and RAID disk system, it relies as much as possible on off-the-shelf prod-
ucts (e.g., IBM Content Manager; Tivoli Storage Manager, a backup and archive system; and
DB2, a database management system).  The design objectives call for 20 TB in 2005, with a

long-term objective of 500 TB. The system was delivered in fall 2002.  In parallel, several joint

KB-IBM studies were conducted,1 most of them on actual preservation issues. Their results willfuel the next development stage, in which some preservation functionality will be added to the
system.1IBM-Koninklijke Bibliotheek (KB).  2002.  IBM-Koninklijke Bibliotheek Long-Term Preservation Study.
Koninklijke Bibliotheek, The Hague.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARAHere are some specific examples of limited-scope systems that might be considered forearly ERA pilots:¥U.S. State Department cables.  NARA is preparing to acquire digital forms of State Depart-
ment diplomatic cables, which are simple text files.  One pilot might focus on preserving these
cables, extracting appropriate metadata automatically from the cables, perhaps providing full-text search, or other access appropriate to the collection.  For quickest deployment, NARA

might consider making these records available using software already developed for operat-ing a digital library.¥Records at the National Personnel Records Center.   Military personnel records, traditionally
stored on paper or microfilm, have more recently been managed by the Department of De-fense as TIFF image files.  There is interest in preserving these records in electronic form when
they are transferred to NARAÕs National Personnel Records Center.  Containing millions of
service and medical records of discharged and deceased veterans, these collections are largebut homogeneous.  Use and access considerations would be quite different than for the State
Department cables because of confidentiality protections and the imperative to provide ready
access to veterans or next of kin.   Access controls would be required.
¥E-mail from the Clinton administration held by the Clinton Presidential Center.  This collectionwould lead to experience with a broader and more modern range of data types, because it
contains e-mail attachments of all sorts.  Metadata could be extracted from the e-mail headers,
full-text search could be provided, and so forth.  This pilot would provide useful information
on the range of data types attached to e-mail and how best to preserve and access these
records.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AppendixesBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.73ABackground on NARA and the ERA Program
This appendix, which is drawn entirely from various National Archives and Records Ad-ministration publications, has been prepared to provide the reader with some background onNARA, its conceptualization and plans for the ERA program, and related matters. The com-mittee feels that it would be more effective, particularly given the time constraints under
which the report was prepared, to let NARA speak for itself on these issues.BACKGROUND ON NARAÕS MISSION FROM THE NARA WEB SITE AND THENARA STRATEGIC PLANWhat Is NARA?The National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) is an independent federalagency that preserves our nationÕs history and defines us as a people by overseeing the man-
agement of all federal records.1NARAÕs MissionNARA ensures, for the citizen and the public servant, for the President and for the Con-gress and the Courts, ready access to essential evidence.21National Archives and Records Administration (NARA). Undated. ÒWhat Is The National Archives & RecordsAdministration?Ó Available online at <http://www.archives.gov/about_us/what_is_nara/what_is_nara.html>.2National Archives and Records Administration (NARA). Undated. ÒNARAÕs Vision, Mission, and Values.ÓAvailable online at <http://www.archives.gov/about_us/vision_mission_values.html>.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARAWhat Does NARA Do?The National Archives and Records Administration is our national record keeper. It is apublic trust that safeguards the records on which people of a democratic republic depend for
documenting their individual rights, for ensuring the accountability and credibility of their
national institutions, and for analyzing their national experience. Both the Government and the
public rely on NARA to meet an almost unlimited range of information needs from records.
Such records are essential for congressional oversight committees to evaluate agencies, for
veterans to prove their entitlements to such benefits as medical care, for citizens to discover
their familiesÕ histories, and for Holocaust survivors to trace assets looted from them by the
Nazis. These are just a few of the many uses made of U.S. Government records. The records we
preserve and make available every day directly affect the lives of millions of our citizens as
well as the understanding we have of our nationÕs history.3NARAÕs ResponsibilitiesNARA is responsible for issuing records management guidance; working with agencies toimplement effective controls over the creation, maintenance, and use of records in the conduct
of agency business; providing oversight of agenciesÕ records management programs; and pro-
viding storage facilities for certain temporary agency records. The Federal Records Act also
authorizes NARA to conduct inspections of agency records and records management pro-
grams.NARA works with agencies to identify and inventory records, appraise their value, anddetermine whether they are temporary or permanent, how long the temporary records should
be kept, and under what conditions both the temporary and permanent records should be
kept. This process is called scheduling. No record may be destroyed unless it has been sched-
uled, and for temporary records the schedule is of critical importance because it provides the
authority to dispose of the record after a specified time period. Records are governed by sched-
ules that are specific to an agency or by a general records schedule, which covers records
common to several or all agencies. According to NARA, records covered by general records
schedules make up about a third of all federal records. For the other two thirds, NARA and the
agencies must agree upon specific records schedules. Once a schedule has been approved, the
agency must issue it as a management directive, train employees in its use, apply its provisions
to temporary and permanent records, and evaluate the results.4Scheduling RecordsNARA designates records as permanent if they have sufficient historical or other value towarrant their continued preservation by the Government. Such records may be kept mainly
because they document an agencyÕs origins, organization, functions, and significant transac-3National Archives and Records Administration (NARA). 2000 (revised). Ready Access to Essential Evidence:  The
Strategic Plan of the National Archives and Records Administration 1997-2007. Available online at <http://www.archives.gov/about_us/strategic_planning_and_reporting/2000_strategic_plan.html>4Government Accounting Office (GAO). 2002. Information Management:  Challenges in Managing and Preserving
Electronic Records (GAO-02-586).  GAO, Washington, D.C., June. Available online at <http://www.gao.gov/cgi-
bin/getrpt?GAO-02-586>.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A75tions and activities. Or they may be kept mainly because they document the persons, places,things, or matters dealt with by an agency; that is, because they contain information with
significant research or reference value.[É]Comparatively few records are permanent, although the exact proportion varies from agen-cy to agency and from office to office.5BACKGROUND ON THE ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVES PROGRAMFrom the Mission Needs StatementThe National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) ensures, for the private citi-zen and all branches of the Government, ready access to essential evidence that documents the
rights of citizens, the actions of Federal officials, and the national experience. NARA is a public
trust which plays a key role in fostering effective and responsible government through man-
agement of the lifecycle of records in all three branches of the Federal Government and through
sustained access to historically valuable records in the National Archives and the Presidential
Libraries. These records enable people to inspect what the Government has done, allow offi-
cials and agencies to review their actions, and help citizens hold the Government accountable.
These records are rich and varied sources of information that Americans use to answer ques-
tions they have about our past.Increasingly, these records are created and maintained in electronic formats. To continueto fulfill its mission, NARA needs to respond effectively to the challenge posed by the diversi-
ty, complexity, and enormous volume of electronic records being created today and the rapidly
changing nature of the systems that are used to create them. Electronic records pose unique
difficulties including ease of erasure and advancing technology that renders records and oper-
ating systems obsolete in a short period of time. The greatest challenge to managing and pre-
serving electronic records is that the environment is dynamic and unpredictable. America is
only at the beginning of Òe-government.Ó Technology will continue to change. Citizens, busi-
nesses and government agencies at all levels will increasingly use computers and networks.
Undoubtedly, they will profit from improvements in technology to develop new and better
ways to do business, and these will produce new types of electronic records and recordkeeping
systems. But no one knows exactly how these things will evolve.Regardless of what the future brings, proper records will be needed to support the efficientfunctioning of the Government, to protect the rights of individuals and businesses, and to
ensure that the Government is accountable to its citizens. Thus the challenge of electronic
records is that of open-ended change played out against an enduring need. The solution itself
must be dynamic, capable of responding to continuing change, and it must be sound, ensuring
that electronic records delivered to future generations of Americans are as accurate decades in5National Archives and Records Administration (NARA). 2000. Disposition of Federal Records: A Records Man-agement Handbook (2000 Web Edition of 1997 printed publication), NARA, Washington, D.C., Chapter 4. Avail-
able online at <http://www.archives.gov/records_management/publications/disposition_of_federal_records/
chapter_4.html>.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARAthe future as they were when first created. Unless we can solve the technological challenge ofpreserving electronic records, NARA will be unable to meet its statutory mission.6[É]Increasingly, our society does business by computer. To the extent that we rely on informa-tion technology in the course of our affairs, we must be able to rely on the electronic records
that are the instruments and by-products of our activities. We must be able to access and use
them effectively in the continuing conduct of affairs. We must be able to rely on them to define
and assert our rights, and to hold our public officials accountable. Long after the needs of
current affairs have been met, the essential records must serve the interests of future genera-
tions in understanding our national experience.ERA will be a comprehensive, systematic, and dynamic means for preserving virtually anykind of electronic record, free from dependence on any specific hardware or software. When
operational, ERA will make it easy for NARA customers to find records they want and easy for
NARA to deliver those records in formats suited to customersÕ needs. Moreover, ERA
Õs tech-nology promises to be useful to many kinds of archives, libraries, agencies, and businesses,
regardless of size. ERA will preserve essential evidence and make it more accessible in every
sector of society.7From NARAÕs ÒERA Vision StatementÓERA will authentically preserve and provide access to any kind of electronic record, freefrom dependency on any specific hardware or software, enabling NARA to carry out its mis-
sion into the future.Vivid Description1.We will be a leader in innovation in electronic records archiving.

2.In coordination with our Federal partners, we will develop policy and technical guid-
ance to enable responsible electronic records creation and management.3.With help from our research partners, we will develop and maintain the technical
capability to capture, preserve, describe, access and appropriately dispose of any government
electronic record.4.We will manage a coherent, nationwide, and sustainable system for permanent archival
electronic records of the Federal Government.5.We will develop the capability to manage Federal agency electronic records within the
NARA records center system.6National Archives and Records Adminstration (NARA), 2002, ÒElectronic Records Archives:  Mission Needs
Statement (MNS),Ó p. 1. Available online at <http://www.archives.gov/electronic_records_archives/about_era/
mission.html>.7Ibid., p. 5.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A776.We will ensure that anyone, at anytime, from any place, has access to the best tools to
find and use the records we preserve.7.Our staff will be capable and consistent users of the electronic tools at every point of the
life cycle.8.We will sustain widespread support from all our stakeholders and customers by listen-
ing to their needs, meeting their requirements, and seeking their feedback. 8From NARAÕs Electronic Records Archives Concept of Operations (ConOps)9Section 1.2, ERA Program OverviewThe Archivist of the United States established the ERA Program in NARA Notice 2000-074to address critical issues in the creation, management, and use of electronic records. As a
program, ERA comprises the policies, procedures, practices, and the necessary technology that
will enable NARA to build the ERA System to receive, preserve, and provide access to elec-
tronic records. The resulting ERA System will be a comprehensive, systematic, and dynamic
means for preserving virtually any kind of electronic record, free from dependence on any
specific hardware or software. In addition to handling the actual records, ERA also will auto-
mate electronic records life cycle management activities. ERA, when operational, will make it
easy for NARA customers to find records they want, and easy for NARA to deliver those
records in formats suited to customersÕ needs.
Section 3.0, Current CapabilityAt this time, NARAÕs archival processes for electronic records are neither fully automatednor fully integrated. The electronic records collected by NARA over the past quarter century
consist primarily of data files and databases. Current accessions of records are increasing in
scope, diversity, and volume.The content and internal structure of the electronic records that are being accessionedreflect a broad spectrum of programs and activities of the Federal Government. Changing
technologies support new and different types of data with enhanced formats (e.g., e-mail,
geospatial data, digital imagery, office automation products, etc.). In addition, the rapid growth
of the Internet is fueling increased public demand for improved on-line access to the electronic
records held by NARA. Consequently, all of these factors motivate the need for a system that
will adequately preserve electronic records as long as they are needed, while providing access
to them.8NARA.  2002.  
ÒElectronic Records Archives (ERA) Vision Statement.Ó  April 18.  Available online at <http://
www.archives.gov/electronic_records_archives/about_era/vision.html>.9NARA.  2002.  
ÒElectronic Records Archives Concept of Operations (ConOps).Ó  October 29.  Available online at
<http://www.archives.gov/electronic_records_archives/about_era/concept_of_operations.html>.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARASection 3.1, BackgroundNARA is not new to the preservation of electronic records. Three decades ago, the agencydeveloped an electronic records management strategy. Since that time, NARA has used that
strategy to accession, preserve, and provide access to a significant number of highly structured
electronic records. This strategy calls for the storage of data in a software and hardware-inde-
pendent format (typically fixed length or delimited files in a standard character set, such as the
American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII)), on a master and back-up copy
of proven, commercially available storage media.For the storage of the data that have been accessioned, NARA adheres to prescribed envi-ronmental standards, performs annual statistical sampling to guard against any loss of data,
and copies the records onto new media before any deterioration of the current media occurs.
Historically, media refreshment has occurred on a 10-year cycle.NARAÕs current services for providing access to electronic records in its holdings allowresearchers to search NARA-created finding aids (in hard copy or on the World Wide Web) to
identify what collections are available. NARA then allows researchers to obtain copies of docu-
mentation on the structure and content of those collections or to visit NARAÕs facility in Col-lege Park, MD, to review that documentation and purchase copies of entire data sets for their
own use. NARA also has made the content of a few of its most frequently requested collections
available via the Internet.Section 3.2, Operational OverviewIn NARAÕs current environment, systems such as the Archival Preservation System (APS)and Archival Electronic Records Inspection And Control (AERIC) system allow it to preserve
the bits that make up electronic records and verify the structure and content of a limited
number of types of electronic records. When fully implemented the Archives Document Re-
view and Redaction System (ADRRES) and the Unclassified Redaction and Tracking System
(URTS) may be instrumental in the access review process for electronic records. In addition,
development is underway to support user access through the Archival Research Catalog (ARC)
and Access to Archival Databases (AAD) systems. The functional capabilities of the APS,
AERIC, ADRRES, URTS, ARC, and AAD systems will be included in the long-term technical
solution and suite of information technology (IT) tools for lifecycle management of records.
APS, AERIC, and AAD address requirements that are specific to electronic records. These
requirements will be addressed within the ERA system itself. Other existing systems address
requirements that apply to other types of records. NARA intends to provide interoperability
across lifecycle management applications through its target enterprise architecture. For addi-
tional information about existing systems, refer to NARAÕs Baseline Characterization Docu-ment (BCD).[É]Section 5.0, Concepts for the Proposed SystemERA will take advantage of sound and proven technologies in order to accommodate thevolume, diversity, and complexity of electronic records that NARA must address both now
and in the future. Managing electronic records requires an integrated, automated process from
receipt through final disposition and public access. The increased volume and complexity of
the records demands this kind of management. Consequently, the ConOps described in thisBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A79document stresses urgency for a high-level of automation that will result in changes to thecurrent approach to managing electronic records.[É]ERA must be capable of addressing electronic records for which there has been little or nofront-end involvement or preparation prior to their transfer by the originating entity. Further,
the user scenarios presented in this document recognize that NARA staff may act in the role of
the originating entity. While the scenarios assume some degree of front-end involvement, they
include the possibility that all transfers may not conform to ERA requirements. Acknowledg-
ing that the level of processing and service for nonconforming electronic records may vary,
ERA will nevertheless provide a means of preserving and accessing these materials.[É]Section 8.0, Analysis of the Proposed ERAVarious benefits, limitations, advantages, and disadvantages of ERA are covered in thissection.Section 8.1, Disadvantages and LimitationsPotential disadvantages or limitations to ERA include:¥High development costs¥High costs associated with security¥NARA staff anxiety brought about by new responsibilities resulting from changes dueto electronic records¥Poor NARA staff morale without proactive change management¥Impact on originating entities (resources required to prepare for transfer of materials toNARA, greater records management responsibilities)¥User misunderstanding of ERAÕs relation to the universe of NARAÕs holdingsSection 8.2, Summary of Benefits and Advantages
ERA will offer numerous benefits to NARA and record users including:¥The preservation of electronic records that would otherwise be lost¥A wider variety of electronic records in NARA holdings¥Consolidated electronic records administration and streamlined internal workflow¥More front end involvement with originating entities¥Higher quality accessioned electronic records¥New tools to support processing and review of electronic recordsÑTools to aid in review decisionsÑTools for withdrawal and redactionÑTools for description.¥Faster access to electronic records¥The ability to service additional record users¥Increased responsiveness and consistency with record users¥Remote access to electronic records¥Enhanced capabilities for searching electronic recordsBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80In 2002, the General Accounting Office (GAO) conducted a review of NARAÕs ERA pro-gram.  The excerpts below from the GAO report indicate some of the challenges to successful
execution that were identified at that time.In response to the challenges associated with managing and preserving electronic records,NARA has performed an assessment of governmentwide records managementÑan importantfirst step that identified several problems, including the inadequacy of guidance on electronic
records, the low priority generally given to records management, and the lack of technology
tools to manage electronic records. While NARA has plans to improve its guidance and ad-
dress the need for technology, it has not yet formulated a strategy to deal with the stature of
records management programs across government. Further, it has no strategy for acquiring the
kind of comprehensive information on records management that would be provided by sys-
tematic inspections and evaluations of federal records programs. Without such a strategy,
records management will likely continue to be considered a low-priority ÒsupportÓ activity
lacking appropriate management attention, and NARA will not acquire information needed to
address problems in agency records management and guidance. Inadequacies in records man-
agement put at risk records that may be valuable: records providing information on essential
government functions, information that is necessary to protect government and citizen inter-
ests, and information that is significant for the historical record.NARAÕs effort to acquire an advanced electronic records archive is at risk.  NARA is not
meeting its schedule for the ERA system, largely because of flaws in how the schedule was
developed. As a result, the schedule will be compressed, leaving less time for completing
essential planning tasks. In addition, NARA has not yet improved IT management capabilities
that would reduce the risks inherent in its effort to acquire ERA. Without these capabilities,
NARA risks spending funds to acquire a system that does not meet mission needs and require-
ments, effectively work with existing systems, or provide adequate security over the informa-
tion it contains.11General Accounting Office (GAO).  2002.   
Information Management: Challenges in Managing and Preserving Elec-tronic Records, report number GAO-02-586.  GAO, Washington, D.C., pp. 32-33.
BConclusions from the General Accounting Office
Report Information Management:  Challenges in
Managing and Preserving Electronic Records
Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.81CBriefers to the Study CommitteeAlthough the briefers listed below provided many useful inputs to the committee, theywere not asked to endorse the conclusions or recommendations, nor did they see the final draftof the report before its release.AUGUST 8-9, 2002WASHINGTON, D.C.John Carlin, Archivist of the United StatesKenneth Thibodeau, Director, Electronic Records Archives Program, NARARobert Chadduck, Research Director, Electronic Records Archives Program, NARA
Reagan Moore, San Diego Supercomputer CenterMichael Lesk, National Science FoundationNOVEMBER 5-6, 2002WASHINGTON, D.C.James Ostell, Chief, Information Engineering Branch, National Center for BiotechnologyInformationAnne Van Camp, Research Libraries Group
Michael Miller, Archivist, Federal Bureau of InvestigationJames Gray, Microsoft ResearchAnna K. Nelson, American University
Joseph King, National Space Science Data CenterJames Olson, Sabbath, Inc.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORD ARCHIVE AT NARAFEBRUARY 27-28, 2003WASHINGTON, D.C.Laura Campbell, Associate Librarian for Strategic Initiatives and Chief Information Officer,Library of CongressRick Barry, Principal, Barry AssociatesMacKenzie Smith, Massachusetts Institute of Technology Libraries
Robert Chadduck, Research Director, Electronic Records Archives Program, NARABuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.83What Is CSTB?The Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB) was established in 1986 asa part of the National Research Council to provide independent advice to the nation on
technical and public policy issues relating to computing and communications.  Composed of
leaders from industry and academia, CSTB conducts studies of critical national issues andmakes recommendations to government, industry, and academia.  CSTB also provides a neu-

tral meeting ground for consideration of complex issues where resolution and action may bepremature.  It convenes discussions that bring together principals from the public and private
sectors, assuring consideration of key perspectives.  The majority of CSTB
Õs work is requestedby federal agencies and Congress, consistent with its National Academies context.A pioneer in framing and analyzing Internet policy issues, CSTB is unique in its compre-hensive scope and effective, interdisciplinary appraisal of technical, economic, social, and
policy issues.  Cybersecurity, critical infrastructure protection, and the trustworthiness of
information systems have been cross-cutting themes in CSTBÕs work.  Several of its reports
have become classics in the field, and CSTB continues to address these topics as they grow in
importance.  Its program on information technology and society has explored such topics as
nationwide identity systems and the use of the Internet under crisis conditions.  CSTB has also
assessed and recommended enhanced IT strategies for a number of agencies of the federal
government.To do its work, CSTB draws on some of the best minds in the country and from around theworld, inviting experts to participate in its projects as a public service.  Studies are conducted
by balanced committees whose members have no direct financial interests in the topics theyare addressing.  Those committees meet, confer electronically, and build analyses through
their deliberations.  Additional expertise is tapped in a rigorous process of review and cri-

tique, further enhancing the quality of CSTB reports.  By engaging groups of principals, CSTB
gets the facts and insights critical to assessing key issues.The mission of CSTB is to¥Respond to requests from the government, nonprofit organizations, and private industryfor advice on computer and telecommunications issues and from the government for adviceon computer and telecommunications systems planning, utilization, and modernization;¥Monitor and promote the health of computer science and telecommunications, with atten-tion to issues of human resources, information infrastructure, and societal impacts;¥Initiate and conduct studies that treat computer science, technology, and telecommunica-tions as critical resources; and¥Foster interaction among the disciplines underlying computing and telecommunications
technologies and other fields, at large and within the National Academies.CSTB projects address a diverse range of topics affected by the evolution of informationtechnology.  Completed reports include 
Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation,and Creativity; Who Goes There? Authentication Through the Lens of Privacy; Information Technologyfor Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future Possibilities; Cybersecurity Today and Tomor-row: Pay Now or Pay Later; Youth, Pornography, and the Internet; Broadband: Bringing Home theBits; LC21: A Digital Strategy for the Library of Congress; and The Digital Dilemma: IntellectualProperty in the Information Age.  For further information about CSTB reports and active projects,
see <http://cstb.org>.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial DevelopmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.