DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/10735Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: WorkshopSummary and Papers392 pages | 8.5 x 11 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-08952-4 | DOI 10.17226/10735Ronald Breiger, Kathleen Carley, and Philippa Pattison, Editors; Committee onHuman Factors; Board on Behavioral, Cognitive, and Sensory Sciences; Divisionof Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education; National Research CouncilDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSiRonald Breiger, Kathleen Carley, and Philippa PattisonCommittee on Human FactorsBoard on Behavioral, Cognitive, and Sensory SciencesDivision of Behavioral and Social Sciences and EducationDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS      500 Fifth Street, N.W.      Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE:  The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the National Research Council,
whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, andthe Institute of Medicine.  The members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences

and with regard for appropriate balance.This work relates to Department of Navy grant N00014-02-1-0997 issued by the Office of Naval Research to the NationalAcademy of Sciences.  The United States Government has a royalty-free license throughout the world in all copyrightable
material contained in the publications.  Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Office of Naval Research.International Standard Book Number 0-309-08952-2 (Book)International Standard Book Number 0-309-51916-0 (PDF)Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 2003107509Additional copies of this report are available from National Academies Press, 500 Fifth Street, N.W., Lockbox 285, Washing-ton, DC 20055; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area); Internet, http://www.nap.edu.Printed in the United States of AmericaCopyright 2003 by the National Academy of Sciences.  All rights reserved.
Suggested citation:  National Research Council.  (2003).  
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis:  Workshop
Summary and Papers, Ronald Breiger, Kathleen Carley, and Philippa Pattison.  Committee on Human Factors.  Board on
Behavioral, Cognitive, and Sensory Sciences, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education.  Washington, DC:
The National Academies Press.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in
scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general
welfare.  Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it t
oadvise the federal government on scientific and technical matters.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts is president of the National Academyof Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the National Academy of Sciences, as a
parallel organization of outstanding engineers.  It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members,

sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government.  The National Academy
of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, andrecognizes the superior achievements of engineers.  Dr. Wm. A. Wulf is president of the National Academy of Engineering.
The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences to secure the services of eminent
members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public.  The Institute

acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to thefederal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education.  Dr. Harvey V.
Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad commu-nity of science and technology with the AcademyÕs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government.
Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the Council has become the principal operatingagency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in providing services to thegovernment, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities.  The Council is administered jointly by both Acad-

emies and the Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts and Dr. Wm. A. Wulf are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the
National Research Council.www.national-academies.orgDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PLANNING SUBCOMMITTEE FOR THE WORKSHOP ON DYNAMIC SOCIAL NETWORKMODELING AND ANALYSISDANIEL R. ILGEN (Chair), Department of Psychology and Department of Management, Michigan StateUniversity, East LansingJOHN M. CARROLL, Center for Human-Computer Interaction, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and StateUniversity, BlacksburgMARTHA GRABOWSKI, Department of Decision Sciences and Engineering Systems, Rensselaer PolytechnicInstitute; and Information Systems Programs, LeMoyne CollegeANNE S. MAVOR, Senior Staff OfficerSUSAN R. McCUTCHEN, Research AssociatevDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMITTEE ON HUMAN FACTORSRAJA PARASURAMAN (Chair), Department of Psychology, Catholic UniversityJOHN M. CARROLL, Center for Human-Computer Interaction, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and StateUniversity, BlacksburgROBYN DAWES, Department of Social and Decision Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University
COLIN G. DRURY, Department of Industrial Engineering, State University of New York, Buffalo
DONALD FISHER, Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, University of Massachusetts,AmherstMARTHA GRABOWSKI, Department of Decision Sciences and Engineering Systems, Rensselaer PolytechnicInstitute; and Information Systems Programs, LeMoyne CollegePETER A. HANCOCK, Department of Psychology, University of Central Florida, Orlando
DANIEL R. ILGEN, Department of Psychology and Department of Management, Michigan State University,East LansingRICHARD J. JAGACINSKI, Department of Psychology, Ohio State University, Columbus
BONNIE E. JOHN, Human-Computer Interaction Institute, School of Computer Science, Carnegie MellonUniversityKURT KRAIGER, Department of Psychology, University of Tulsa, Oklahoma
WILLIAM S. MARRAS, Institute for Ergonomics and Department of Industrial, Welding, and SystemsEngineering, Ohio State University, ColumbusRICHARD W. PEW, BBN Technologies, Cambridge, Massachusetts
ROBERT G. RADWIN, Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Wisconsin, Madison
KARLENE ROBERTS, Haas School of Business, University of California, Berkeley
KIM J. VICENTE, Cognitive Engineering Laboratory and Department of Mechanical and IndustrialEngineering, University of TorontoGREG L. ZACHARIAS, Charles River Analytics, Cambridge, Massachusetts
ANNE S. MAVOR, DirectorSUSAN R. McCUTCHEN, Research AssociateviDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Preface
viiThe Committee on Human Factors was established in 1980 by the Commission on Behavioral and SocialSciences and Education.  Over the years, the committee has pursued a wide range of topics dealing with theoretical

and methodological issues and with the application of principles of human behavior and performance to the design
of systems.  Recent interests have included modeling individual and organizational behavior, networks and remote

collaboration, and contributions of the behavioral and organizational sciences to ensuring national security.Within this context, the Committee on Human Factors was asked by the Office of Naval Research to hold aworkshop on social network modeling and analysis and to examine the potential of research in this area for
application to national security issues.  In response, a subgroup of the committee was appointed by the National

Research Council to plan and organize the workshop.  Key participants were identified and asked to write papers

and make presentations.  Many of the papers focused on current developments in the science of social network

modeling and several discussed various applications, including national security.  Part I of this document is a

summary of the major themes and the research issues and prospects that emerged from the presentations and
discussions.  Part II contains the papers as submitted.
I would like to thank Rebecca Goolsby from the Office of Naval Research for supporting this effort and for herinterest, insights, and helpful suggestions.  I would also like to extend our appreciation to National Research

Council staff Anne Mavor and Susan McCutchen for their assistance in planning and organizing the workshop.Part I, the workshop summary, has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their diverseperspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the Report Review Committee of
the National Research Council.  The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments

that will assist the institution in making its published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets
institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the charge.  The review comments and draft

manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of the process.  We thank the following individuals for their

review of Part I of this report:  Kari Chopra, Aptima, Inc., Washington, DC; Patrick Doreian, Department of

Sociology, University of Pittsburgh; and Charles M. Macal, Center for Complex Adaptive Systems Simulation,
Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL.Although the reviewers listed above provided many constructive comments and suggestions, they were notasked to endorse the content of the document nor did they see the final draft of the report before its release.  The

review of this report was overseen by Paul Holland, Statistical Theory and Practice, Educational Testing Service,
Princeton, NJ.  Appointed by the National Research Council, he was responsible for making certain that an

independent examination of this report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all
review comments were carefully considered.  Responsibility for the final content of this report rests entirely with

the authors and the institution.Daniel Ilgen, ChairPlanning SubcommitteeDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. Contents
PART I:  WORKSHOP SUMMARY
Introduction, 3Workshop Sessions and Themes, 3
Research Issues and Prospects, 11PART II:  WORKSHOP PAPERS
Opening AddressEmergent Themes in Social Network Analysis:  Results, Challenges, Opportunities19
Ronald L. BreigerSession I:  Social Network Theory Perspectives
Finding Social Groups:  A Meta-Analysis of the Southern Women Data39
Linton C. FreemanAutonomy vs. Equivalence Within Market Network Structure?78
Harrison C. WhiteSocial Influence Network Theory:  Toward a Science of Strategic Modification of Interpersonal
Influence Systems89Noah E. FriedkinInformation and Innovation in a Networked World101
David Lazerix115Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xCONTENTSSession II:  Dynamic Social Networks
Informal Social Roles and the Evolution and Stability of Social Networks121
Jeffrey C. Johnson, Lawrence A. Palinkas, and James S. BosterDynamic Network Analysis133Kathleen M. CarleyAccounting for Degree Distributions in Empirical Analysis of Network Dynamics146
Tom A.B. SnijdersPolarization in Dynamic Networks:  A Hopfield Model of Emergent Structure162
Michael W. Macy, James A. Kitts, Andreas Flache, and Steve BenardLocal Rules and Global Properties:  Modeling the Emergence of Network Structure174
Martina MorrisSocial Networks:  From Sexual Networks to Threatened Networks.187
H. Eugene Stanley and Shlomo HavlinSession III:  Metrics and Models
Sensitivity Analysis of Social Network Data and Methods:  Some Preliminary Results197
Stanley Wasserman and Douglas SteinleySpectral Methods for Analyzing and Visualizing Networks:  An Introduction209
Andrew J. Seary and William D. RichardsStatistical Models for Social Networks:  Inference and Degeneracy229
Mark S. HandcockThe Key Player Problem241Stephen P. BorgattiBalancing Efficiency and Vulnerability in Social Networks253
Elisa Jayne Bienenstock and Phillip BonacichData Mining on Large Graphs265
Christopher R. Palmer, Phillip B. Gibbons, and Christos FaloutsosSession IV:  Networked Worlds
Data Mining in Social Networks289
David Jensen and Jennifer NevilleRandom Effects Models for Network Data303
Peter D. HoffPredictability of Large-Scale Spatially Embedded Networks313
Carter T. ButtsDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSxiUsing Multi-Theoretical Multi-Level (MTML) Models to Study Adversarial Networks324
Noshir S. Contractor and Peter R. MongeIdentifying International Networks:  Latent Spaces and Imputation345
Michael D. Ward, Peter D. Hoff, and Corey Lowell LofdahlSummary:  Themes, Issues, and Applications

Linking Capabilities to Needs363
Kathleen M. CarleyAPPENDIXESA  Workshop Agenda
373B  Biographical Sketches
376Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART I
Workshop Summary
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WORKSHOP SUMMARY33Workshop Summary
INTRODUCTIONIn the summer of 2002, the Office of Naval Research asked the Committee on Human Factors to hold aworkshop on dynamic social network modeling and analysis.  The primary purpose of the workshop was to bring
together scientists who represent a diversity of views and approaches to share their insights, commentary, and
critiques on the developing body of social network analysis research and application.  The secondary purpose of

the workshop was to assist government and private-sector agencies in assessing the capabilities of social network
analysis to provide sound models and applications for current problems of national importance, with a particular
focus on national security.  Some of the presenters focused on social network theory and method, others attempted

to relate their research or expertise to applied issues of interest to various government agencies.  This workshop is

one of several activities undertaken by the National Research Council that bears on the contributions of various
scientific disciplines to understanding and defending against terrorismÑa topic raised by Bruce M. Alberts,
president of the National Academy of Sciences, in his annual address to the membership in April 2002.The workshop was held in Washington, D.C., on November 7-9, 2002.  Twenty-two researchers were asked to
prepare papers and give presentations.  The presentations were grouped into four sessions, each of which con-

cluded with a discussant-led roundtable discussion among presenters and workshop attendees on the themes and
issues raised in the session.  The sessions were:  (1) Social Network Theory Perspectives, (2) Dynamic Social

Networks, (3) Metrics and Models, and (4) Networked Worlds.  The opening address was presented by workshop
chair Ronald Breiger, of the University of Arizona; Kathleen Carley, of Carnegie Mellon University, offered
closing remarks summarizing the sessions and linking the work to applications in national security.  Part II of this

report contains the opening address, the closing remarks, and the papers as provided by the authors.  The agenda

and biographical sketches of the presenters are found in the appendixes.This summary presents the major themes developed by the presenters and discussants in each session andconcludes with research issues and prospects for both the research and applications communities.WORKSHOP SESSIONS AND THEMESOverall, the workshop provided presentations on the state of the art in social network analysis and its potentialcontribution to policy makers.  The papers run the gamut from the technical to the theoretical, and examine such
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4DYNAMIC SOCIAL NETWORK MODELING AND ANALYSISapplication areas as public health, culture, markets, and politics.  Throughout the workshop a number of themes
emerged, all based on the following understandings:¥Both network theory and methodology have expanded rapidly in the past decade.¥New approaches are combining social network analysis with techniques and theories from other researchareas.¥Many of the existing tools, metrics, and theories need to be revisited in the context of very large scale and/or dynamic networks.¥The body of applied work in social networking is growing.Several common analytical issues underlie much of the research reported.  First, traditional social network
analysis is Òdata greedyÓÑvery detailed data are required on all participants.  Questions to be addressed in the
analysis of these data concern how to estimate the data from high-level indicators, how sensitive the measures are
to missing data, and how network data can be collected rapidly and/or automatically.  Furthermore, advances

require the development of additional shareable data sets that capture heretofore understudied aspects such as
large-scale networks, sampling errors, linkages to other types of data, and over-time data.  Second, traditional

social network analysis (especially prior to the last couple of decades)1 has focused on static networks, whereasmuch of the work discussed here focuses on the processes by which networks change or emerge.  While ongoing

data collection and analysis are providing key new insights, researchers need new statistical methods, simulation
models, and visualization techniques to handle such dynamic data and to use these data to reason about change.
Third, social network theories are beginning to outstrip the measures and data.  For example, theories often posit

ties as being flexible, probabilistic, or scaled; most data and metrics, however, are still based on binary data.Session I:  Social Network Theory Perspectives
Presenters and PapersDiscussant:  Ronald Breiger
1.Linton C. Freeman, 
Finding Social Groups:  A Meta-Analysis of the Southern Women Data
2.Harrison C. White, 
Autonomy vs. Equivalence Within Market Network Structure?3.Noah E. Friedkin, 
Social Influence Network Theory:  Toward a Science of Strategic Modification of
Interpersonal Influence Systems4.David Lazer, 
Information and Innovation in a Networked WorldThemesThe papers in this session illustrate the breadth of areas that can be addressed by social network analysis.  On
one hand, the work can be used to explain, predict, and understand the behavior of small groups and the influence
of group members on one another, as seen in the work of Freeman and Friedkin.  On the other hand, social network

analysis can be Òwrit largeÓ and applied at the market or institutional level, as described in the papers by White and
Lazer.  Regardless of network size, all four papers demonstrate that a structural analysis that focuses on connec-

tions can provide insight into how one person, group, or event can and does influence another.  These people or

groups or events cannot, and do not, act in an autonomous fashion; rather, their actions are constrained by their
position in the overall network, which is in turn constrained by the other networks and institutions in which they
are embedded (the overall ecology).  Further, the papers presented in this session review the range of methodologi-
1Early work on dynamic modeling was done by P.S. Holland and S. Leinhardt (A dynamic model for social networks, Journal ofMathematical Sociology 5:5-20, 1977).
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WORKSHOP SUMMARY5cal approaches and styles of analysis that are compatible with a social network approach.  Unlike many other
scientific methods, the social network approach can be used with ethnographic and field data (Freeman), experi-
mental laboratory data (Friedkin), historical examples (White), and policy/technology evaluation (Lazer).Freeman provided a framework for assessing comparative analyses of a long-standing object of sociologicaltheoryÑthe small social collectivity characterized by interpersonal ties.  White integrated theoretical perspectives
on a network-based sociology of markets and firms.  Friedkin advocated applications of social influence network

theory to problems of network modification.  Lazer considered governance questions arising from the 
Òinforma-tional efficiencyÓ of different network architectures (spatial, organizational, emergent) and the prospects of 
ÒfreeridingÓÑgovernments becoming complacent about innovating in the hope that another government will bear thecost of a successful innovation.  Three major themes crosscut these papers and the resultant discussion.
Scaling up and uncertainty.  How well do the different analytical techniques and algorithms 
Òscale upÓ to large
networks with hundreds or thousands of actors and multiple types of relations?  Perhaps a more useful phrasing of

this question is, Under what conditions and for which analytical purposes do models of social networks scale up,and how well do existing techniques deal with uncertainty in information?  Spirited discussion arose in response

to the question of whether the same social network model may be posed at ÒmicroÓ and 
ÒmacroÓ levels of social
organization, or whether scaling up must involve the addition of substantially more complex representation of
social structure within the network model.WhiteÕs model requires the analyst to account explicitly for the varied circumstances of particular industries.In his work, markets constructed among firms in networks are mapped into a space of settings with interpretable
parameters that govern the ratio of demand to producersÕ costs; key parameters pertain to growth in volume and to
variation in product quality.  White
Õs model is also distinctive in treating uncertainty not as a technical problemimplicated in parameter estimation (statistical models being a main concern of the second and third sessions of this
workshop), but as a substantive force that drives the evolution of ranking and manipulation as organizing features
of a space of markets.  During discussion, White expressed the view that scaling up is indeed a formidable

challenge.Friedkin, on the other hand, felt that the only practical constraint on social influence models is the problem ofdata-gathering ability.  Friedkin
Õs social influence network theory describes an influence process in which mem-bersÕ attitudes and opinions on an issue change recursively as the members revise their positions by taking
weighted averages of the positions of influential fellow members.  One example of an application would be

producers who eye, and orient to, their competitors while figuring out the cost of their product, as in WhiteÕsmarket model.  The mathematics is general
ÑFriedkin suggested applications to the modification of group struc-ture such that, for example, outcomes are rendered less sensitive to minor changes in influence structure or to
initial opinions of group members.  However, Friedkin
Õs model focuses on convergent interpersonal dynamicsrather than on the structuring of qualitatively distinct network outcomes, as in WhiteÕs market ecology.Network outcomes.  Both Lazer and Friedkin argued that the partial structuring of interdependence, a definitive
aspect of social networks, must be taken into account in theorizing the production of outcomes.  Taking innovative

information, such as knowledge of policies or innovations that work as a desired network outcome, LazerÕs paperasks how interdependence can be governed in large and complex systems.  Lazer develops the argument that,

where the production of information requires costly investment, there is a paradoxical possibility that the more
efficient a system is at spreading information, the less new information the system might generate.  This suggests
that in networked (as distinct from hierarchical) worlds, incentives should be provided to continue experimenting
with innovations.Breiger suggested the benefits of a comparative reading of LazerÕs paper and FriedkinÕs:  In Friedkin
Õs modelthe dependent variable is actor opinions at equilibrium; in LazerÕs, it is knowledge created by or held by actors.Can the free riding that motivates LazerÕs rational actors be usefully applied to suggest processes that structure theinterior of FriedkinÕs influence networks?  Conversely, can Friedkin
Õs model provide a concrete format forspecifying LazerÕs theories of information interdependency?Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6DYNAMIC SOCIAL NETWORK MODELING AND ANALYSISMeta-analysis of network analysis methods.  Freeman was able to locate 21 analyses of the same data set
(concerning the participation of women in social events in a southern city in the 1930s).  He examined these studies

by use of a form of meta-analysis, but it is an unusual form in that multiple analytic techniques are applied to a
single data set.  There is an underlying dimension on which the analytic methods converge, and the several most

effective techniques allow identification of a single (and, in this convergent sense, most informed) description of
the data.  Generally, the 
ÒbestÓ of these 21 analytic procedures agree more with one another than with the anecdotal
description supplied by the original data gatherers.  The possibility is raised that in certain circumstances (perhaps

in cases where the various methods applied yield results that are not too far from the true network structure) the
intensive application of multiple analytic methods may compensate for problems in data quality.Session II:  Dynamic Social Networks
Presenters and PapersDiscussant:  Stanley Wasserman
1.Jeffrey C. Johnson, 
Informal Social Roles and the Evolution and Stability of Social Networks (coauthors
Lawrence A. Palinkas and James S. Boster)2.Kathleen M. Carley, 
Dynamic Network Analysis3.Tom A.B. Snijders, 
Accounting for Degree Distributions in Empirical Analysis of Network Dynamics4.Michael W. Macy, 
Polarization in Dynamic Networks:  A Hopfield Model of Emergent Structure
(coauthors James A. Kitts and Andreas Flache)5.Martina Morris, 
Local Rules and Global Properties:  Modeling the Emergence of Network Structure
6. H. Eugene Stanley, 
Threat Networks and Threatened Networks:  Interdisciplinary Approaches to Stabiliza-
tion and Immunization (coauthor Shlomo Havlin)ThemesThe papers in this session address the evolution, emergence, and dynamics of network structure.  Methods
range across ethnography and participant observation, statistical modeling, simulation studies, and models em-
ploying computational agents.  The methods are not mutually exclusive and were often used together to create a

more complete understanding of the dynamics of social networks.  Four themes emerged from these papers and the

roundtable discussion.What makes networks effective or ineffective?  This theme added an explicitly dynamic focus to the ÒnetworkoutcomesÓ theme of the previous session.  Various factors were considered, including the presence or absence of
certain roles, structural characteristics (patterns of ties), and connections to other networks.  The cross-cultural

ethnographies of network evolution conducted by Jeffrey Johnson and his colleagues demonstrate that group
dynamics can vary dramatically from one group to another even within the same physical and cultural setting and
in the presence of similar organizational goals and formal structure.  Johnson et al., studying Antarctic research

station teams, found five features of emergent social roles that are associated with the evolution of effective
networks:  heterogeneity (such that members
Õ roles fit in with one another), consensus (agreement on individuals
Õstatus and function), redundancy (such that removal of a single actor still ensures proper functioning, avoiding
vulnerability), latency (promoting adaptive responses to unforeseen events), and isomorphism of formal and
informal social roles (promoting agreement on group goals and objectives).  The studies make use of quantitative
modeling of network structures over time as well as direct observation over extended periods.Multiagent network models are featured in the dynamic network analysis of Kathleen Carley and in thecomputational modeling of Michael Macy and his colleagues.  Carley has formulated a highly distinctive approach

to the dynamic modeling of social networks.  Her simulation models and her formulation of ties among actors as

probabilistic (such that connections can go away, get stronger, or change in strength dynamically over time) rather
than deterministic allow her to investigate how networks may endeavor to regain past effectiveness (or to Òre-Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WORKSHOP SUMMARY7growÓ) to make up for destabilizing losses.  ÒWhat ifÓ exercises allow theoretical exploration of assumptions thatan analyst makes about network vulnerabilities and about alternative distributions of resources, with reference to
the system the analyst has constructed.  For example, Carley found that removal of the most central node might

leave a network less vulnerable than removal of an emergent leader.Macy et al. studied conditions in which a group might be expected to evolve into increasingly antagonisticcamps.  Their computational model allows the manipulation of qualities attributed to agents
Ñfor example, theirtendency to focus on a single issue, the degree of their conviction, and their rigidity or openness to influence from
others.  A surprising finding of this simulation study is that global alignment along a single polarizing definition of

opposing ideologies is facilitated by ideological flexibility and open-mindedness among local constituents, as seen
in the elegantly simple system of actors and relations postulated by the type of neural network employed by Macy
et al.Researchers in the statistical physics community have recently focused attention on Òscale-freeÓ social net-
works, characterized, as Eugene Stanley pointed out in his presentation, by a power-law distribution of ties
emanating from the nodes, loosely analogous to an airline route map showing a very small number of well-
connected ÒhubsÓ and many less well-connected nodes.  It has been proven that scale-free networks are optimallyresilient to random failure of individuals; Stanley and Havlin point out at the same time, however, that such
networks are highly susceptible to deliberate attack.  Under the assumption that social networks of people exposed

to disease have the scale-free property, the authors review possible strategies for immunization.Dynamics of local structure.  The papers presented by Macy and by Carley also speak effectively to another theme
that crosscut many of the papers in this session:  the advancement of modeling techniques that focus on behavior

among small sets of actors and on the implications of such local behavior for the evolution of a network macro-
structure.  This theme provides a dynamic cast to the ideas of Òscaling upÓ presented in the first session.  Compu-tational models of social networks are precisely about exploring the evolution of whole systems on the basis of
rules (such as when an actor should form a tie with another) and endowments postulated at the level of individual
actors.Coming from quite a different direction, that of the formulation of models that allow the fit of models to datato be assessed within a statistical context, SnijdersÕ paper reports an investigation of network evolution on the basis
of a stochastic, actor-oriented model that embeds discrete-time observations in an unobserved continuous-time
network evolution process.  Just one arc is added or deleted at any given moment, and actors are assumed to try to

obtain favorable network configurations for themselves.The paper by Martina Morris continues the focus on relating local rules to global structure, relying onempirical data (from sexual partner networks) and statistical modeling as well as simulations.  Her question was

whether the overall network structure can be explained by recourse to a small number of partnership formation
rules that operate on the local, individual level.  Two such rules were evinced in selective mixing patterns, such as

the degree of matching on race or age, and the timing/sequencing of partnership formation (e.g., serial monogamy
versus concurrency).  Morris linked network data to network simulation by means of a statistical modeling

framework:  statistical models for random graphs as implemented via the Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)

estimation method.  Putting together local rules and simulations based on random graph (statistical) methods

allows empirical modeling of global networks on the basis of local properties.Key features of networks in modeling evolution.  Physicists including Stanley and Havlin, who have made manyrecent contributions to the modeling of scale-free networks, are interested in the dynamic evolution of degree
distributions (number of ties emanating from each node).  Sociologists tend to emphasize that other features of the

network are also of great importance in network evolution, including the degree of transitivity (which is one way
of measuring hierarchy), cyclicity (a hierarchy-defeating principle), segmentation into subgroups, and so on.  In

his paper, Snijders demonstrates that it is possible to formulate a model for network evolution in which the
evolutionary process of the degree distribution is decoupled from other, arguably important, features of the
networkÕs evolution such as those mentioned above.  Snijders
Õ paper elaborates a statistical context within which
the contribution of each of several features of network evolution might be comparatively assessed.  Carley
Õs paperDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8DYNAMIC SOCIAL NETWORK MODELING AND ANALYSISelaborates mechanisms for evolution that draw on nonstructural properties such as individual learning and re-source depletion, as well as exogenous changes such as the removal of specific nodes.Simulation and computational-actor models versus validation and statistical models.  A lively roundtable
discussion of the six papers in this session focused in particular on the preceding theme and on the relative merits
of conceptual modeling versus validation techniques.  It was argued, on one hand, that an emphasis on validation

is healthy because the analyst can be in a position to distinguish real patterns from mere noise or from wishful
thinking.  On the other hand, it was argued that simulations can help an analyst to explore the logic of postulated

mechanisms that may be driving an empirical result, and to explore realms of the possible rather than predicting
the future of a specific event or action.  Such predictions are generally not possible outcomes of simulation studies.

It was argued that each broad project approach (statistical rigor and simulations that explore various insights) is
valuable, as are efforts to integrate them more closely.  As more data become publicly available to the social

networking community, they can be used to improve both simulation and statistical techniques.Session III:  Metrics and Models
Presenters and PapersDiscussant:  Philippa Pattison
1.Stanley Wasserman, 
Sensitivity Analysis of Social Network Data and Methods:  Some Preliminary
Results (coauthor Douglas Steinley)2.Andrew J. Seary and William D. Richards, 
Spectral Methods for Analyzing and Visualizing Networks:An Introduction3.Mark S. Handcock, 
Assessing Degeneracy in Statistical Models for Social Networks4.Stephen P. Borgatti, 
The Key Player Problem5.Elisa Jayne Bienenstock and Phillip Bonacich, 
Balancing Efficiency and Vulnerability in Social Networks6.Christos Faloutsos, 
ANF:  A Fast and Scalable Tool for Data Mining in Massive Graphs
 (coauthors
Christopher R. Palmer and Phillip B. Gibbons)ThemesThe papers in this session present methodological developments at the forefront of efforts to constructstatistical models and metrics for understanding social networks.  Although a number of papers in the other

sessions also contributed significantly to this effort, a key distinction between these papers and those in the other
sessions is that they focus on what can be learned if we only have network data.  At least four important themes

guiding the development of new models and metrics can be identified.Exploratory data analysis (EDA) for networks.  The first is the development of techniques that fall under the
broad class of methods for exploratory data analysis (EDA) for networks.  Such methods include descriptive

measures and analyses that assist in summarizing and visualizing properties of networks and in investigating the
dependence of such measures on other network characteristics.  Under this general heading, Seary and Richardsprovided a comprehensive review of what can be learned from spectral analyses of matrices related to the
adjacency matrix of a network.  They also illustrated the application of these analyses to empirical networks

using the computer program NEGOPY (a key concept in this program is that of liaisons).  Faloutsos summarized

a number of relationships between node measures (such as degree of connectivity and the Òhop exponentÓ) andtheir frequency in power-law terms and presented a fast algorithm for computing the approximate neighborhood
of each node.  Wasserman and Steinley presented the first stages of a study designed to explore the ÒsensitivityÓof network measures by assessing the variation in some important network statistics (e.g., degree centralization,
ÒbetweennessÓ centralization, and proportion of transitive triads) as a function of specified random graph
distributions.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WORKSHOP SUMMARY9Model development and estimation.   The second guiding theme is the value of developing plausible models for
social networks whose parameters can be estimated from network data.  Mark Handcock outlined the general class

of exponential random graph models and presented a compelling analysis of difficulties associated with estimating
certain models within the class.  He showed how model degeneracy
Ñthe tendency for probability mass to beconcentrated on just a few graphsÑinterferes with approaches to apply standard simulation-based estimationapproaches, and he described an important alternative model parameterization in which such problems can be
handled.Impact of network change on network properties.  A third theme underlying the work presented in this session is
the importance of understanding how different measures of network structure change following Ònode removalÓ or
Ònode failure.Ó  For example, Borgatti considered two versions of the 
Òkey playerÓ problem:  Given a network, find
a set of k nodes that, if removed, maximally disrupts communication among remaining nodes or is maximally
connected to all other nodes.  He proposed distance-based measures of fragmentation and reach as relevant to these

two versions of the key-player problem and presented an algorithm for optimizing the measures as well as several
applications.Bienenstock and Bonacich contrasted the notions of efficiency and vulnerability in networks, and of randomand strategic attack, and examined the efficiency and resilience of four network formsÑrandom, scale-free,lattice, and bipartiteÑunder both forms of attack.  A distance-based efficiency measure
Ñsimilar to BorgattiÕsfragmentation measureÑwas proposed and vulnerability was measured as the average decrease in efficiency ofthe network after a sequence of successive attacks.  Bienenstock and Bonacich found that, of the class of networks

assessed, scale-free networks were most susceptible to attack, and lattice and bipartite models with a small
proportion of random ties offered the best balance of efficiency and resilience.Finally, Faloutsos examined three types of network node failure:  random, in order of degree, and in order ofapproximate neighborhood size.  He argued that the Internet at the router level was robust in the case of random

node failure but sensitive to the other two forms.In the roundtable discussion, it was noted that the research topic of network vulnerability appears to be anemerging area in which there are many useful, and usefully interrelated, results, with reference in particular to the
papers by Borgatti and by Bienenstock and Bonacich in this session, as well as to those by Carley and by Stanley
and Havlin in the previous session.  Fast algorithms such as those developed by Faloutsos and colleagues are

necessary to extend these investigations to very large contexts such as the Internet.Processes or flows on networks.  A fourth theme is the importance of distinguishing the structure of a network
from the different types of dynamic processes or flows that the network might support.  Borgatti described a

framework for distinguishing different interpersonal processes (e.g., disease transmission, dissemination of knowl-

edge) that might involve network partners and considered the implications of such distinctions for analyses of
network structure.Session IV:  Networked Worlds
Presenters and PapersDiscussant:  David Lazer
1.Alden S. Klovdahl, 
Social Networks in Contemporary Societies2.David Jensen, 
Data Mining in Social Networks (coauthor Jennifer Neville)
3.Peter D. Hoff, 
Random Effects Models for Network Data4.Carter T. Butts, 
Predictability of Large-Scale Spatially Embedded Networks5.Noshir S. Contractor, 
Using Multi-Theoretical Multi-Level (MTML) Models to Study Adversarial Networks(coauthor Peter R. Monge)6.Michael D. Ward, 
Identifying International Networks:  Latent Spaces and Imputation 
(coauthor Peter D.Hoff and Corey Lowell Lofdahl)Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10DYNAMIC SOCIAL NETWORK MODELING AND ANALYSISThemesThe papers in this session focus on the modeling of large-scale social networks.  It is important to stress that
tools and data sets for addressing large-scale networks are still in their infancy.  An overarching concern is the

extent to which standard social network metrics provide information in large-scale networks.  A related need is

publicly available, large-scale network data sets that can serve as examples for systematic comparative method-
ological analysis.  Four themes emerged from the papers and the roundtable discussion in this session.
Understanding the structure of large-scale networks.  Klovdahl
Õs paper demonstrates how social structurecan be exploited to obtain a sample of a large-scale network.  In random-walk sampling, a small set of persons is

randomly sampled from a large population and interviewed; from the contacts provided by each interviewee, one
is randomly selected for an interview, and this process is repeated until chains of (say) length 2 are constructed.  In

essence, this procedure allows observation of random sets of connected nodes, which provide the basis for
statistical inferences of the structural properties of large networks.The feature of structure addressed in the paper by Butts is geographical distance, which he discusses as arobust correlate of interaction (e.g., most participants in the 9/11 airplane hijackings were from a particular,
relatively small region of Saudi Arabia).  His paper models the predictive power of geographical distance in large-

scale, spatially embedded networks, and argues that in many realistic situations distance explains a very high
proportion of variability in tie density.Understanding processes in large-scale networks.  What are the processes that sustain large networks?  Why do
people maintain, dissolve, and reconstitute communication links as well as links to information?  Contractor and

Monge systematically reviewed large bodies of empirical literature and distilled many propositions concerning the
maintenance and dissolution of links.  To date, much research on social networks has looked at just one of these

mechanisms at a time.  Ironically, however, many of the mechanisms contradict one another.  For example,

creating a tie with someone because many others do so is consistent with social contagion theory but contradicts
self-interest theories that suggest the marginal return from an additional tie would be slight.  In their larger project,

Contractor and Monge develop a framework that tests multiple theories such as these at multiple levels, allowing
many theories to be brought to bear on the same data set.Understanding data on large-scale networks.  Papers by several participants present models, methods, and
illustrative analyses oriented toward the study of large-scale networks.  Jensen and Neville joined social network

analysis with data mining and related techniques of machine learning and knowledge discovery in order to
investigate large networks.  At the intersection of statistics, databases, artificial intelligence, and visualization,

data mining techniques have been extended to relational data.  One example, useful in detecting cell phone fraud,
is that fraudulent telephone numbers are likely to be not one but two degrees away (because various phone
numbers are stolen but they tend to be used to call the same parties).  Jensen
Õs and NevilleÕs paper reports theireffort to predict an outcome (the success of a film) on the basis of a data set that interlinks features of a large
network (such as movies, studios, actors, and previous awards).  Whereas recent work in machine learning and

data mining has made impressive strides toward learning highly accurate models of relational data, Jensen and
Neville suggest that cross-disciplinary efforts that make good use of social network analysis and statistics should
lead to even greater progress.Hoff presented random effects modeling for social networks, which provide one way to model the statisticaldependence among the network connections.  The models assume that each node has a vector of latent character-

istics and that nodes relate preferentially to others with similar characteristics.  Hoff employs a Markov chain

Monte Carlo (MCMC) simulation procedure to estimate the modelÕs parameters.Ward, Hoff, and Lofdahl report in their paper an application of HoffÕs latent spaces model to data oninteractions among primary actors in Central Asian politics over an 11-year period ending in 1999, based on 1
million iterations of the MCMC estimation procedure using geographic distance as the only covariate.  Countries

closer together in the dimensional space resulting from model estimation were predicted to have a higher probabil-Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WORKSHOP SUMMARY11ity of connection.  Imputation techniques were investigated and found to predict ties that were not sampled.  The
paper provides a favorable initial application of the latent spaces model to a data context of interest.A final observation from the resultant discussion concerned the similarities (which are very great) as well asthe differences (which are nonetheless consequential) among the various statistical models, notably those of
HandcockÕs and HoffÕs papers as well as the random graph models presented by Wasserman, Pattison, andcolleagues.  In brief, the similarities concern the increased focus on formulating parametric models for random

graphs within the exponential family.  The differences pertain to different paths taken in the estimation of model

parameters.Understanding the adversary versus understanding ourselves.  In the roundtable discussion, Lazer began his
remarks by considering, in the post-9/11 context, the contributions that network analysis might make to decision
makers who confront security challenges and suggested that the first problem to be considered is that of under-
standing the adversary.  Severe information overload coupled with a great deal of missing or nonexistent data and

the need for quick, real-time decisions are factors that hamper efforts to understand an adversaryÕs vulnerabilities.Social network models cannot always lead an analyst to make a prediction that has perfect accuracy, but they can
certainly improve the process of making such predictions by identifying relevant linkages and related sources of
uncertainty that may be easily overlooked.  For example, the paper by Ward and his colleagues provides a majorextension to the usual international relations models that paradoxically ignore relational structures.  Further, Butts

was able in his paper to project the likely structure of a network based on a small amount of publicly available
information.Lazer then turned to the question of understanding ourselves, arguing that a different set of challenges isimplicated in this second concern.  Here the needs center around questions of who needs to coordinate, communi-

cate, and cooperate.  Challenges concern critical self-evaluation (turf issues, organizational cultures, entrenched

constituencies), design challenges (including needs for security as well as coordination), and the ability to be up
and running in real-time, emergent situations.  An opportunity in this area is that there are many more chances to

gather data.  Therefore, in contrast to a project designed to understand the adversary
Õs vulnerabilities, there areperhaps more obvious openings for data-analytic approaches and for rigorous research.RESEARCH ISSUES AND PROSPECTSIn this final section we identify near-term prospects for improving social networks research that emerged fromthe workshop papers and discussion.  In doing so we focus on three areas: formulation of models; data and

measurement; and research relevant to national security needs.  The concerns and questions that we identify, while

voiced by various workshop participants speaking as individuals, do not represent conclusions or recommenda-
tions of the workshop itself.Formulation of ModelsNetworks ÒPlusÓ:  Generalized Relational Structures
The social network community has often found it useful to view social networks as ÒskeletalÓ abstractions ofa much richer social reality.  An important question, though, is whether the extent to which attempts to model and

quantify network properties can rely on the network observations alone or whether they would instead be enhanced
by additional information about actors and ties and their embedding in other social forms (the constellation of
which might be termed Ògeneralized relational data structuresÓ).  In other words, to what extent do we need to
develop a more systematic (and quantitative) understanding of such generalized relational data structures, such as
the meta-matrix approach?  Such an understanding could lead to the development of models and analytic ap-

proaches that reflect the social context in which networks reside and the interaction of network processes with
other aspects of this reality, including the background, intentions, and beliefs of the actors involved and theDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12DYNAMIC SOCIAL NETWORK MODELING AND ANALYSIScultural and geographical settings in which they find themselves.  Breiger raised similar points in his opening
address.Processes on NetworksAn important reason to examine network structure is that such examination provides an understanding of theconstraints and opportunities for social and cognitive processes enacted through network ties.  Yet there is a

limited understanding of the extent to which we can predict the course of social and cognitive processes from
network topology alone.  Should we be engaging in empirical and methodological programs of study that enable

us to articulate more clearly the relationship between network structure and various types of social processes in
which we are interested?  Research presented at this workshop demonstrates that models in which the network ties

and other network-based diffusion or contagion processes coevolve significantly expand our ability to understand,
interpret, and predict social and cognitive behavior.  Further work involving empirical analysis, simulation, and

statistical modeling in this area seems to hold particular promise.Scaling UpAn evident theme emerging from Sessions I (Social Network Theory Perspectives) and II (Dynamic SocialNetworks) is the potential value of juxtaposing methods used to describe large-scale networks, primarily in
physics and computer science, with methods for evaluating models for social networks at a smaller scale, primarily
in the social sciences.  A number of statistical models that have been developed for social networks of medium size

have attempted to express network structure as the outcome of regularities in interactive interpersonal processes at
a ÒlocalÓ level.  Can we extend the focus of such statistical modeling approaches to develop theoretically prin-
cipled and testable models for social networks at a larger scale and in the process evaluate some of the claims
emerging from the more descriptive analyses?  A number of network theories are based on cognitive principles and

small-group social theory.  As we move to large-scale networks does this microlevel behavior still appear, or does

the variance inherent in human action cause such microbehavior to be lost as macrolevel bases for relations
become visible?Model Development and EvaluationIn addition to extending models to include richer sources of relational data, how can we best incorporatepotentially more complex dependence structures and longitudinal observations?  Can we develop measurement

models for ties and structural models for networks that take account of measurement and sampling issues?  Can we

also develop more rigorous and diagnostic approaches to model evaluation?  How can simulation studies be best

utilized to contribute to the resolution of questions of model specification and evaluation for evolving networks?
Can we evaluate the fit of power laws more carefully; indeed, can we construct and evaluate models predicting the
emergence of scale-free networks?  Furthermore, can we extend and possibly integrate the very different and

distinctive programs of fruitful work currently being done (and presented at the workshop in papers by Carley,
Faloutsos et al., Friedkin, Macy et al., Morris, Snijders, and Stanley and Havlin) in order to build models for the
coevolution of network ties, actor orientations, and actor affiliations?Modeling:  Estimation and Evaluation
Significant issues that emerged from the workshop session on dynamic social networks are thecomplementarity of simulation from complex models for dynamic and interactive network-based processes (in
order to understand model behavior) and the task of formulating models in such a way that model parameters can
be estimated from observed data and model fit can be carefully evaluated.  The potential value of developing,

estimating, and evaluating models in conjunction with empirical data is evident, and a major research domain is
the development of models for network observations that will allow us to close the gap between what can beDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WORKSHOP SUMMARY13hypothesized from simulation-based explorations of theoretical positions and what can be verified empiricallyfrom well-designed network studies.Data and MeasurementThe Design of Network Studies:  Sampling Issues and Data Quality
A significant set of issues surrounds the question of network sampling.  Although only a few presentations in
this workshop directly addressed questions of sampling, such issues were always close to the surface.  Networks

rarely have boundaries, and almost all empirical networks have been based on sampling decisions or sampling
outcomes of some form.  A principled means for handling sampling issues would be very valuable and indeed is

a natural extension of model-based formulations.  Several factors that might be considered here include (1) the

biases inherent in the collection of nodes and ties obtained by a given sampling procedure, (2) the tendency to
over- or undersample certain types of relations, and (3) the extent to which such errors are uniformly distributed
over the network or focused in some portion of the overall network.Related issues concern missing data, unreliable data, and data arising from actors (ranging from schoolchildren to corporate executives) who may strategically misreport their ties.   Methods for analyzing network data

exhibiting these properties include intensive application of multiple analytic procedures to compensate for prob-
lems of data quality (see FreemanÕs paper and related discussion in Session I above); addition of actors by meansof random-walk sampling (see discussion of KlovdahlÕs presentation in Session IV); and the possibility thatmissing links can be implied by the existence of other linkages, as reviewed in the section entitled ÒData Qualityand Network SamplingÓ in Breiger
Õs opening address.Important questions to address include:  What methodological steps can be taken to minimize the conse-
quences of missing nodes and tie measurement errors?  Can we deal with missing data in model construction and

develop model-based approaches to estimate missing data?  Would it be prudent to develop more effective

measurement strategies for each tie of interest, as well as models for the measurement of ties?  How can we go

about providing evidence for the validity of network measurement?  Further, should we focus more effort on

characterizing the multifaceted nature of network ties?Network EstimationIt is important to note that most network studies are done in a Òdata greedyÓ fashion, with the result that the
underlying network is mapped out or sampled at a fairly high level of accuracy.  This is practical in some contexts,

such as situations in which archival or observational data are available and reliable; however, it is likely to be
highly impractical in many other contexts.  Thus, it would be useful to specify systematically the classes or

dimensions of networks that exhibit fundamentally different behavior.  Which high-level indicators can be used to

determine the location of an unobserved network of interest in this space of possibilities?  In other words, what can

be done to provide a first-order estimate of the shape of the unobserved network?  What kinds of questions can be

answered by having even this high-level estimate?  Basic research both on characterizing the impact of networks

and on their fundamental form would be useful in this regard.Exploratory Data AnalysisIn light of the issues summarized above, it will be important to consider how we can augment descriptiveanalyses of networks so as to incorporate information from other sources (e.g., node attributes, orientations and
locations, tie properties, group and organizational affiliations).  More generally, can we extend these approaches to

more complex and longitudinal relational data structures, and can they be developed so as to assist in the evalua-
tion and development of model-based approaches?  Many visualization tools provide valuable means for the

simultaneous presentation of relational and other data forms, but can their capacities be further enhanced?  In

relation to the notion of resistance of network statistics, is special treatment required for certain network concepts?
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14DYNAMIC SOCIAL NETWORK MODELING AND ANALYSISFor example, many network analyses have been based on the role of cut points and bridge ties, observations thatlead to statistics that may be inherently nonresistant (e.g., number of components, reachability, etc.).  Should

researchers identify observations associated with lack of resistance (e.g., investigate their measurement quality)?Research Relevant to National SecurityImpact of Network Change on Network PropertiesWhat is learned by integrating an understanding of network ÒinterventionsÓ with a model-based approach?
One of the core features of social networks is arguably their potential to self-organize, which is especially likely in
response to an intervention.  Research presented at this workshop illustrates the potential for network models, both

simulation and mathematical, to be used to foreshadow the probable network response to various types of interven-
tions such as the removal of a node that is high in centrality or cognitive load, a Òkey player.Ó  This work suggests
that, to be effective, strategies for altering networks need to be tailored to the processes by which the networks
change, recruit new members, and diffuse goods, messages, or services.Stabilization and Destabilization StrategiesBasic research is needed to determine the set of factors that influence network stabilization and destabilizationstrategies.  Papers in each of the workshop
Õs four sessions address these concerns.  A problem analogous to the
Òkey playerÓ problem that was not addressed at the workshop but is equally critical is the problem of the 
Òkey tie.ÓCan we develop metrics to identify key ties and the impact of their removal or addition on the overall behavior of
the network?  What are the basic properties that make a group, an organization, or a community resilient, efficient,

and adaptive?  Can we identify network structures or roles in networks that optimize these properties?  While the

research on dynamic networks, both empirical and simulation, suggests that this is possible, there is still much
work to be done.  Can we combine our analysis of the consequences of network change with a model-based

understanding of measurement error?  Can we identify a program of empirical research that would evaluate

predictions about the impact of diverse types of intervention under different levels and types of error?Closing the GapAs Carley emphasized in her closing address, the ideas, measures, and tools being developed by networkanalysts hold promise with respect to the needs of the defense and intelligence community.  However, there is still

a large gap.  Fundamental new science on dynamic networks under varying levels of uncertainty is needed.  To fill

this gap, Carley suggested that new research featuring empirical studies, metrics, statistical models, computer
simulations, and theory building are all needed.How can the gap between scientific research on networks and national needs be narrowed?  Carley put
forward four proposals.  First, universities need to produce more master
Õs and Ph.D. students who are trained insocial network analysis and who enter government work.  Second, illustrative data sets that are suitable for

dissemination within the community of networks researchers and that suggest the types of problems faced by the
defense and intelligence community need to be made publicly available.  Third, effort needs to be made to

establish a dialogue with social networks researchers in which the needs of the defense and intelligence commu-
nity can be articulated without compromising national security.  Finally, academicians in this research area need to

continue to strive for clarity in the articulation of the practical implications of their theoretical results.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART II
Workshop Papers
Note:  Part II contains the papers as submitted to the workshop.
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OPENING ADDRESSDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Emergent Themes in Social Network Analysis: Results, Challenges, Opportunities  Ronald L. Breiger University of Arizona  
 
 On behalf of the Workshop participants, I thank Anne Mavor (Director, Committee on Human Factors, National Research Council / National Academy of Sciences) and Rebecca Goolsby (US Office of Naval Research) for organizing this Workshop.  
 After a brief introduction to network analysis, I will identify the results of this enterprise to date, emphasizing major themes that have emerged.  I will then turn to scientific and research challenges that I see on the immediate horizon, and to those I perceive just beyond that horizon.  Finally, I will point to opportunities.  
 Thinking about social networks is ubiquitous and of long standing.  It may be said that kinship was the first social science, in that various peoples™ own cultural constructions of their networks of kinship relations have seemed always to mix observation with analysis and with proclamation (White, 1992: 290; Freeman, 2003).  The 17th-century philosopher, Spinoza, derived scores of logically interrelated propositions about a system that has the characteristics of a basic social network situation, a system consisting of multiple relationsŠsuch as loving, hatred, and envyŠamong multiple actors (notably an acting person, an other, and an object).1  Spinoza™s system is in many respects remarkably similar to the 20th-century theory of cognitive balance2 that forms the backdrop to several papers presented at this Workshop.  In Spinoza™s conception, actors change their initial opinions on the basis of network structure, as in some contemporary forms of social influence modeling (see, e.g., Carley™s and Friedkin™s papers included in this volume), and multiple relations are key (which is the sense in which balance theory provides one foundation for the paper of Macy et al.).  A science of networks did not emerge from Spinoza™s speculative endeavor, or from the many others like it that are precursors of contemporary network studies.  Lacking was a commitment to the systematic observation and modeling of actual behavior.  
 Military thinkers, too, have long found it natural to plan in terms of relations and forces.  Clausewitz ([1832] 1976: 484) articulated a structuralist vision of warfare, writing that ﬁin war, more than anywhere else, it is the whole that governs all the parts, stamps them with its character, and alters them radically.ﬂ Keeping the dominant characteristics of both belligerents in mind, ﬁout of these characteristics a certain center of gravity develops, the hub of all power and movement, on which everything else dependsﬂ (pp. 595-96).  In countries subject to domestic strife, Clausewitz continued, the center of gravity is generally the capital city.  Among alliances, it lies in ﬁthe community of interest,ﬂ and in popular uprisings it is ﬁthe personalities of the leaders and public opinion.ﬂ  It is ﬁagainst these that our energy should be directedﬂ (p. 596).  In sharp contrast to a concentrated network of forces, some more contemporary conflicts feature protagonists who seek to ﬁattain decisive strategic advantage by exploitation of the strength of dispersed forcesﬂ (Boorman, 1969: 171).  Two centuries after Clausewitz, social network modeling is aiding in a reformulation of the ﬁcenter of gravityﬂ concept so that it is applicable to extended command and control architectures (Dekker, 2001), and social network models of both  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
  2concentrated and dispersed forces inform thinking about information warfare (Pew and Mavor, 1998:301-19), netwars (Arquilla and Ronfeldt, 2001), and the destabilization of networks (Carley et al., 2001).  
 Freeman (2003) presents a monographic treatment of the history of social network analysis; brief overviews are also available (Scott, 2000: 7-37; Wellman, [1988] 1997: 21-29). At the present time, the field is a recognized academic specialty pursued by a cross-disciplinary network of sociologists, anthropologists, organization analysts, social psychologists, physicists, statisticians, mathematicians, communication experts, and people from many other fields.  Network analysts have a membership organization,3 professional journals,4 and a variety of university centers of research.  Network researchers are likely to agree with anthropologist Mary Douglas (1973: 89) that ﬁin a complex society, networks are the minimum level at which social relations can be investigated.ﬂ  Four characteristics of the contemporary paradigm on network analysis are identified by Freeman (2003): motivation by a structural intuition about specific relationships linking social actors; grounding in systematic empirical data; heavy reliance on graphic imagery; and use of mathematical and/or computational models.  
 Results  
 Especially from the 1960s onward, major advances as well as cumulative building of analytical methods and research findings have led to productive results in social network modeling.  Overviews and full treatments are available elsewhere.5 I will briefly identify six distinctive themes of network analysis that have emerged in recent decades.  
 1. Measures on nodes, arcs, and whole networks have been developed to exploit a variety of relational insights.  For example, the ﬁcentralityﬂ of an actor (call him Ego) as measured by the number of ties he receives from other actors is a notion that is quite distinct from the same actor™s degree of ﬁcentralityﬂ on the basis of the number of shortest paths through the network that connect pairs of actors and that include Ego as an intermediary.  (This is the distinction between ﬁdegreeﬂ and ﬁbetweennessﬂ variants of centrality; e.g., Freeman, 1979.)  ﬁConstraintﬂ is a measure of the extent to which Ego is tied to people who are invested in other of Ego©s contacts (Burt, 1992).  The extent to which the acquaintance sets of two connected individuals overlap has been captured by the faction of triplets in a network that are transitive (Holland and Leinhardt, 1975), recently reintroduced as the ﬁclustering coefficientﬂ of Watts and Strogatz (1998).  And entire networks may be characterized by their ﬁdensityﬂ of ties (the proportion of possible relationships among the actors that are observed to exist).  
 2.  Analyses of role interlock have exploited the interpenetration of multiple networks (such as ﬁlikingﬂ and ﬁdislikingﬂ) on a given population of actors.  Boorman and White (1976) model role interlock by use of algebraic semigroups and homomorphisms; examples include the study of ﬁstrength of weak tiesﬂ among advice-seeking on community affairs, business partnerships, and social relations of the community influentials in two small cities (Pattison, 1993: 254).  Recent studies of role interlock have made use of innovative statistical models for network analysis, as in Lazega and Pattison™s (2001) study of work relations, advice-seeking, and friendship among partners and associates in three offices of a US law firm. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
  3 
 3. Concepts of equivalence form the link between the individual-level data on ties and connections, and the overall network macro-structure.  Lorrain and White (1971: 80) sought to locate ﬁsets of individuals ... who are placed similarly with respect to all other sets of individuals, to the extent that total relations and flows are captured by the aggregation of detailed relations consonant with those equivalence sets of individuals.ﬂ Structural equivalence captures sets of actors each of whom has identical relations to all actors in a network of multiple types of tie. Automorphic equivalence identifies actors who have the same relation to similar types of others.  (A good metaphoric example of automorphic equivalence is the quarterbacks of opposing football teams).  More general forms of equivalence have also been developed (see, e.g., Batagelj et al., 1992; Borgatti and Everett, 1992; Pattison, 1993) and applied in studies such as Van Rossem™s (1996) analysis of international diplomatic, military, and economic exchanges.  Statistical estimation of models of network macro-structure has been an area of considerable progress (Nowicki and Snijders, 2001).  
 4. Duality refers to the idea (for example) that interpersonal networks based on common membership in groups may be turned ﬁinside outﬂ to reveal networks among groups based the number of members they share (Breiger, 1974; Pattison and Breiger, 2002).  Thus, in addition to defining networks on persons, networks may be defined on linkages between different levels of structure. An example and extensions appear in Mische and Pattison™s (2000) three-level study of social movement activists, their organizational memberships, and various projects in which they engaged. Statistical modeling of affiliation data has been developed and applied to study appearances of Soviet political elites at official and social events for 8 years during the Brezhnev era (Faust et al., 2002).  Innovative sampling schemes and analytical frames have been developed for dual network situations (McPherson, 2001).  
 5. The study of social influence links networks of social relations to attitudes and behaviors of the actors (Marsden and Friedkin, 1994: 3; Robins et al., 2001).  Analysts of social influence model how an actor™s attitudes or opinions are adjusted to those of the others who have some influence on the actor (DeGroot, 1974).  Friedkin formal theory (1998) models the equilibrium outcomes of influence processes and leads to testable predictions of opinion change.  From a different perspective, one viewing an organization™s members as interdependent entrepreneurs who cultivate status competition, Lazega (2001) studies collective action and the evolution of mechanisms for self-governance among peers in a ﬁcollegialﬂ (non-hierarchical) organization.  In their Workshop paper included in this volume, Michael Macy and his collaborators demonstrate how the study of evolving group polarization can benefit from the modeling of actors as computational agents.  
 6.  Models and methods for visualizing networks have improved strikingly since Jacob Moreno introduced the sociogram in 1934.  At that time the basic idea was to represent social actors by circles and relationships by arrows connecting the circles.  Increasingly in recent times (see Freeman 2000), the barrier between visualization and formal modeling has been disappearing, as more powerful techniques for representation continue to be developed.  
 Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
  4 An illustration of how various of these themes might combine in a research application is provided by Padgett and Ansell™s (1993) study of the rise of the Medici family in fifteenth-century Florence.  The data came (in some cases directly, in others via the work of historians)  from the extensive archives in Florence, including tax assessments for the years 1403 and 1427 and a wealth of kinship, marriage, business, and census records.  The data reflected in Figure 1 pertain to 92 families.  
 With respect to multiple networks: The graph in Figure 1 reports relations (coded separately) of personal loans, patronage, friendship (coded by historians from extensive personal letters that have been preserved), and the posting of surety bonds in another™s behalf in order to guarantee good behavior.  By hypothesis, each network reports a potentially different quality of relation, with the entire set of relations serving to comprise the structure.  
 With respect to types of equivalence: Padgett and Ansell develop a method for aggregating the 92 families into structurally equivalent sets relying heavily on their external ties with outsiders, as well as on their internal relations.  Figure 1 thus reports a macro-structure, a reduced-form visualization of the network of relations among the identified aggregates of families.    Figure 1. Florence network macro-structure. SOURCE:  Figure 2.b on p. 1277 in J.F. Padgett and C.K. Ansell, in Robust Action and the Rise of the Medici, 1400-1434, American Journal of Sociology 98:1259-1319, 1993.  Reprinted by permission.  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
  5 
 With respect to network measures: The authors report that, among the Medicean families at the top of Figure 1, Freeman™s measure of ﬁbetweennessﬂ centrality (CB) is .362 for intermarriages among the families; for the remaining families in the figure, it is a much lower .198.  The import is that the Medici family connected many other families that had few ties among themselves; they served as a hub for this portion of the structure.  
 The authors™ interpretation is roughly as follows.  The traditional oligarchical families portrayed in the lower portion of Figure 1 were highly interconnected.  Dense ties, however, did not lead to cohesive collective action in time of crisis, given the many status equals among the oligarghs, each with a plausible claim to leadership.  In sharp contrast, the Medici family stood as the gateway from its followers to the rest of the structure.  This was an extraordinarily centralized ﬁstarﬂ or ﬁspokeﬂ system, with very few direct relations among the Medici partisans.  Thus, the rise of the Medici corresponded to a network strategy in which their follwers were kept structurally isolated from one another (see also Padgett, 2001).  
 In my summary characterization of the results of social network analysis, I have recourse to the subtitle of Wasserman and Faust™s (1994) 800-page compendium: ﬁMethods and Applications.ﬂ  I believe we now have a productive array of distinctive tools with which to build impressive analyses along many lines of inquiry.  Before we move to a qualitatively higher level of progress in theoretical development, certain extant challenges will have to be met, and it is to these that I now turn.  Challenges on the Horizon   Here I focus on scientific and research challenges on the immediate horizon, in the areas of statistical modeling, data quality, and network sampling.  A number of Workshop participants are in the process of making breakthroughs in these areas.  
Statistical Modeling  
 Statistical analysis of network ties is both important and difficult.  It is important (among other reasons) because it can allow us to distinguish pattern from random noise, and because it enables us to assess comparatively a variety of hypotheses about the structures that underlie or generate the network data that we observe.  It is difficult because the units of observations (such as the tie from person A to B and those from A to C and from B to A) are not independent.  
 Efforts dating from the 1930s to model the distribution of ties received by actors in social networks (such as the binomial model of Paul Lazarsfeld™s reported in Moreno and Jennings, 1938) recognized that ﬁa change in position of one individual may affect the whole structure.ﬂ6  A major line of investigation in the 1970s (e.g., Holland and Leinhardt, 1975) sought network inferences from a more realistic embedding of non-independent relationships within triads of social actors. In a major breakthrough, Holland and Leinhardt (1981) formulated an exponential family of models (which they termed the p1 family) that provided estimation of the probability of an observed network conditioned on the number of ties sent and received by each actor (and the network™s overall density) and, simultaneously, on the two-person configurations (mutual, Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
  6asymmetric, and null-choice dyads) among the actors. Application of the model led to some substantively important research, for example on decision-making in organizational fields (Galaskiewicz and Wasserman, 1989).  
 Three problems with the p1 model were to motivate further work. First, the advances of Holland and Leinhardt™s 1981 model entailed a return to the assumption of dyadic independence (the assumption, e.g., that person A™s choice of B is independent of A™s choice of C), which is surely unrealistic in many contexts.  Second, because p1 is essentially a null model, its ability to characterize actual network data was poor. Third, degrees of freedom for assessing the overall fit of these model often depended on the number of actors in the network, thus violating the usual assumptions about asymptotics in maximum likelihood estimation.  
 Recent work constituting fully a new breakthrough, however, has allowed the assumption of dyadic independence to be rendered unnecessary in new families of more realistic models based on hypotheses about the precise nature of network dependencies.7  These new models, as formulated in particular by Wasserman, Pattison, and Robins (Wasserman and Pattison, 1996; Pattison and Wasserman, 1999; Robins et al., 1999) go under the name of random graph models or p* models.  Formulating applications of these models to diverse network contexts, as well as issues pertaining to estimation of the models, characterizes major challenges for current network research.  Because a number of papers presented at this Workshop pertain to these challenges, I will continue with a brief characterization of such models.8  
 It is useful for those without a strong statistics background to keep in mind that these random graph (or p*) models encode hypotheses that ﬁyou can get your hands on,ﬂ hypotheses concerning definite features of observed social relations.  Each such model asserts that a specific collection of simple, concrete structures (termed ﬁconfigurationsﬂ) compose the network as a whole.  Single networks as well as networks of multiple types of relation (such as co-worker and socializing, in Lazega and Pattison™s 2001 study of 71 partners and associates in a law firm with offices in three cities) may be modeled with this approach.  
 There is also an equilibrium aspect to these random graph models, in that the presence or absence of each possible tie in the network is estimated conditioning on the rest of the data.  It may be the case that, once these configurations are specified by an analyst, very standard methods of estimation (ﬁlogit regressionﬂ) are applicable.  However, the resulting estimates do not satisfy some of the usual assumptions (they are pseudo-likelihood estimates rather than full maximum likelihood), and this point has occasioned a good deal of additional work, some of which is reported at this Workshop.  
 Several of the Workshop papers included in this volume may be located with respect to the challenges of statistical modeling that I have reviewed.  In his paper, Mark Handcock investigates some of the consequences (for what he terms the degeneracy of the estimation process) that result from the use of pseudo-likelihood estimation. He makes use of simulation methods, known as Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods, that allow estimation of parameters such that the estimates are constrained to the non-degenerate part of the model space.  In his paper, Peter Hoff reviews an approach (a form of generalized linear mixed-effects models) that he and his colleagues see as having particularly feasible means of exact parameter Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
  7estimation.  An application of this approachŠto modeling political interactions of the primary actors in Central Asian politics over the period 1989-1999Šis presented in the paper of Michael Ward and Peter Hoff in this volume.  
 Tom Snijders has developed a model for the statistical evaluation of network dynamics that has a certain relation to the random graph (p*) models (see Snijders, 2001: 388-89).  In his Workshop paper included in this volume Snijders applies his model to the study of network evolution and, in particular, to the evolution of a network™s degree distribution (the number of ties implicating each actor).  Degree distribution has been the central focus of recent models of social networks that have been formulated by physicists (see Watts and Strogatz, 1998, and also the papers in this volume by Eugene Stanley and by Christos Faloutsos).  One of Snijders™ principal findingsŠthat there is no general straightforward relation between the degree distribution on one hand and structural aspects of evolution on the otherŠcontinues the debate on the importance of degree distributions and, in particular, on whether such distributions provide a major key to (or even a ﬁuniversal lawﬂ governing) the evolution of social networks.  
 In Snijders™ paper as well as the paper of Martina Morris, the question of what sorts of parameterizations are appropriate for statistical models of social networks comes strongly to the foreground.  Stanley Wasserman and Douglas Steinley begin building a framework for analysis how sensitive the results of network analysis are to the peculiarities of the dataset as well as to the parameters the analyst is attempting to estimate.  Their paper in this volume reports, for example, that interaction between different graph statistics (such as centralization and transitivity) is crucial for robustness of estimation.  
 Elisa Jayne Bienenstock and Phillip Bonacich turn robustness from a technical issue to a substantive one.  In their Workshop paper they report a simulation study of different network configurations (pinwheels, lattices, and so on). Their major measures are network efficiency and vulnerability.  They find for example that centralized communication networks are more efficient but also more vulnerable to selective attacks on their most central members.  
 In another contribution that seeks to turn robustness from a technical issue to a substantive one, Stephen Borgatti™s Workshop paper develops two versions of what Borgatti terms the key player problem: finding a set of nodes which, if removed, would maximally disrupt communication among the remaining nodes (KPP-1), and finding a set of nodes that is maximally connected to all other nodes (KPP -2).  
 The Workshop paper authored by Andrew Seary and William Richards reviews eigenvector decomposition methods for network analysis.  Their paper also moves in the direction of investigating conditions for network stability and its disruption, as with their report of a result from spectral decomposition that may be used to solve the longstanding problem of dividing a network into two sets with minimal connectivity between them.  
 Pattison and Robins (2002; see also Robins et al., 2001) have explored various sorts of non-network information that can be incorporated into random-graph modelsŠinformation such as actor attributes, affiliations of persons with groups, and spatial layouts.  Research on the relation between geographic spatial arrangements and social networks is rapidly advancing Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
  8(Faust et al., 1999).  In his paper for this Workshop, Carter Butts presents some fundamental results on the relation of physical distance to network evolution.  At least implicitly, this work seems beneficial for the formulation of spatially oriented random graph models.  
 
Data Quality and Network Sampling  
 Social networks have been measured in many ways, and the available research indicates that these can make some claim to being reliable, though certainly imperfect, measures (Marsden, 1990: 456).  A continuing challenge for network analysts is the formulation of methods for the study of network data that are less than pristine with respect to reliability and validity.  Applications of network modeling to situations of increasing realism have heightened concerns about missing data, data that seem unreliable, and actors (ranging from schoolchildren to corporate executives) who may be behaving strategically in reporting or concealing their ties to others.  Related challenges concern the representativeness of network data.  Network analysts, including a number of Workshop participants, are currently engaged in confronting these challenges.  
 Linton Freeman™s paper for this Workshop reports a meta-analysis of twenty-one methods applied to a single affiliation network.  Assuming that there is a ﬁtrueﬂ answer to the question of whether each pair of persons belongs together in the same group, Freeman employs a procedureŠtermed consensus analysis (Batchelder and Romney, 1988)Šthat allows (simultaneously) the pooling of results from the twenty-one methods to uncover the most likely candidates for ﬁtrueﬂ answers, and also quantitative assessment of the ﬁcompetenceﬂ of each of the twenty-one methods.  Freeman™s paper thus suggests that, in some situations (perhaps those in which the various methods applied are in the vicinity of the correct analysis of a structure), intensive application of multiple analytical methods can compensate for data that are less than perfect.   In her Workshop paper, Martina Morris is particularly interested in two rules governing partner selection in sexual transmission networks: concurrency (number of partners) and mixing (the extent to which both partners share an attribute, such as race). These are examples of network properties that can be measured with ﬁlocalﬂ network sampling strategies; they do not require data on all relations of all people in a network. Going further, Morris writes that ﬁif simple local rules [such as concurrency and mixing] govern partner selection, then these also determine the aggregate structure in the network: What looks like an unfathomably complicated system is, in fact, produced by a few key local organizing principles.ﬂ  In her paper included in this volume, Morris combines this ﬁlocal rulesﬂ approach with random graph models and simulation strategies to understand the emergence of overall network structuring.  
 Robins, Pattison, and Woolcock (2002) provide random graph (p*) models for network data containing non-respondents, without having to assume that the respondents missing are a random sample.  An earlier effort along a somewhat similar line is that of Friedkin (1998: 77-78).  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
  9 Cognitive social structure (Krackhardt, 1987; see also Carley and Krackhardt, 1996) is an analytical approach associated with a distinctive format of data collection.  Each individual in a network is asked to provide reports of whether each individual has a relationship with each other.  Thus, each individual reports a full matrix of data.  This approach has implications for the analysis of data quality.9  Define there to be ﬁconsensusﬂ (Krackhardt, 1987: 117) on the tie from person i to person j if at least a stipulated fraction of all network members report that i indeed sends that tie to j.  This allows a calibration of self-reports against the reports of others.  
 In his Workshop paper included in this volume, Alden Klovdahl reviews studies that employ random walk sampling designs, which involve random selection of a very small number of individuals from a large population.  Each person is interviewed in order to obtain (among other things) a list of network associates.  One of these is randomly selected to be the next person interviewed, and so forth.  Klovdahl discusses in his paper how he used just 180 interviews (60 random walks of 2 steps each) to study network properties of a city of a quarter-million people.  
 All of the above efforts respond to the challenge of analyzing network data that is of less than perfect quality.  It will also be useful to encourage studies (such as the one of Costenbader and Valente, 2002) of the comparative performance of network measures (such as various measures of actor centrality) in the presence of increasing amounts of missing data.  Challenges Just Over the Horizon   I will now turn to scientific and research challenges that I envision as just beyond our current horizon.  These concern efforts to significantly extend, or to generalize or to move beyond, the social networks paradigm as outlined in the first major section above.  Here too, the Workshop participants are among those leading the way.  
 1. There is increasing interest in moving beyond the analysis of social networks to consider questions of how such analyses relate to design issues. Principles of network governance may be extended to the consideration of how criminal or terrorist networks might function most effectively (Milward and Raab, 2002). Asking what makes a network effective, Arquilla and Ronfeldt (2001: 324-43) point to five levels: organizational (where leadership resides; how hierarchical dynamics may be mixed in with network dynamics), narrative (not simply a ﬁlineﬂ with a ﬁspin,ﬂ but grounded expression of participants™ experiences, interests, and values), doctrinal (for example, preference for a leaderless form), technological (for example, use of couriers or the internet to connect people), and social (for example, the use of kinship or bonding experiences as bases for trust).  In his Workshop paper included in this volume, David Lazer is concerned with governance issues involved in information diffusion among policy agencies.  In their Workshop paper, Noshir Contractor and Peter Monge raise the question of how theories of underlying network dynamics need to be modified to be applicable to the study of adversarial networks.  Of particular interest, Contractor and Monge formulate numerous testable hypotheses drawn from a wide range of substantive theories, all pertaining to modeling the emergence of networks within their multi-theoretical, multi-level (MTML) model.  
 2. Dynamic Network Analysis (DNA) is the name that Kathleen Carley gives to her highly distinctive, highly innovative effort to push the envelope on network analysis.  Not Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
  10directly related to models of network dynamics such as Snijders™ (reviewed in the previous section), Carley™s approach has three hallmarks. First, it is meta-matrix, in a dramatic extension of the ﬁdualityﬂ concept discussed in the first section above.  The meta-matrix includes matrices relating people to people (social networks), people to knowledge (knowledge networks), people to events (attendance networks), events to each other (temporal ordering), and more.  Second, the ties in the meta-matrix are defined probabilistically, on the basis of cognitive inferencing or cognitive change models or Bayesian updating techniques. Third, Carley™s approach employs multi-agent network models; for example, learning mechanisms are specified and used to dynamically adjust networks as the computational agents in them attend events, learn new information, or are removed from the network.  One principal focus of Carley™s approach is the cognitive, and to a lesser extent the social, processes by which the networks in the meta-matrix evolve.  
 As is Kathleen Carley, Michael Macy is a leader in the area of self-organizing networks and computational agents.  In his Workshop paper coauthored with James Kitts and Andreas Flache, Macy et al. model evolving polarization of group opinion space.  They report some surprising disjunctions between interactions among the actors, on one level, and the emerging group structuring, on the other.  
 3. ﬁAt the beginning of the 21st century, a maverick group of scientists is discovering that all networks have a deep underlying order and operate according to simple but powerful rules. This knowledge promises to shed light on the spread of fads and viruses, the robustness of ecosystems, the vulnerability of economiesŠeven the future of democracy.ﬂ Thus reads the dust jacket of a recent popularized account (Barabási, 2002) of work by several researchers trained in physics who have developed distinctive lines of modeling for social (and other) networks.  Beginning with regular structures on the one hand and random structures on the other, researchers within this new tradition (Watts and Strogatz, 1998) show that introducing small changes into the ﬁregularﬂ structure leads to massive changeŠthis is the ﬁsmall worldﬂ network with a few ﬁshortcutsﬂ that bridge the structure.  Researchers in this tradition emphasize power-law distributions of choices made by actors (this is the ﬁscale-freeﬂ property), according to which a very few actors have a great many ties (in rough analogy to route maps of airlines that have ﬁhubﬂ systems).  These writers demonstrate that such networks have important implications for diffusion of diseases and for many other properties such as those alluded to in the quotation at this paragraph™s beginning.  
 In their paper for this Workshop, E. Eugene Stanley and Shlomo Havlin review advances in the modeling of scale-free networks and related work, and they propose a trajectory of future research aimed at understanding how to optimize the stability of threatened netoworks.  And the Workshop paper of Christos Faloutsos and his co-authors reviews a wide range of results concerning power laws applied to network data, in research that combines network analysis and graph mining.  I believe that these papers should be read in conjunction with that of Snijders, who argues (convincingly, in my view) for the desirability of a dynamic modeling context that explicitly incorporates features (such as transitivity, cyclicity, and subgrouping) in addition to the degree distribution that is emphasized in physicists™ models.  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
  114. Moving beyond a structural approach to social network analysis by directly engaging cultural issues is a challenge that is increasingly attracting attention.10  The emphasis of network analysis on formal aspects of social structure often seems the opposite of a concern for culture and cognition; indeed, in the early work on structural equivalence ﬁthe cultural and social-psychological meanings of actual ties are largely bypassed .... We focus instead on interpreting the patterns among types of tieﬂ (White et al. 1976: 734). However, over the past decade a fusion of concern across structural modeling and problems of culture, cognition, action, and agency has been among the most important developments for an influential segment of the community of networks researchers.   An important spur to network thinking about culture and cognition was White™s rethinking of network theory in his 1992 volume Identity and Control. White now wrote of agency as ﬁthe dynamic face of networks,ﬂ as motivating ﬁways of ... upend[ing] institution[s] and ... initiat[ing] fresh actionﬂ (pp. 315, 245). White (1992) considered discursive ﬁnarrativesﬂ and ﬁstoriesﬂ to be fundamental to structural pursuits, writing that ﬁstories describe the ties in networksﬂ and that ﬁa social network is a network of meaningsﬂ (pp. 65, 67). Emirbayer and Goodwin (1994), who characterized Identity and Control in exactly this way (p. 1437), went on to prod network analysts to conceptualize more clearly the role of ﬁideals, beliefs, and values, and of the actors that strive to realize themﬂ (p. 1446).  A more extensive review of this direction for extending social network research is provided in Breiger (2003).  
 The Workshop paper of Jeffrey Johnson, Lawrence Palinkas, and James Boster moves in a sense in the ﬁoppositeﬂ direction: extending rigorous structural conceptions into the analysis and interpretation of cross-cultural studies on the evolution of informal group roles in Antarctic research stations.  One finding for example is that groups that have a rich mix of informal role properties fare better.  
 5. Actor-Network Theory (ANT) is an orientation within the ﬁpost-modernﬂ branch of contemporary science studies.  The term ﬁactor-networkﬂ is intended to mark the difficulties in establishing clear boundaries between network actors and connections, between agency and structure, and between network actors and those who analyze networks (Law and Hassard, 1999).   Research within this tradition includes Latour™s ([1984] 1988) rewriting of the history of Louis Pasteur as the interpenetration of networks of strong microbes with networks of weak hygienists, viewing the microbes as ﬁa means of locomotion for moving through the networks that they wish to set up and commandﬂ (p. 45).  This line of work has had no influence at all on social network analysts.  There may however be some potential in developing formal, analytic models that incorporate insights from this tradition concerning the bridging of ties and connections, structure and agency, and reflexivity (relations between analysts and network actors).  Opportunities   I will conclude by summarizing my discussion of results and challenges, and by pointing to opportunities.  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
  12 As to results, we now have a large number of spectacularly useful methods and applications.  We have numerous studies of real-world processes.  There is a remarkable degree of consensus among researchers on the fundamentals of the approach, and a notable cumulation of results.  
 The challenges that I see concern the development of research syntheses at the theory-data interface.  We need improved network statistical models.  We need to further the development of models that are at once validated, robust, and concerned with network dynamics.  We need to continue to improve methods for dealing with network sampling.  We need to continue to explore ways to significantly extend, or to generalize, or to move beyond the static social networks paradigm, by embedding network models and research within the wider array of concerns that I have sketched in the preceding section.  
 This Workshop will play an important role in furthering the kind of communication and interchange that is necessary, among many of the leading researchers in the field.  In pointing to future opportunities, I will paraphrase David Lazer™s paper, hoping that he won™t mind that I take one of his conclusions slightly out of context, a conclusion that he labels a counterintuitive governance prescription.  In my version, the conclusion is that as research groups receive more information regarding what other research groups are doing, incentives for all such groups to continue innovating, and thus creating knowledge, should be increased.  Our opportunities lie in joining resources with innovation in pursuing the scientific challenges that confront us. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
  13Endnotes 
1 For example, Proposition 35 in Spinoza™s Ethic ([1677] 1923) reads: ﬁIf I imagine that an object beloved by me is united to another person by the same, or by a closer bond of friendship than that by which I myself alone hold the object, I shall be affected with hatred towards the beloved object itself, and shall envy that other person.ﬂ  
2 Fritz Heider, who formulated balance theory in the 1940s, writes that he came to the theory by reading and reconsidering Spinoza™s work (Heider, 1979).  
3 The International Network for Social Network Analysis (INSNA), web address http://www.sfu.ca/~insna/.  
4 Social Networks (published by Elsevier), the Journal of Social Structure (an electronic journal, available on-line at http://www2.heinz.cmu.edu/project/INSNA/joss/), and Connections (published by INSNA).  
5 See in particular the monographic reviews of Wasserman and Faust (1994),  DeGenne and Forsé ([1994] 1999), and Scott (2000) as well as the succinct overviews of Wellman ([1988] 1997) and Breiger (2003).  
6 Information in this and the following paragraphs is condensed from the review of statistical modeling of networks in Breiger (2003).  
7 The analyst is allowed to specifiy dependencies among any ties in the network that share a node.  
8 See also the introduction in Anderson et al. (1999) as well as the cited papers of Wasserman, Pattison, and Robins.  
9 I am grateful to Philippa Pattison for reminding me of this point.  
10 This paragraph and the next draw directly on Breiger (2003). Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
  14References  
Anderson, Carolyn J., Stanley Wasserman, and Bradley Crouch (1999) ﬁA p* primer: Logit models for social networks.ﬂ Social Networks 21: 37-66. Arquilla, John, and David Ronfeldt (2001).  Networks and Netwars: The Future of Terror, Crime, and Militancy.  Santa Monica, CA: RAND. Barabási, Albert-László (2002). Linked: The New Science of Networks.  Cambridge, MA: Perseus Publishing. Batagelj, Vladimir, Patrick Doreian, and Anuıka Ferligoj (1992). ﬁAn Optimizational Approach to Regular Equivalence.ﬂ Social Networks 14: 121-135. Batchelder, William H., and A. Kimball Romney (1988). ﬁTest Theory without an Answer Key.ﬂ Psychometrika 53: 71-92. Boorman, Scott A. (1969). The Protracted Game: A Wei-Ch™i Interpretation of Maoist Revolutionary Strategy.  New York: Oxford University Press. Boorman, Scott A., and Harrison C. White (1976). ﬁSocial structure from multiple networks: II. Role structures.ﬂ American Journal of Sociology 81:1384-1446. Borgatti, Stephen P., and Martin G. Everett. (1992)  ﬁThe Notion of Position in Social Network Analysis.ﬂ  Pp. 1-35 in Peter V. Marsden (ed.), Sociological Methodology 1992. London: Basil Blackwell. Breiger, Ronald L. (1974). ﬁThe Duality of Persons and Groups.ﬂ Social Forces 53: 181-90. Breiger, Ronald L. (2003). ﬁThe Analysis of Social Networks.ﬂ In Melissa Hardy and Alan Bryman, eds., Handbook of Data Analysis.  London: Sage Publications, Ltd., in press. Burt, Ronald S. (1992) Structural Holes: The Social Structure of Competition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Carley, Kathleen M., and David Krackhardt (1996). ﬁCognitive Inconsistencies and Non-Symmetric Friendship.ﬂ Social Networks 18: 1-27. Carley, Kathleen M., Ju-Sung Lee and David Krackhardt (2001). ﬁDestabilizing Networks.ﬂ Connections 24(3): 31-34. Clausewitz, Carl von. ([1832] 1976). On War, tr. Michael Howard and Peter Paret.  Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Costenbader, Elizabeth, and Thomas Valente (2002). The Effect of Sampling on Centrality Measures. Unpublished paper, Department of Preventative Medicine, University of Southern California. DeGenne, Alain, and Michel Forsé ([1994] 1999). Introducing Social Networks. London: Sage Publications. DeGroot, M.H. (1974) ﬁReaching a Consensus.ﬂ Journal of the American Statistical Association 69: 118-121. Dekker, Anthony (2001). ﬁApplying Social Network Analysis Concepts to Military C4ISR Architectures.ﬂ Connections 24 (3): 93-103. Douglas, Mary (1973). Natural Symbols. Baltimore: Penguin Books. Emirbayer, Mustafa, and Jeff Goodwin (1994). ﬁNetwork Analysis, Culture, and Agency.ﬂ American Journal of Sociology 99: 1411-53. Faust, Katherine,  B. Entwisle, R.R. Rindfuss, S.J. Walsh, & Y. Sawangdee, ﬁSpatial Arrangement of Social and Economic Networks Among Villages in Nang Rong District, Thailand,ﬂ Social Networks 21 (1999): 311-37. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
  15Faust, Katherine, Karin E. Willert, David D. Rowlee and John Skvoretz (2002). ﬁScaling and Statistical Models for Affiliation Networks: Patterns of Participation among Soviet Politicians during the Brezhnev Era.ﬂ Social Networks 24: 231-59. Freeman, Linton C. (1979). ﬁCentrality in Social Networks I. Conceptual Clarification.ﬂ Social Networks 1: 215-39.  Freeman, Linton C. (2000). ﬁVisualizing Social Networks.ﬂ Journal of Social Structure 1 (electronic journal). Freeman, Linton C. (2003). The History of Social Network Analysis. Unpublished manuscript. School of Social Sciences, University of CaliforniaŒIrvine.  Friedkin, Noah E. (1998). A Structural Theory of Social Influence. Cambridge University Press. Galaskiewicz, Joseph, and Stanley Wasserman (1989). ﬁMimetic and Normative Processes wihin an Interorganizational Field: An Empirical Test.ﬂ Administrative Science Quarterly 34: 454-479. Heider, Fritz (1979). ﬁOn Balance and Attribution.ﬂ  Pp. 11-23 in Paul W. Holland and Samuel Leinhardt (eds.), Perspectives on Social Network Research.  New York: Academic Press. Holland, Paul W., and Samuel Leinhardt (1975). ﬁLocal structure in social networks.ﬂ Pp. 1-45 in David R. Heise (ed), Sociological Methodology 1976. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. Holland, Paul W., and Samuel Leinhardt (1981). ﬁAn Exponential Family of Probability Distributions for Directed Graphs.ﬂ Journal of the American Statistical Association 76:33-65. Krackhardt, David (1987). ﬁCognitive Social Structures.ﬂ Social Networks 9: 109-34. Latour, Bruno ([1984] 1988) The Pasteurization of France, tr. Alan Sheridan and John Law. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Law, John, and John Hassard, eds. (1999). Actor Network Theory and After. Oxford: Blackwell. Lazega, Emmanuel (2001). The Collegial Phenomenon: The Social Mechanisms of Cooperation among Peers in a Corporate Law Partnership.  Oxford University Press. Lazega, Emmanuel, and Philippa E. Pattison (2001).  ﬁSocial Capital as Social Mechanisms and Collective Assets: The Example of Status Auctions Among Colleagues.ﬂ  Pp. 185-208 in Nan Lin, Karen Cook, and Ronald S.Burt (eds.), Social Capital: Theory and Research.  New York: Aldine de Gruyter. Lorrain, François P., and Harrison C. White (1971). ﬁStructural Equivalence of Individuals in Social Networks.ﬂ Journal of Mathematical Sociology 1: 49-80. Marsden, Peter V. (1990). ﬁNetwork Data and Measurement.ﬂ Annual Review of Sociology 16: 435-63. Marsden, Peter V., and Noah E. Friedkin (1994). ﬁNetwork Studies of Social Influence.ﬂ  Pp. 3-25 in Stanley Wasserman and Joseph Galaskiewicz (eds.), Advances in Social Network Analysis. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. McPherson, J. Miller (2001) ‚Sampling strategies for the arts: A hypernetwork approach™, Poetics 28: 291-306. Milward, H. Brinton, and Jörg Raab (2002). ﬁDark Networks: The Structure, Operation, and Performance of International Drug, Terror, and Arms Trafficking Networks.ﬂ Unpublished paper, School of Public Administration and Policy, University of Arizona. Mische, Ann, and Philippa E. Pattison (2000) ﬁComposing a civic arena: Publics, projects, and social settings.ﬂ Poetics 27: 163-194. Moreno, Jacob L., and Helen H. Jennings (1938). ﬁStatistics of Social Configurations.ﬂ Sociometry 1:342-374. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
  16Nowicki, Krzysztof, and Tom A.B. Snijders (2001). ﬁEstimation and Prediction for Stochastic Blockstructures.ﬂ Journal of the American Statistical Association 96: 1077-1087. Padgett, John F. (2001). ﬁOrganizational Genesis, Identity, and Control: The Transformation of Banking in Renaissance Florence.ﬂ Pp. 211-57 in James E. Rauch and Alessandra Casella (eds.), Networks and Markets. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.  Padgett, John F., and Christopher K. Ansell (1993). ﬁRobust Action and the Rise of the Medici, 1400-1434.ﬂ American Journal of Sociology 98: 1259-1319. Pattison, Philippa E. (1993).  Algebraic Models for Social Networks. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Pattison, Philippa E., and Ronald L. Breiger (2002). ﬁLattices and Dimensional Representation: Matrix Decompositions and Ordering Structures.ﬂ Social Networks 24: 423-44. Pattison, Philippa , and Garry Robins (2002). ﬁNeighborhood-Based Models for Social Networks.ﬂ Pp. 301-37 in Sociological Methodology 2002, ed. R.M. Stolzenberg.  Boston: Blackwell. Pattison, Philippa, and Stanley Wasserman (1999). ﬁLogit Models and Logistic Regressions for Social Networks: II. Multivariate Relations.ﬂ British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology 52: 169-193. Pew, Richard W., and Anne S. Mavor, eds. (1998). Modeling Human and Organizational Behavior: Application to Military Simulations.  Washington, DC: National Academy Press. Robins, Garry, Peter Elliott and Philippa Pattison (2001). ﬁNetwork Models for Social Selection Processes.ﬂ Social Networks 23: 1-30. Robins, Garry, Philippa Pattison, and Peter Elliott (2001). ﬁNetwork Models for Social Influence Processes.ﬂ Psychometrika 66: 166-90. Robins, Gary, Philippa Pattison, and Stanley Wasserman (1999). ﬁLogit Models and Logistic Regressions for Social Networks, III: Valued Relations.ﬂ Psychometrika 64:371-394. Robins, Garry, Philippa Pattison, and Jodie Woolcock (2002). ﬁMissing Data in Networks: Exponential Random Graph (p*) Models for Networks with Non-Respondents.ﬂ Unpublished paper, Department of Psychology, University of Melbourne, Australia. Scott, John (2000). Social Network Analysis: A Handbook, 2nd ed. London: Sage. Snijders, Tom A.B. (2001). ﬁThe Statistical Evaluation of Social Network Dynamics.ﬂ Pp. 361-95 in Sociological Methodology 2001, edited by Michael E. Sobel and Mark P. Becker. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell 31: 361-95. Spinoza, Benedict de. ([1677] 1923). Ethic, tr. W. Hale White. Oxford University Press. Van Rossem, Ronan (1996). ﬁThe World System Paradigm as General Theory of Development: A Cross-National Test.ﬂ American Sociological Review 61: 508-27. Wasserman, Stanley, and Katherine Faust (1994). Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications. New York: Cambridge University Press. Wasserman, Stanley, and Philippa Pattison (1996). ﬁLogit Models and Logistic Regressions for Social Networks: I. An introduction to Markov Graphs and p*.ﬂ  Psychometrika 61: 401-425. Watts, Duncan J., and Steven H. Strogatz, ﬁCollective Dynamics of ‚Small-World™ Networks.ﬂ Nature 393 (1998): 440-42. Wellman, Barry ([1988] 1997). ﬁStructural Analysis: From Method and Metaphor to Theory and Substance.ﬂ  Pp. 19-61 in Barry Wellman and S.D. Berkowitz (eds.), Social Structures: A Network Approach.  Greenwich, CT: JAI Press. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
  17White, Harrison C. (1992). Identity and Control: A Structural Theory of Social Action. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. White, Harrison C., Scott A. Boorman, R.L. Breiger (1976). "Social Structure from Multiple Networks:  I.  Blockmodels of Roles and Positions."  American Journal of Sociology 81: 730-780.  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SESSION ISocial Network Theory Perspectives
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.        Photograph by Ben Shahn, Natchez, MS, October, 1935 Library of Congress, Prints & Photographs Division, FSA-OWI Collection, [reproduction number, LC-USF33-006093-M4]  Finding Social Groups: A Meta-Analysis of the Southern Women Data1 Linton C. Freeman University of California, Irvine  
1. Introduction For more than 100 years, sociologists have been concerned with relatively small, cohesive social groups (Tönnies, [1887] 1940; Durkheim [1893] 1933; Spencer 1895-97; Cooley, 1909).  The groups that concern sociologists are not simply categoriesŠlike redheads or people more than six feet tall.  Instead they are social collectivities characterized by interaction and interpersonal ties.  Concern with groups of this sort has beenŠand remainsŠat the very core of the field.  These early writers made no attempt to specify exactly what they meant when they referred to groups.  But in the 1930s, investigators like Roethlisberger and Dickson (1939) and Davis, Gardner and Gardner (1941) began to collect systematic data on                                            1 The author owes a considerable debt to Morris H. Sunshine who read an earlier draft and made extensive suggestions all of which improved this manuscript.  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 2interaction and interpersonal ties.  Their aim was to use the data both to assign individuals to groups and to determine the position of each individualŠas a core or peripheral group member.  But, to assign individuals to groups and positions, they needed to specify the sociological notions of group and position in exact terms.  Over the years a great many attempts have been made to specify these notions.  In the present paper I will review the results of 21 of these attempts.  All 21 tried to specify the group structure in a single data set.  And 11 of the 21 also went on and attempted to specify core and peripheral positions.    My approach to this review is a kind of meta-analysis.  Schmid, Koch, and LaVange (1991) define meta-analysis as ﬁ. . . a statistical analysis of the data from some collection of studies in order to synthesize the results.ﬂ  And that is precisely my aim here.  A typical meta-analysis draws on several data sets from a number of independent studies and brings them together in order to generalize their collective implications.  Here I am also trying to discover the collective implications of a number of studies.  But instead of looking at the results produced by several data sets, I will be looking at the results produced by several different analytic methods.  In this meta-analysis I will compare the groups and the positions that have been specified by investigators who examined data collected by Davis, Gardner and Gardner (1941) [DGG] in their study of southern women.  My comparison draws on a number of techniques, including consensus analysis (Batchelder and Romney, 1986, 1988, 1989), canonical analysis of asymmetry (Gower, 1977) and dynamic paired-comparison scaling (Batchelder and Bershad, 1979; Batchelder, Bershad and Simpson, 1992).  I will address two questions: (1) do the several specifications produce results that converge in a way that reveals anything about the structural form of the data?  And, (2) can we learn anything about the strengths and weaknesses of the various methods for specifying groups and positions?  2. Southern Women Data Set In the 1930s, five ethnographers, Allison Davis, Elizabeth Stubbs Davis, Burleigh B. Gardner, Mary R. Gardner and J. G. St. Clair Drake, collected data on stratification in Natchez, Mississippi (Warner, 1988, p. 93).  They produced the book cited above [DGG] that reported a comparative study of social class in black and in white society.  One element of this work involved examining the correspondence between people™s social class levels and their patterns of informal interaction.  DGG was concerned with the issue of how much the informal contacts made by individuals were established solely (or primarily) with others at approximately their own class levels.  To address this question the authors collected data on social events and examined people™s patterns of informal contacts. In particular, they collected systematic data on the social activities of 18 women whom they observed over a nine-month period.  During that period, various subsets of Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 3these women had met in a series of 14 informal social events.  The participation of women in events was uncovered using ﬁinterviews, the records of participant observers, guest lists, and the newspapersﬂ (DGG, p. 149).  Homans (1950, p. 82), who presumably had been in touch with the research team, reported that the data reflect joint activities like, ﬁa day™s work behind the counter of a store, a meeting of a women™s club, a church supper, a card party, a supper party, a meeting of the Parent-Teacher Association, etc.ﬂ This data set has several interesting properties.  It is small and manageable.  It embodies a relatively simple structural pattern, one in which, according to DGG, the women seemed to organize themselves into two more or less distinct groups.  Moreover, they reported that the positionsŠcore and peripheralŠof the members of these groups could also be determined in terms of the ways in which different women had been involved in group activities.   At the same time, the DGG data set is complicated enough that some of the details of its patterning are less than obvious.  As Homans (1950, p. 84) put it, ﬁThe pattern is frayed at the edges.ﬂ  And, finally, this data set comes to us in a two-modeŠwoman by eventŠform.  Thus, it provides an opportunity to explore methods designed for direct application to two-mode data.  But at the same time, it can easily be transformed into two one-mode matrices (woman by woman or event by event) that can be examined using tools for one-mode analysis.     Because of these properties, this DGG data set has become something of a touchstone for comparing analytic methods in social network analysis.  Davis, Gardner and Gardner presented an intuitive interpretation of the data, based in part on their ethnographic experience in the community.  Then the DGG data set was picked up by Homans (1950) who provided an alternative intuitive interpretation.  In 1972, Phillips and Conviser used an analytic tool, based on information theory, that provided a systematic way to reexamine the DGG data.  Since then, this data set has been analyzed again and again.  It reappears whenever any network analyst wants to explore the utility of some new tool for analyzing data.   3. The Data Source Figure l, showing which women attended each event, is reproduced from DGG (p. 148).  DGG examined the participation patterns of these women along with additional information generated by interviews.  As I discussed in Section 1 above, they had two distinct goals in their analysis:  (1) they wanted to divide women up into groups within on the basis of their co-attendance at events, and (2) they wanted to determine a positionŠin the core or peripheryŠfor each woman.  As they put it (p. 150):  Whereitisevidentthatagroupofpeopleparticipatetogetherintheseinformalactivitiesconsistently,itisobviousDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 4thataclique2hadbeenisolated.Interviewingcanthenbeusedtoclarifytherelationship.Thoseindividualswhoparticipatetogethermostoftenandatthemostintimateaffairsarecalledcore members;thosewhoparticipatewithcoremembersuponsomeoccasionsbutneverasagroupbythemselvesalonearecalledprimary members;whileindividualsonthefringes,whoparticipateonlyinfrequently,constitutethesecondary membersofaclique. Figure 1.  Participation of the Southern Women in Events  Unfortunately, the data as presented in Figure 1 are not definitive.  Indeed, two pages after presenting their data, DGG (p. 150) presented them again in another format.  Their second version of the data is reproduced here as Figure 2.  I have added annotations showing important comparative features in red.   The existence of that second presentation raises a problem; the data shown in Figure 1 do not agree with those shown in Figure 2.  Specifically, in Figure 2 woman 15 was reported to have been a participant in events 13 and 14, but she was not so reported in Figure 1.  In addition, in Figure 2 woman 16 was reported as participating in events 8, 9, 10 and 12.  But in Figure 1, she was reported to have been a participant only in events 8 and 9.  The extra events reported in Figure 2 but missing in Figure 1 are outlined in red.                                            2 Note that DGG wrote before ﬁcliqueﬂ was defined as a technical term by Luce and Perry (1949).  DGG used the word ﬁcliqueﬂ to mean what I am calling a ﬁgroup.ﬂ  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 5We are faced with a dilemma then.  Are we to believe the data presented in Figure 1 or those presented in Figure 2?  Homans (1950) was the first to use these data in a secondary analysis.  He reported additional details that suggest that he was probably in touch with the original research team.  And in his report he used the data as they are displayed in Figure 1.   Moreover, there is additional ancillary evidence for the correctness of the data as presented in Figure 1.  It turns out that there is a contradiction in the presentation of Figure 2 that makes it difficult to accept the data presented there as correct.  Compare, for example, the participation patterns displayed by the two women designated with red arrows in Figure 2: woman 11 and woman 16.  According to Figure 2, these two women displayed identical patterns of participation.  Yet, in that figure, woman 11 was classified as a primary member of her ﬁcliqueﬂ while woman 16 was called secondary.  This contradiction implies that the correct data are those shown in Figure 1.   Figure 2.  Participation of the Southern Women in Events Most analysts have apparently reached this conclusion.  Most have used the data as shown in Figure 1.  A few, however, have analyzed the data as presented in Figure 2, and this produces a problem for any attempt to compare the results of one analysis with those of another.  When the two analyses are based on the use of different data sets comparisons are, of course, not possible.   Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 6I have assumed that the ﬁcorrectﬂ data are those shown in Figure 1.  For the relatively small number of results that have been produced by analyses of the data of Figure 2, I have asked the original analysts to redo their analyses using the Figure 1 data or I have redone them myself.  4. Finding Groups and Positions in the DGG Data 4.1 Davis, Gardner and Gardner™s Intuition-Based Groups  (DGG41) In their own analysis Davis Gardner and Gardner did not use any systematic analytic procedures.  They relied entirely on their general ethnographic knowledge of the community and their intuitive grasp of the patterning in Table 1 to make sense of the data.  As Davis and Warner (1939) described it, they drew on ﬁ. . . records of overt behavior and verbalizations, which cover more than five thousand pages, statistical data on both rural and urban societies, as well as newspaper records of social gatherings . . .ﬂ   DGG drew on all this material and used it both to assign the women to groups and to determine individuals™ positions within groups.  They indicated that the eighteen women were divided into two overlapping groups.  They assigned women 1 through 9 to one group and women 9 through 18 to another.  They assigned three levels in terms of core/periphery participation in these groups.  They defined women 1 through 4 and 13 through 15 as core members of their respective groups.  Women 5 through 7 and 11 and 12 they called primary.  Women 8 and 9 on one hand and 9, 10, 16, 17 and 18 on the other were secondary.  Note that woman 9 was specified as a secondary member of both groups because, they said, ﬁin interviewsﬂ she was "claimed by both" (DGG, p. 151).   4.2 Homans™ Intuition-Based Analysis (HOM50) Like Davis, Gardner and Gardner before him, Homans (1950) interpreted these data from an intuitive perspective.  Unlike those earlier investigators, however, Homans did not have years of ethnographic experience in Natchez to draw upon.  His intuitions, therefore, had to be generated solely by inspecting the DGG data and, presumably, by conversations with the ethnographers.   Homans implied that he had re-analyzed the data using a procedure introduced by Forsyth and Katz (1946) whom he cited.  Forsyth and Katz had suggested permuting the rows and columns of a data matrix so as to display its group structure as clusters around the principal diagonal of the matrix (upper left to lower right).  Their procedure required that both the rows and columns be rearranged untilŠas far as possibleŠmore or less solid blocks of non-blank cells are gathered together.  Such blocks of cells, they suggested, represent ﬁwell-knitﬂ groups.    It is doubtful that Homans actually used the Forsyth and Katz procedure.  DGG had already arranged the matrix in such a way that it displayed group structure.  Seemingly they had anticipated the Forsyth and Katz approach by six years.  Homans, Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 7then, did not rearrange the data matrix at all; he simply copied the arrangement of Figure 1, exactly as it was reported by DGG.    In any case, after inspecting the arrangement shown in Figure 1, Homans grouped 16 of the women and distinguished two levels of core and peripheral positions.  In his report Homans  (p. 84) report wrote:  ...wegeneralizetheseobservationsbysayingthatthe18womenweredividedintotwogroups.Thepatternisfrayedattheedges,butthereisapattern.Thefirstsevenwomen,EvelynthroughEleanor,wereclearlymembersofonegroup;numbers11through15,MyrathroughHelen,werejustasclearlymembersofanother.Somewomenparticipatedaboutequallywithbothgroupsbutnotverymuchwitheither;Pearl[woman8]isanexample.Andsomeparticipated,thoughnotveryoften,onlywiththesecondgroup.Pearl,Olivia,Flora[women8,17and18]andtheirlikearemarginalgroupmembers.This statement is somewhat ambiguous.  It does assign women 1 through 8 to one group and 11 through 15, along with 8, 17 and 18 to the other.  Because woman 8 (Pearl) is assigned to both, the two groups overlap.  In addition Homans characterized women 8, 17 and 18 to ﬁmarginal positionsﬂ but it is difficult to know whet he intended by the phrase ﬁand their like.ﬂ   His statement, moreover, makes no mention at all of woman 9 (Ruth) or woman16 (Dorothy).  They were simply not assigned to either group or to any position. 4.3 Phillips and Conviser™s Analysis Based on Information Theory (P&C72)  Phillips and Conviser (1972) were the first to use a systematic procedure in the attempt to uncover the group structure in the DGG data.3  They reasoned that a collection of individuals is a group to the extent that all of the members of the collection attend the same social events.  So, to examine the DGG data, they needed an index of the variability of attendance.  They chose the standard information theoretic measure of entropy, H (Shannon, 1964).  H provides an index of the variability of a binary (yes/no) variable.  In this case, it was applied to all the women (and all the events) in the DGG data. Thus, H was used to provide an index of the degree to which different collections of women attended different sets of events (and different sets of events attracted different collections of women).   Phillips and Conviser set about to find groups by comparing various ways of partitioning the women into subsets.  They argued that any given partitioning produced social groups if the entropy H summed for all of the subsets was less than the entropy for                                            3 It should be noted that Phillips and Conviser attributed the southern women data to Homans.  Nowhere in their paper did they acknowledge DGG. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 8the total set of women.  In such an event, the women assigned to each subset would be relatively homogeneous with respect to which events they attended. They evaluated the utility of any proposed partitioning by calculating the information theoretic measure .   is an index of the degree to which the overall entropy of the total collectivity H is reduced by calculating the value Hi within each of the i designated subsets and summing the results (Garner and McGill, 1956).   is large when all the women who are classed into each subset are similar with respect to their attendance patterns.  It is maximal only when the within-subset patterns are all identical.   To employ this approach, then, it is necessary to partition the women in all possible ways, calculate  for each partitioning, and see which partitioning produces the largest value.   There is, however, a major difficulty with this approach.  The number of possible partitionings grows at an exponential rate with an increase in the number of individuals examined.  The number grows so rapidly that the partitions cannot all be examined, even with as few as 18 women to be considered.   So Phillips and Conviser worked out a way to simplify the problem.  Like Homans, they cited again the procedure suggested by Forsyth and Katz (1946).  That procedure rearranges the rows and columns in the data matrix in such a way that women who attended the same events and events that were attended by the same women are grouped together.  When this is done, only those women who are close together in the matrix are eligible to be in the same group.  That being the case, only those relatively few partitionings that include or exclude individuals in successive positions in the data matrix need to be considered. As I indicated above, the DGG data had already been arranged in the desired order by the original authors.  So, like Homans, Phillips and Conviser did not actually have to rearrange them.  They could proceed directly to partitioning.  They began by partitioning the women into two classes (1 versus 2 through 18, 1 and 2 versus 3 through 18, 1 through 3 versus 4 through 18, etc.).  They reported that, of all these two-group partitions, the split of 1 through 11 versus 12 through 18 yielded the largest value of .   In checking their results, however, I discovered that their result was based on an error in calculation.  When I recalculated I discovered that the maximum value of  is actually achieved with the 1 through 9 versus 10 through 18 split.  This approach simply partitions; it cannot distinguish core or peripheral positions, nor can it permit overlapping. 4.4 Breiger™s Matrix Algebraic Analysis (BGR74)  Breiger (1974) used matrix algebra to show that the original two-mode, woman by event, DGG data matrix could be used to generate a pair of matrices that are, Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 9mathematically, dual.  First, multiplying the original matrix by its transpose produces a woman by woman matrix in which each cell indicates the number of events co-attended by both the row and the column women.  Second, multiplying the transpose by the original matrix yields an event-by-event matrix where each cell is the number of women who attended both the row event and the column event.  The woman-by-woman matrix is shown in Figure 3.4  And its dual, the event-by-event matrix, is shown in Figure 4.  Figure 3.  The One-Mode, Woman by Woman, Matrix Produced by Matrix Multiplication  Figure 4.  The One-Mode, Event by Event, Matrix Produced by Matrix Multiplication                                             
4 Breiger renamed DGG™s ﬁMyra.ﬂ  He listed her as ﬁMyrnaﬂ in his tables and diagrams.  Breiger™s designation has been picked up in a number of later worksŠincluding the data set released as part of the UCINET program (Borgatti, Everett and Freeman, 1992).  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 10After examining the woman by woman matrix Breiger™s conclusion was that ﬁ. . . everyone was connected to virtually everyone else.ﬂ  It was difficult, therefore, to separate the women into subgroups.  So, in order to do that he turned to the dual, event by event, matrix.  He reasoned that ﬁ. . . only those events that have zero overlap with at least one other event are likely to separate the women into socially meaningful subgroups.ﬂ  He found that events 6, 7, 8 and 9 were all linked to all of the other events; they contained no zero entries.  So he eliminated their columns from the original two-mode data matrix.  When those four columns were eliminated, women 8 and 16 were not participants in any of the remaining events so they were dropped from the analysis.  The next step was to recalculate a new woman-by-woman matrix from the reduced woman by event matrix from which the four linking events and the two uninvolved women had been removed.  He then dichotomized the reduced data matrix and determined its clique5 structure.  The result was a clear separation of the women into three cliques, two of which overlapped.  Women 1 through 7 plus woman 9 formed one clique, women 10 through 15 formed another.  In addition, women 14, 15, 17 and 18 formed a third.  Thus, the latter two groups overlapped; women 14 and 15 were members of both the second and the third cliques.  Breiger™s procedure, then, permits the generation of more than two groups and it allows groups to overlap.  But like the Phillips and Conviser approach, it cannot assign core or peripheral positions. 4.5 Breiger, Boorman and Arabie™s Computational Analysis (BBA75)  Breiger, Boorman and Arabie (1975) reported on a new computational technique, CONCOR, designed for clustering binary relational data.  CONCOR partitions the points in a graph into exactly two similarity classes, or blocks.   Such blocks result when a data matrix can be permuted in such a way that some rectangular areas of the permuted matrix contain mostly ones, and other rectangular areas are predominately filled with zeros. CONCOR begins with a data matrix, for example, the DGG women by event data.  Then, using only the rows (women) or only the columns (events) CONCOR calculates either a row-by-row or column-by-column matrix of ordinary Pearsonian correlations.  Then the rows (or columns) in this correlation matrix are again correlated and this process is repeated, again and again, until all the correlations are uniformly either plus or minus one.  The convergence to correlations to plus or minus one seems always to occur.  And the result is partitioning of the original data into two relatively homogeneous groups. The application of CONCOR to the women (rows) of the DGG data set produced a partition.  Women 1 through 7 and 9 were assigned to one group and 10 through 18 along with 8 were assigned to the other.  Like the information theoretic approach used by                                             
5 Here the term ﬁcliqueﬂ is used in the technical sense.  It is a maximal complete subset (Luce and Perry, 1949). Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 11Phillips and Conviser, CONCOR partitions the data.  That means that CONCOR™s results cannot assign core or peripheral positions nor can they display groups that overlap. 4.6 Bonacich™s Boolean Algebraic Analysis (BCH78)  Bonacich (1978) focused on the same duality that Breiger had noted, but he used a different algebraic tool.  Instead of using Breiger™s matrix algebra, Bonacich drew on Boolean algebra to specify both homogeneous groups of women and homogenous groups of events.  Bonacich began with the two-mode data set reported by DGG.  His aim was to find a procedure for simplifying the data in such a way thatŠas much as possibleŠall the unions (a or b), intersections (a and b) and complements (not a) contained in the original data are preserved.   Like Breiger, he drew on the duality between women and events.  He strategically selected a subset of events (3, 8 and 12) that permitted him to divide the women into two groups in terms of their attendance at those events.  The first group contains women 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 who were present at Event 3.  The second group contains women 10, 11, 12, 13 and 15 who attended Event 12.   Most of the women from both groups (all but woman 5 from the first group and woman 14 from the second group) also attended Event 8 along with four others.  So, because they avoided attending event 8Šthat ﬁbridgedﬂ between the two groupsŠBonacich reasoned that they were ﬁpurerﬂ representatives of their groups.  He therefore defined women 5 and 14 as occupants of the central, or core, positions in their respective groups.   The approach used by Bonacich, then, divided the women into two groups and it also determined core and peripheral group members.  But, because it ignored all but three events, it eliminated one-third of the women (7, 8, 9, 16, 17 and 18) from the analysis.   4.7 Doreian™s Analysis Based on Algebraic Topology (DOR79) Doreian (1979) drew on Atkin™s (1974) algebraic topology in order to specify subgroups and positions in the DGG data.  Atkin™s model defines each event as the collection of women who attended it. Dually, each woman is defined as the collection of events she attended.   From the perspective of Atkin™s model, two women are assumed to be connected to the degree that they are linked through chains of co-attendance.  Women A, B and C form a chain at level 5 if a woman A co-attends 5 events with woman B and B attended 5 events with C.  Then, even if A and C never attended any event together, all three are put together and their connection is assigned a level of 5.  Doreian used this procedure to uncover the patterning of connections among the DGG women.   Women who form chains linked by co-attendance at 4 or more events, are divided into two groups.  One contains women 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 9.  The other includes women 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15.  Moreover, by considering subsets of women who were Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 12connected at higher levels, Doreian was able to specify degrees of co-attendance ranging from the core to the periphery according of each group.  His results place women 1 and 3 in the core of the first group, followed by 2 and 4 at the next level and 5, 6, 7 and 9 at the third.  In the second group there were only two levels.  Women 12, 13 and 14 were core, and 10, 11 and 15 were placed at the second level.  4.8 Bonacich™s Use of Singular Value Decomposition (BCH91)  Bonacich (1991) used a form of singular value decomposition (SVD) to uncover groups in the DGG data.  SVD is a tool from linear algebra.  It is closely related to principal components analysis.  Richards and Seary (1997) described the procedure: ...chooseasetofaxesinthemultidimensionalspaceoccupiedbythedataandrotatethemsothatthefirstaxispointsinthedirectionofthegreatestvariabilityinthedata;thesecondone,perpendiculartothefirst,pointsinthedirectionofgreatestremainingvariability,andsoon.Thissetofaxesisacoordinatesystemthatcanbeusedtodescribetherelativepositionsofthesetofpointsinthedata.Mostofthevariabilityinthelocationsofpointswillbeaccountedforbythefirstfewdimensionsofthiscoordinatesystem.SVD can be used to analyze either one-mode or two-mode data.  In this case, Bonacich applied it directly to the two-mode, women by events, data set.  And he proposed that the first of the new transformed axes reveals both overall group structure and individual positioning.  Individuals who displayed similar patterns of attendance at events are assigned similar scores on that axis.  Moreover, that first axis is bipolarŠit assigns both positive and negative scores to individuals.  Bonacich indicated that women with positive values belong in one group and those with negative values in the other.  The magnitudes of individual scoresŠpositive or negativeŠcan be taken as indices of core versus peripheral group membership.  A large score associated with a woman indicates that she tended to present herself only at those events that were attended by other members of her own group and that she avoided events that were attended by members of the other group.   One of Bonacich™s groups included women 1 through 9, and the other women 10 through 18.  The order for the first group placed woman 5 in the core, followed by 4, 2, 1 and 6 together, and 3, 7, 9, and 8 in that order.  In the second group, women 17 and 18 were together at the core, followed by 12, 13 and 14 together, then 11, 15, 10, and 16 in that order. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 134.9 Freeman™s Analysis Based on G-Transitivity (FRE92)  Freeman (1992) was the first to analyze the DGG data in a strictly one-mode form.  Like Breiger (1974) he used matrix multiplication to produce the woman-by-woman matrix shown above in Figure 3.  The cells in that figure show the number of events co-attended by the row-woman and the column-woman.  The cells in the principal diagonal indicate the total number of events attended by each woman. Freeman™s analysis was based on an earlier suggestion by Granovetter (1973), hence the name, G-Transitivity.  Granovetter focused on the strengths of the social ties linking individuals.  He argued that, given three individuals A, B and C where both A and B and B and C are connected by strong social ties, then A and C should be at least weakly tied.  Freeman assumed that the frequency of co-attendance provided an index of tie strength.  He developed a computational model that works from the larger frequencies of co-attendance to the smaller.  It determines a critical level of co-attendance below which the data violate Granovetter™s condition.  At the level just below the critical one, there is at least one triple where an A and a B are tied at that level, B and some C are tied at that level, but A and C have no tie at all.  But at the critical level and all higher levels, the condition is met; so all ties that involve co-attendance at or above that critical level are, in Granovetter™s sense, strong. Applied to the DGG data this procedure divided fifteen of the eighteen women into two groups. The first contained women 1 through 7 and 9.  The second contained women 10 through 16.  Within each of those groups each woman was connected to every other woman on a path involving only strong ties.  But there were no strong ties linking women across the two groups.  Thus, this method could uncover groups in the DGG data set, but it could not distinguish between cores and peripheries.  Moreover, this procedure was unable to assign group membership to women 8, 17 and 18.     4.10 Everett and Borgatti™s Analysis Based on Regular Coloring (E&B93)  In an earlier paper Everett and Borgatti (1991) had defined regular equivalence in terms of graph coloring.  Let the vertices of a graph represent social actors and the edges represent a symmetric relation linking pairs of actors.  The neighborhood of a vertex is the set of other vertices that are directly connected to that vertex.  Each vertex is assigned a color.  Then any subset of vertices can be characterized by its spectrum, the set of colors assigned to its members.  Assigning colors to vertices partitions the actors into equivalence sets.  And those equivalence sets are regular when all the vertices are colored in such a way that they are all embedded in neighborhoods with the same spectrum.  Everett and Borgatti (1993) used the concept of hypergraphs to generalize their regular coloring to two-mode data sets.  And Freeman and Duquenne (1993) restated that generalization in simpler terms, referring only to ordinary bipartite graphs.   Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 14This approach draws on the duality of two-mode data. Women are connected only to events and vice versa.  So the women are assigned colors from one spectrum and the events are assigned colors from another.  Women are regularly equivalent when they participate in events that are regularly equivalent.  Events are regularly equivalent when they have participants who are regularly equivalent.  To simplify their analysis, Everett and Borgatti dropped four women (8, 16, 17 and 18).  The remaining 14 women were partitioned into two regular equivalence classes, and, at the same time, the events were partitioned into three classes:  Any women who attended any of events 1 through 5 and also any of events 6 through 9 were assigned to one class.  Those women who attended any of events 6 through 9 and also any of 10 through 14 were assigned to the other class.  The resulting partitioning of the fourteen women assigned women 1 through 7 along with 9 to one group and women 10 through 15 to the other.  No assignments to core or peripheral positions were made.   4.11 Two Groupings Resulting from Freeman™s Use of a Genetic Algorithm (FR193 and FR293)  Freeman (1993) produced another one-mode analysis of the DGG data.  He began with the definition of group proposed by Homans (1950) and Sailer and Gaulin (1984).  They defined a group as a collection of individuals all of whom interact more with other group members than with outsiders.    To explore this idea, Freeman used the same one-mode woman-by-woman matrix of frequencies that he had used in his earlier analysis of G-transitivity.  He assumed that the women who co-attended the same social events would almost certainly have interacted.  So he took this matrix as an index of interaction. To find groups, then, one might examine all the possible partitionings of these 18 women and find any that meet the Homans-Sailer-Gaulin condition.  But, in the discussion of the approach used by Phillips and Conviser above, the impossibility of searching through all the partitionings was established.  Phillips and Conviser avoided the problem by limiting their search to only a small subset of the possible partitionings.  Freeman (1993) took another approach.  He drew on a search optimization algorithm to enhance the probability of finding partitionings that yield groups.  Freeman search was based on Holland™s (1962) genetic algorithm.  This approach emulates an actual evolutionary process in which pseudo-organisms ﬁadaptﬂ to the demands of an environmental niche.  In this case, each pseudo-organism was associated with a particular partitioning of the 18 women.  The niche was defined in terms of the Homans-Sailer-Gaulin definition of group.  And the ﬁfitnessﬂ of each grouping was evaluated in terms of the extent to which it approached that condition.   The search for an optimum partitioning was enhanced by allowing those partitionings with the highest fitness to crossbreed.  In that way they produced another generation of ﬁoffspringﬂ partitionings, each with some of the traits of their two parents.  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 15And, to avoid getting the whole process locked into some less than optimal pattern, each partitioning in the new generation was subjected to a small chance of a mutation that would vary its structure.  The DGG data were entered into the genetic program and 500 runs were made.  Two solutions that met the Homans-Sailer-Gaulin criterion were uncovered.  The first, that occurred 327 times, found the same optimum revealed in the corrected Phillips and Conviser analysis.  It grouped women 1 through 9 together and women 10 through 18 together.  The second pattern occurred less frequently.  It turned up 173 times and assigned women 1 through 7 to one group and women 8 through 18 to the other.  These were the only partitions that displayed more interaction within groups than between groups.     4.12 Two Solutions Provided by Freeman and White™s Galois Lattice Analysis (FW193 and FW293)  Freeman and White (1993) drew on another algebraic tool.  They used Galois lattices to uncover groups and positions in the DGG data.  Mathematically, a Galois lattice (Birkhoff, 1940) is a dual structure.  It displays the patterning of women in terms of the events that each attended.  And at the same time it shows the patterning of events in terms of which women attended each.   Moreover it shows the containment structure of both the women and the events.  A woman A ﬁcontainsﬂ another B if never attends an event where A is not present.  And an event X contains event Y if no woman is present at Y who is not also present at X.   A Galois lattice, therefore, permits the specification of classes of events.  And it allows us to define subsets of actors in terms of those event classes.  Overall, it allows an investigator to uncover all the structure that was displayed in the earlier algebraic work by Breiger (1974) and Bonacich (1978), without the necessity of choosing arbitrary subsets of events in order to classify the women.  Freeman and White first reported the structure that was revealed by examining the overall lattice.  Those results assigned women 1 through 9 and 16 to one group and women 10 through 18 to the other.  Woman 16, then, was a member of both groups.  Core and peripheral positions were assigned according to the patterning of containment.  At the core of the first group were women 1, 2, 3 and 4.  Women 5, 6, 7, and 9 were in the middle.  And woman 16 was peripheral.   The core of the second group contained women 13, 14 and 15.  Women 10, 11, 12, 17 and 18 were in the middle, and again woman 16 was peripheral. Freeman and White™s second analysis was based on examining the two sub-lattices of women that were generated by the partitioning of events in the overall lattice.  Two sets of events, 1 through 5 and 10 through 14 shared no common actors.  So Freeman and White examined the sub-lattices generated by considering only these events.  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 16This is exactly the event set that Breiger used in his matrix algebraic analysis described above.  And its overall results are similar to those produced by Breiger.   This second analysis excluded women 8 and 16 who had not attended any of these ten events.  It produced two non-overlapping groups that contained the remaining sixteen women.  One group included women 1 through 7 along with 9.  And the other included women 10 through 15 along with 17 and 18.  Woman 1 was at the core of her group, followed by 2, 3 and 4 at the next level, then 5, then 6, and finally 7 and 9 together at the periphery.  Woman 14 was at the core of her group, followed by 12, 13 and 15 at the next level, 11, 17 and 18 next, and finally by woman 10 at the extreme periphery. 4.13 Borgatti and Everett™s Three Analyses (BE197, BE297 and BE397)  As part of a broad examination of techniques for the analysis of two-mode data, Borgatti and Everett (1997) used three procedures for finding groups in the DGG data.  They began by constructing a one-mode bipartite matrix of the DGG data.  A bipartite matrix represents a graph in which the nodes can be partitioned in such a way that all the ties in the graph connect nodes that fall in one partition with nodes that fall in the other; there are no within partition ties.  The bipartite matrix produced by Borgatti and Everett is shown in Figure 5.  The partition is between women and events.  All the ties go from women to events or from events to women.  There are neither woman-woman ties nor are there any event-event ties.  Figure 5.  One-Mode Bipartite Representation of the DGG Data Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 17 Borgatti and Everett defined an object on this matrix called an n-biclique.  Like an n-clique, an n-biclique is a maximal complete subgraph in which no pair of points is at a distance greater than n.  In this case, they were interested only in such bicliques where n = 2.  Since women are connected to events, a 2-bicliques must include both women and events.  It could include a one-step connection from at least one woman to at least one event and another one-step connection from those events to at least one other woman.  Or it might include a one-step connection from at least one event to at least one woman and another one-step connection from those women to at least one other event.  Originally, Luce and Perry (1949) had required that a clique contain at least three objects.  Borgatti and Everett generalized that requirement and specified that their 2-bicliques must contain at least three women and at least three events.   Of the 68 2-bicliques, only 22 contained 3 or more women and 3 or more events.  Women 8, 16, 17 and 18 were not included in any of these bicliques.  Everett and Borgatti recorded the pattern of overlap among the 22 cliques and then used the average method of Johnson™s (1967) hierarchical clustering to define groups, cores and peripheries on the matrix of overlaps.  Their results reveal two groups.  One contains women 1 through 7 and 9.  The other contains women 10 through 15.  Women 3 and 4 are the core of the first group.  They are followed by 2, 1, 7, 6, 9 and 5 in that order.  Women 12 and 13 are the core of the second group.  They are followed in order by 11, 14 10 and 15.    Borgatti and Everett used the same bipartite data in a second approach.  There they used a search algorithm to find the two-group partitioning that maximized the fit between the observed data and an idealized pattern.  In their idealized pattern all within-group ties are present and no between-group ties are present.  An optimal partition is sought using Glover™s (1989) tabu search algorithm, and the fit of any partition is measured by correlation between that partition and the ideal.  The result was a simple partition of all the women and all the events.  The positions of individuals were not calculated.  The tabu search found that the best two-group partition for the women was 1 through 9 and 10 through 18.  In their third analysis Borgatti and Everett used the regular two-mode DGG data.  Here again they sought an optimal partitioning.  And again the criterion for an optimum was correlation between a particular partitioning and the ideal that contained solid blocks of zero ties between groups and one ties within groups.  Like Freeman (1993), Borgatti and Everett used a genetic algorithm to search for an optimum.  But, while Freeman™s search was made on the one mode woman by woman data, Borgatti and Everett searched the two mode, woman by event data.  The result of their application of the genetic algorithm assigned women 1 through 9 to one group and 10 through 18 to the other. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 184.14 Skvoretz and Faust™s p* Model (S&F99) Skvoretz and Faust (1999) explored the ability of p*, a family of structural models proposed by Wasserman and Pattison (1996) to uncover the important structural properties of the DGG data.  Skvoretz and Faust developed several models in which various conditioning factors were used in the attempt to reproduce the patterning of the DGG data from a small number of parameters.  Their best fitting model embodied three key parameters, all concerned with bridging ties.  One parameter was based on the number of triads in which two actors were linked by an event.  The second was based on the number of triads in which two events were linked by an actor.  And the third took into account the distances between pairs of events as measured by the number of actors on the shortest path linking them.   Together, these parameters did a good job of capturing the tendency of these women to attend those events that brought the same sets of individuals together, again and again.  These three factors, then, were included in a model that predicted the likelihood that each woman attended each event.  In effect, Skvoretz and Faust used the p* model to produce an idealized version of the DGG data, one that removed minor perturbations andŠhopefullyŠcaptured the essence of the overall pattern of attendance.  They produced, in effect, an ﬁimprovedﬂ version of the DGG data.   In order to uncover the group structure in this idealized data set, I clustered the data produced by the model using Johnson™s (1967) complete link hierarchical clustering algorithm.  That algorithm produces an ordering among sets of women by linking first those who were assigned the closest ties according to the p* model, then proceeding to the next lower level and so on.  The results divide the women into two groups, and they assign core and peripheral positions in those groups.  One group included women 1 through 9 and the other women 10 through 15 as well as 17 and 18.  Woman 16 was not included in either group.  The two positional orderings were: 1 and 3, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 8 for the first group and 12 and 13, 14, 15, 11, 10, and finally 17 and 18 together at the extreme periphery for the second. 4.15 Roberts™ Singular Value Decomposition of Dual Normalized Data (ROB00) Roberts (2000) calculated a ﬁmarginal freeﬂ (Goodman, 1996) two-mode analysis of the DGG data.  He pre-processed the data using the classical iterative proportional fitting algorithm (Deming and Stephan, 1940).  This produced a ﬁpure patternﬂ (Mosteller, 1968) in which all differences in row and column marginals were eliminated.  The two-mode data transformed to constant marginals are shown in Figure 6. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 19 Figure 6.  DGG Data After Roberts™ Iterative Proportional Fitting    Roberts then subjected the transformed data to a singular value decomposition.  The result is a procedure like correspondence analysis or principal components analysis, but one in which all of the marginal effects have been removed.  The groups produced linked women 1 through 9 and 10 through 18.  Women 1 and 12 are in the cores of the two groups.  Woman 1 is followed by 2, 3 and 4 who are tied at the next level.  They are followed by 5, 6, 7, 9, and 8 in that order.  Woman 12 is followed by 13, 14, 11, 15, 10 and 16 in that order.  And finally women 17 and 18 are grouped together at the extreme periphery of the second group. 4.16 Osbourn™s VERI Procedure for Partitioning (OSB00) Osbourn (1999) is a physicist who conducted experimental research on visual perception.  His experiment examined how individuals perceived collections of points presented on a two-dimensional plane and categorized them into clusters.  His empirical results suggested that individuals rescale a dumbbell-shaped area around each pair of points in the plane.  An individual clusters a pair of points together if and only if no other point falls in the dumbbell-shaped area between them.  That result was used to determine the threshold for grouping as a function of variations in the separation of pairs of points.  That threshold was called the visual empirical region of influence (VERI).   Osbourn generalized these results and they have been used to produce an all-purpose clustering and pattern recognition algorithm.  The algorithm turns out to have important applications that deal with a wide range of complex phenomena.  The model has successfully been applied in a number of areas. Among them it has been applied to interpretation of inputs of odors reported by mechanical ﬁnoses,ﬂ and it has been used to interpret pictures of brain tissue produced by magnetic resonance imagery (MRI).   The publications include general descriptions of the VERI procedure, but they do not specify the details.  So when, in the year 2000, I met Osbourn I asked him if I might try VERI on the one-mode woman-by-woman version of the DGG data.  Because my Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 20data were not based on measured physical data, he concluded that it would be necessary to develop a special form of the algorithm.  He did exactly that and sent me a program that was specifically designed to tolerate data that were not scaled. I tried his adapted algorithm on the DGG data, but it was limited.  It could only do one partitioningŠsplitting the women into two groups at a point that, according to the VERI criterion, provided the most dramatic separation.  That partitioning assigned women 1 through 16 to one group and women 17 and 18 to the other. 4.17  Newman™s Weighted Proximities (NEW01) In analyzing data on co-authorship, Newman (2001) constructed a weighted index of proximity for two-mode data.  He assigned each author of a publication a weight inversely proportional to the number of co-authors he or she had in that publication.  This weighting was based on the assumption that a large collection of co-authors might be less well connected to each other than a small collection. Newman had reported his general approach, but, like Osbourn, he had not spelled out the details of his weighting scheme.  But I had already noticed that the bridging events in the DGG data (E6 through E9) were larger than the other events, therefore such weighting had intuitive appeal for those data.  Therefore, I asked Newman to run his weighting algorithm on the DGG data, and he obliged.  The results were a transformation of the DGG data that took his differential weighting into account.   As in the case of the Skvoretz and Faust result described above, I needed a way to convert the Newman data into groups and positions.  Just as I did above, I used the complete link form of Johnson™s (1967) hierarchical clustering to do that conversion.  The clustering algorithm divided the women into a group containing women 1 through 7 and 9 and another with woman 8 along with women 10 through 18.  It placed women 1 and 2 at the core of their group.  They were followed, in order, by 3, 4, 6, 5, and 7 and 9 tied for the peripheral position.  The core of the other group contained 13 and 14.  They were followed by 12, 11, 15 and 10 in that order, then 17 and 18 were placed together and finally 8 and 16 were together at the extreme periphery.      That completes the review of 21 analyses of the DGG data.  All of those analysesŠeither directly or indirectlyŠhave specified groups among the women.  In addition, 11 of them have indicated women™s positions in the core or periphery.  The question for the next section, then, centers on an examination of what we can learn by considering all of these results together and conducting a meta-analysis. 5. Meta-Analysis of the Results In Section 4, twenty-one analytic procedures produced two kinds of substantive results when they were applied to the DGG data.  In every case, groups were specified and individuals were assigned to those groups.  And eleven procedures went on to specify Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 21various levels of core and peripheral positions and to assign individuals to those positions.  The next two sections will review and analyze these two kinds of results.  Section 5.1 will deal with groups and Section 5.2 will examine positions. In each of these sections, meta-analysis will be used to try to answer the two questions posed in Section 1 above: (1) By considering all of the results together, can we come up with an informed description of the group structure revealed in the DGG data?  And (2), can we distinguish between those analytic tools that were relatively effective and those that were less effective in producing that description? 5.1 Finding Groups The classifications of women into groups by each of the 21 procedures described in Section 4 yields a 21 by 153 matrix.  The 21 rows represent the analytic procedures and the 153 columns represent the unordered pairs of women [(1,2), (1,3) . . . (17,18)].  But, since there is a good deal of agreement among the procedures and since no procedure generated more than two groups, we can simplify their presentation.  Figure 7 shows the whole pattern of assignment of women to groups. In Figure 7 the 18 columns represent the 18 women.  And the 21 rows refer to the 21 analytic procedures.  A woman in each cell is designated by a ﬁW.ﬂ   Groups are designated by colors.  All the red ﬁWsﬂin a given row were assigned to the same group by the procedure designated in that row.   All the blue ones were assigned to a second group.  And in the fourth row there are green ﬁW™sﬂ thatwere assigned to a third group. Any woman who was assigned to two groups by the procedure in question, received a pair of color codes.    Figure 7.  Group Assignments by 21 Procedures Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 22What we need here is a way to evaluate the pattern displayed in Figure 7.  Batchelder and Romney (1986, 1988, 1989) developed a method called consensus analysis that will do just that.  Consensus analysis was originally designed to analyze data in which a collection of subjects answered a series of questions.  It is based on three assumptions:  (1) there is a ﬁtrueﬂ (but not necessarily known) answer to each question, (2) the answers provided are independent from question to question and (3) all the questions are equally difficult.  Given these assumptions, consensus analysis uses the patterning of agreements among subjects to estimate both the ﬁtrueﬂ answer to each question and the ﬁcompetenceﬂ of each subject.  ﬁTrueﬂ answers are determined by the overall consensus of all the subjects.  And the ﬁcompetenceﬂ of a given subject is a function of the degree to which that subject provides answers that are close to the consensual answers.   For each pair of women, each analytic tool was, in effect, asked a kind of true/false question: does this pair of women belong together in the same group?  And each analytic tool answered that questionŠyes or noŠfor each of the 153 pairs of women. Thus, consensus analysis can be used to address both questions of interest in the current context.  It can determine the ﬁtrueﬂ answers and it can determine the ﬁcompetenceﬂ of each procedure.  It uses an iterative maximum likelihood procedure to estimate the ﬁtrueﬂ answers.  For these data, the answer sheet is shown in Figure 8.  There, a woman are in a row is classified as a member of the same group as a woman in a column if there is a 1 in their cell.  The bold entries show complete agreement among the 21 procedures.  All in all, there are 25 pairs of women where all 21 analytic procedures agreed that they should be placed together.  But even in those cases where there was less than total agreement, the probability of misclassification approached zero very closely.  The very worst case was the estimate that woman 8 and woman 9 belonged together; in that case the maximum likelihood probability of error was .0008.  According to this figure, then, the consensus of the analytic procedures is to assign women 1 through 9 to one group and women 10 through 18 to the other.   Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 23 Figure 8.  The Groupings Estimated by Consensus Analysis Estimates of the ﬁcompetenceﬂ of the 21 analytic procedures are obtained using factor analysis.  First, the number of matches in the answers to the 153 questions is calculated for each pair of procedures.  Then the covariance in those answers is calculated for each pair.  And finally, loadings on the first principal axis are determined using singular value decomposition.    
The first axis of eachŠmatches and covarianceŠprovides an index of competence.  These two indices are useful in estimating the competence of procedures only if they are in substantial agreement.  In this case the correlation between the axis based on matches and that based on covariances was .967.  This suggests that the patterning of agreements is robust and that the results are not simply an artifact of the computational procedures.   
The estimates of competence based on matches are shown in Figure 9.  These are probably overestimates because of the large number of zeros in the data matrix.  Nonetheless, because of their high correlation with covariances, they can be taken as monotonically linked to the success of each procedure in approximating the consensus classifications shown in Figure 9.  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 24 Figure 9.  The ﬁCompetenceﬂ Scores of the 21Analytic Procedures  Figure 9 shows variation in the degree to which the various methods produce group assignments that meet this new criterion.  Method 20, Osbourn™s VERI algorithm is dramatically poorer than any of the others.  And at the opposite extreme, six of the methods, 3 (Phillips and Conviser™s information theory), 8 (Bonacich™s correspondence analysis), 15 (Borgatti and Everett™s taboo algorithm), 11 (Freeman™s first genetic algorithm solution), 16 (Borgatti and Everett™s tabu search), 16 (Borgatti and Everett™s genetic algorithm) and 19 (Roberts™ correspondence analysis) are tied for the best performance.  They are followed very closely by two additional methods, 18 (Skvoretz and Faust™s p* analysis) and 14 (Freeman and White™s Galois sub-lattice).  All in all, then, we have eight methods that perform very well.  They all assigned individuals to groups in a way that is in substantial agreement with the assignments uncovered by consensus analysis. One area in which the analytic devices displayed no consensus at all has to do with overlap in-group memberships.  Only four of the methods reviewed displayed overlapping groups.  DGG and Homans both relied on intuition, so they could easily specify women who bridged between the groups they reported.  DGG proposed that woman 9 was a member of their two groups: women 1 through 9 and 9 through 18.  Homans saw woman 8 as a bridge between a group that included women 1 through 8 and one containing women 8, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17 and 18.  Breiger™s analysis was based in part on cliques.  Thus, it could, and did allow overlaps.  His method suggested that there were three groups, two of which overlapped.  One group involved women 1 through 9, a Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 25second involved women 10 through 15.  And his third group included women 14 and 15 again, along with 17 and 18.  Finally, the lattice analysis also allowed overlaps.  Freeman and White found that, in lattice terms, woman 16 bridged between their two groups (women 1 through 9 plus 16 in the first, and women 10 through 18 in the second). Clearly, there is nothing resembling a consensus in these reports of overlap.  In fact, the closest thing there is to agreement can be found in the reports by DGG and Homans on one hand and the two solutions by Freeman using the genetic algorithm (FR193 and FR293).  The two Freeman solutions agreed that women 1 through 7 were a group, as were women 10 through 18.  Women 8 and 9 were assigned to the first group by one solution and to the second group by the other.  One possible interpretation of these results is that women 8 and 9 were both bridges between groups.  This suggests that the lattice analysis supports both the DGG designation of woman 9 and the Homans designation of woman 8 as bridges.  But beyond that, little can be generalized about these results.  When it came to dealing with group overlap, these analyses certainly did not agree.   5.2 Specifying Positions: Core and Periphery Next we turn to the question of the assignment of individuals to core and peripheral positions.  In this case we are limited because only 11 of the analytic procedures produced such assignments.  The designation of core and peripheral positions by those 11 procedures is shown in Figure 10.  In each procedure, core and peripheral orders were assigned within each group.  The first groups are shown on the left and the second groups on the right.  Within each group, core/peripheral positions are shown left to right.  The vertical lines show the divisions specified by the procedure.  In the case of DGG41, for example, women 1, 2, 3 and 4 were at the core.  They were followed by 5, 6 and 7.  And finally, 8 and 9 were farthest from the core.  Figure 10.  Core/Periphery Assignments by the 11Analytic Procedures  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 26In dealing with groups, consensus analysis was used to determine the ﬁtrueﬂ assignment of women to groups.  That grouping drew upon the information provided by all the analytic devices considered simultaneously.  In dealing with core and peripheral positions, it would be useful to be able to establish a similar criterion for the ﬁtrueﬂ positions in which to place individuals.  But, unfortunately, consensus analysis could not be used here.  The analytic devices displayed too much variability in assigning core and peripheral positions.  Moreover, with only 11 analytic tools making assignments, there were fewer data points from which to generate reliable estimates.   As an alternative, I used two analytic tools.  One is canonical analysis of asymmetry (Gower 1977; Freeman, 1997) and the other is dynamic paired-comparison scaling (Batchelder and Bershad, 1979; Batchelder, Bershad and Simpson, 1992; Jameson, Appleby and Freeman, 1999).   These two tools offer alternative ways of establishing the ﬁtrueﬂ or ﬁbestﬂ ordering of individuals given something less than complete agreement among the eleven methods.  The problem is simplified somewhat by partitioning the original 18 by 18 matrix.  The ﬁanswer sheetﬂ in Figure 8 above defined women 1 through 9 as one group and 10 through 18 as another.   The assignments to core and peripheral positions reflect this division.  All in all the eleven methods compared 537 ordered pairs of women in terms of which woman was nearer the core.  Of these, 533 comparisons involved women from the same group; only four compared women from different groups.    Therefore, since the overall pattern reflects the presence of the same groups that were specified above, I analyzed core/periphery positioning separately for each of those two groups.  The core/periphery matrix for the first group is shown in Figure 11.  That for the second is shown in Figure 12.  Figure 11.  Matrix of Frequencies of Assignment to a ﬁCloser to the Coreﬂ Position by 11 Analytic Procedures for the First Group of Nine Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 27 Figure 12.  Matrix of Frequencies of Assignment to a ﬁCloser to the Coreﬂ Position by 11 Analytic Procedures for the Second Group of Nine These two data sets were first subjected to canonical analysis of asymmetry.  As it is used here, the canonical analysis is based on an on/offŠall or noneŠmodel.  Each cell Xij in the data matrix is compared with its counterpart Xji.  Whichever is the larger of the two is set equal to ½ and the smaller is set equal to -½.  If the two are equal, both are set to 0.  Thus, either woman i is closer to the core than woman j, woman j is closer than i, or neither is closer.   The resulting matrix is called skew-symmetric.  A skew-symmetric matrix displays an important property when it is analyzed using singular value decomposition.  If a linear order is present, the first two axes of the output form a perfect arc around the origin.  The arc arranges the points from the one at the extreme core to the one at the most extreme periphery.   The results for the data of Figures 11 and 12 both formed perfect arcs.  They ordered the women in each of the two groups as shown in the third column of Figure 13.  Those results show that the canonical all or none approach produces clear results.  Women 5 and 6 fall at the same level, as do women 17 and 18.  Other than these two positional ties, the canonical analysis displays a linear order for each of the two groups.  It places woman 1 in the first group and woman 13 in the second in the extreme core positions.  And it places women 8 and 16 in the extreme peripheries of their respective groups. The other procedure, paired-comparison scaling, is not based on an all or none model.  Instead, it provides real valued dominance scores that are sensitive to the proportion of judgments in which each woman is assigned a position nearer the core than each of the others.  This approach is based on Thurstone™s (1927) method of paired comparisons.  Again we begin by comparing each cell Xij in the data matrix with its counterpart Xji.  Only this time we do not convert the numbers to dichotomous values.  Instead, we convert them to probabilities: Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 28Pij=Xij/(Xij+Xji). These probabilities, then, are used to determine the core/periphery order. Normal distribution assumptions are used to assign an initial level to each woman.  Her initial level is determined by the number of others with whom she was compared, and the number of those comparisons in which she was determined to be nearer the core.  These initial levels are then used in a recursive equation to assign each woman a final     Figure 13.  The Core-Periphery Rankings Assigned to Each Group of Women by the Two Scaling Procedures  level in the hierarchy.  These final levels depend on the same two factors listed above.  And, in addition, they depend on the number of comparisons in which a given woman was judged farther from the core and the average level of all those with whom she was compared These calculations are repeated, again and again, each time adjusting for the changed values of the average levels of others.  Finally, they converge and further computations are unnecessary.  The final result is a scaling.  Each woman is assigned a numerical score that represents her position in the continuum from core to periphery.  The rank orders produced by this scaling are shown in the fourth column in Figure 13. These two calculations involve approaches that are quite different.  So it is heartening to discover that they order the women almost identically.  The only difference is found in the first group.  The canonical analysis shows a tie between woman 5 and Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 29woman 6, but the paired-comparison analysis places woman 5 closer to the core than woman 6.   To evaluate the effectiveness of each of the 11 orders provided by the analytic procedures, I used gamma.  Gamma provides an order-based measure of agreement.  I compared each of the orders suggested by the procedures with the idealized orders provided by canonical analysis and paired-comparison analysis.   Because the two idealized orders are so similar, their gammas with the orders produced by the analytic procedures were, of course, nearly identical.  The results for both the canonical and the paired-comparison standards are shown in Figure 14.   For both model-based standards, Homans™ order produced the highest gamma.  One must be careful, however, in looking at these values because different gamma calculations may be built on vastly different numbers of observations.  In this case, the value of 1.0 associated with Homans™ work was based on only 17 comparisons in the order of the women.  In contrast the values associated with the two analyses by Newman were based on 58 and 59 comparisons respectively.  Because Homans™ report contained relatively less information about who was in the core and who was peripheral, it generated fewer predictions about positions.  The predictions it did make happened to agree with the positional information produced by both criteria.  But the Newman analyses both produced large numbers of predictions, and they were still mostly in agreement with those produced by the criteria.    Beyond Newman, the orders produced by Davis, Gardner and Gardner themselves, by Doreian, by Freeman and White in their first analysis, and by Skvoretz and Faust are consistently in agreement with the criteria.  Their gammas are all above .9 and they are all based on at least 43 comparisons.  At the opposite extreme, both Bonacich analyses and the Borgatti and Everett bi-clique analysis do not agree very well with the criteria.    Figure 14.  Gammas Showing the Degree to which 11 Analyses Agreed with the Two Standards in Assigning Individuals to Core and Peripheral Positions Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 30So again, we have been able to uncover something close to a consensusŠthis time with respect to core and peripheral positions.  And we have again been able to find out something about the extent to which each of the analytic procedures approaches that consensus.   6. Summary and Discussion 6.1 Assignment to Groups Each of the 21 analyses reported here assigned the DGG women to groups.  Consensus analysis determined the agreement among the assignments.  It turned out that there was a strong core of agreement among most of the analytic devices.  The agreement was substantial enough to allow the model to be used specify a partition of the women into groupsŠone that captured the consensus of all the analyses.  At the same time, the consensus analysis was also able to provide ratings of the ﬁcompetenceﬂ of each of the analytic procedures.   The consensual assignment of women to groups and the ﬁcompetenceﬂ ratings of the analytic methods were reported above.  The ﬁcompetenceﬂ scores were reflected in the first axis of an singular value decomposition of the matches generated by the methods in assigning pairs of women to the same or to different groups.  In that earlier examination I reported only the first axis.  But here, it is instructive to examine the second and third axes.  They are shown in Figure 15.  Figure 15.  Axes 2 and 3 Produced by the Singular Value Decomposition of the Matches in the Assignments of Women Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 31The arrangement of points representing the analytic methods in Figure 15 tells a good deal about both the partitioning of women to groups and the competence of the methods.   The consensus put women 1 through 9 in the first group and women 10 through 18 in the second.  In Figure 15, the basis for determining why this was the ﬁbestﬂ partition becomes apparent.  That partition was specified exactly by six of the analytic procedures: P&C72 (The corrected version of Phillips and Conviser™s information theoretic algorithm), BCH91 (Bonacich™s correspondence analysis), FR193 (Freeman™s first genetic algorithm solution), BE297 (Borgatti and Everett™s taboo search), BE397 (Borgatti and Everett™s genetic algorithm) and ROB00 (Roberts™ correspondence analysis of normalized data).  These analyses are all placed at a single point at the upper right of the figure.   Other analyses that produced results that were quite close to that ideal pattern are clustered closely around that point.  For example, BBA75 and NEW01 produced the same pattern with only one exception.  They both assigned woman 8 to the second group.  FR292 assigned both women 8 and 9 to the second group.  DGG41 put woman 9 in both groups.  And FW193 put woman 16 in both.  Finally, S&F99 deviated only by failing to include woman 16 in either group.  Thus, in addition to the six ﬁperfectﬂ partitionings, six additional procedures came very close to the ideal and are clustered in the region surrounding these ﬁperfectﬂ solutions.  This clustering is the key.  It shows a clear consensus around the 1-9, 10-18 division.  This consensus is really remarkable in view of the immense differences among the analytic procedures used. Figure 16 re-labels all the points such that their departure from the ﬁperfectﬂ partitioning is displayed.  Note that the 1-9, 10-18 partition is labeled ﬁPERFECT.ﬂ  Note also that departures from that ideal are generally placed farther from the PERFECT point as the degree of their departure grows.  They are, moreover, segregated in terms of the kinds of departure they embody.  All the points that fall on the left of the vertical axis involve methods that failed to assign two or more of the women to groups.  Overall, those points are arranged in such a way that those falling further to the left are those that are missing more women.  Immediately to the right of the vertical, are the methods that located women in the ﬁwrongﬂ group.  And their height indicates the number of women classified in ﬁerror.ﬂ  All the way to the right are the methods that assigned women to both groups.  And, to the degree that they assigned more women in that way, they are farther to the right.  Finally, it should be noted that there are two analyses that assigned women to multiple groups on the left.  But it is clear from their placement that this analysis was more responsive to their inability to place women in groups than it was to their dual assignments. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 32 Figure 16.  Axes 2 and 3 of the Matches Labeled by Structural Form Overall, then, it is clear that there was a consensus about assigning women to groups.  Six methods agreed, and most of the others departed relatively little from that agreed-upon pattern.   6.2 Positions in Groups In assigning positions to individuals, I used two, quite different, scaling techniques.  One was based on a dominance model.  For each pair of women A and B, the model placed A closer to the core than B, if and only if more procedures placed A closer to the core than B.  The other was probability-based.  It placed A closer to the core than B with some probability based on the proportion of procedures that placed A closer to the core than B. Despite their differences, the results of these two methods turned out to be almost identical.  They were similar enough that either could be taken as providing something very close to an optimum assignment of individuals to positions.  The effectiveness of each of the analytic procedures was evaluated by their monotone correlations with these optima.  The results were very similar; the correlation between the gammas produced by the dominance model and those produced by the probability model was .983.  So, even with without consensus among the procedures, I was able to find the agreed-upon orderŠcore to peripheryŠand to evaluate the ability of each method to uncover that order.     Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 336.3 A Final Word As a whole I believe that this meta-analysis has been productive.  As far as assigning women to groups was concerned, the results were dramatic.  When it came to assigning women to positions, the results were less dramatic, but still fairly convincing.  We end, then, with four strong results:  (1) We have a consensual partitioning of women into groups.  (2) We have a consensual assignment of women into core and peripheral positions.  (3) We have a rating of the methods in terms of their competence in assigning women to groups.  And (4) we have a rating of the methods in terms of their ordinal correlations with the standard positional assignments.  I would like to wind up with two additional comparisons of the analytic procedures examined here.  These final comparisons will be restricted to the published analyses of the DGG data; they will not include the unpublished analyses involving my use of Osbourn™s VERI or the analysis Newman ran at my request.   The first comparison is based on time.  Figure 17 shows the average competence ratings of procedures published at various points of time.  The data in Figure 17 show an interesting secular trend.  There has been a slow but consistent trend toward increasing competence through time.   Thus, the overall tendency in published reports using the DGG data is clearly in the direction of greater competence. In addition, it is possible to make some generalizations about the adequacy of the various kinds of analytic procedures that have been used to find groups and positions using the DGG data.  Six procedures (BGR74, BCH78, DOR79, E&B93, FW193 and FW293) all took essentially algebraic approaches.  Five (P&C72, FR193, FR293, BE197 and BE297) used various algorithms to search for an optimal partition.  Three analyses (BBA75, BCH91 and ROB00) employed various versions of singular value decomposition.  Two (DGG41 and HOM50) were based simply on the authors™ intuititions.  And three developed unique approaches.  One (FRE92) looked at a kind of transitivity.  A second (BE197) dealt with overlapping bicliques.  And the third (S&F99) developed a statistical model. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 34 Figure 17.  Competences of the Procedures Over Time All in all, then, we have used seven distinct classes of procedures in analyzing the DGG data.  Figure 18 shows the relative success of each class in terms of its average competence.  Figure 18.  Average Competences of the Various Classes of Procedures A number of features of Figure 17 are worth noting.  First, the statistical model of the DGG data developed by Skvoretz and Faust was the winner.  It won despite the fact that, unlike most of the other procedures, it was not explicitly designed to uncover groups.  Group structure emerged as a sort of bi-product of a broader structural analysis.  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 35The statistical model is not, however, the undisputed champion.  It is followed so closely by the three singular value decomposition analyses, that it has to share the crown with them.  And the five partitioning programs are right up there near the top.   There seems to be a step between all those procedures and the next three.  Clearly transitivity, bicliques and the algebra-based approaches did not do as well.  And, finally, the intuitive judgments fall at the bottom.   In part that position is due to the vagaries of Homans™ report, but DGG themselves did very little better.  This result is particularly interesting given the fact that Davis, Gardner and Gardner™s interpretation of their own data is often taken as privileged.  The assumption has been that because they had a huge amount of ethnographic experience in the community, DGG had an edgeŠthey somehow knew the ﬁtrueﬂ group structure.  But, particularly in the light of the present results, there is no compelling reason to award DGG any special exalted status vis-à-vis their ability to assign individuals to groups.  Indeed, their very intimacy with these 18 women might have led to various kinds of biased judgments.   References Batchelder, W. H. and N. J. Bershad    1979 The statistical analysis of a Thurstonian model for rating chess              players. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 19:39Œ60.  
Batchelder, W. H., N. J. Bershad and R. S. Simpson 1992 Dynamic paired-comparison scaling. Journal of Mathematical            Psychology, 36:185Œ212.  
Batchelder, W. H. and A. K. Romney  1986 The statistical analysis of a general Condorcet model for dichotomous            choice situations. In B. Grofman and G. Owen (Eds.) Information            Pooling and Group Decision Making. Greenwich, Connecticut: JAI            Press, Inc.  
Batchelder, W. H. and A. K. Romney    1988  Test theory without an answer key. Psychometrika 53:71-92.  
Batchelder, W. H. and A. K. Romney  1989 New results in test theory without an answer key. In E. Roskam (Ed.)            Advances in Mathematical Psychology Vol. II. Heidelberg New            York: Springer Verlag.  
Birkhoff, G.    1940  Lattice theory. New York: American Mathematical Society.  
Bonacich, P. 1978 Using boolean algebra to analyze overlapping memberships.  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 36          Sociological Methodology 101-115.  
Bonacich, P. 1990 Simultaneous group and individual centralities.  Social Networks            13:155-168.  
Borgatti, S. P. and M. G. Everett   1997  Network analysis of 2-mode data. Social Networks 19:243-269.  
Borgatti, S. P., M. G. Everett and L. C. Freeman 1991 UCINET IV, Version 1.0. Reference Manual. Columbia, SC:            Analytic Technologies.  Breiger, R. L.   1974  The duality of persons and groups. Social Forces 53:181-190.  
Breiger, R. L., S. A. Boorman and P. Arabie 1975 An algorithm for clustering relational data, with applications to social            network analysis and comparison to multidimensional scaling.            Journal of Mathematical Psychology 12:328-383.  
Cooley, C. H.    1909  Social Organization. New York: C. Scribner©s sons.   
Davis, A., B. B. Gardner and M. R. Gardner   1941  Deep South. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.  
Davis, A. and W. L. Warner  1939 A comparative study of American caste.  In Race Relations and the            Race Problem. (Ed.) E. T. Thompson.  Durham: Duke University            Press.  
Deming, W. E. and F. F. Stephan  1940 On a least squares adjustment of a sampled frequency table when the            expected marginal totals are known.  Annals of Mathematical            Statistics  11:427-444.  
Doreian, P. 1979 On the delineation of small group structure.  In H. C. Hudson, ed.            Classifying Social Data, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.  
Durkheim, É.    [1893] 1933  The division of labor in society. Translated by G. Simpson.               New York: Free Press.   Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 37Everett, M. G. and S. P. Borgatti 1992 An Extension of regular colouring of graphs to digraphs, networks            and hypergraphs. Social Networks 15:237-254.  
Forsyth, E. and L. Katz  1946 A matrix approach to the analysis of sociometric data. Sociometry 9:            340-347.  
Freeman, L. C. 1993 On the sociological concept of "group": a empirical test of two    models. American Journal of Sociology 98:152-166.  
Freeman, L. C. 1994 Finding groups with a simple genetic algorithm. Journal of               Mathematical Sociology 17:227-241.  
Freeman, L. C. 1997 Uncovering organizational hierarchies.  Computational and            Mathematical Organization Theory 3:5-18  
Freeman, L. C. and V. Duquenne 1993 A note on regular colorings of two mode data. Social Networks            15:437-442.  Freeman, L. C. and D. R. White 1994 Using Galois lattices to represent network data. In Sociological            Methodology 1993. P. Marsden, ed.  Pp. 127-146. Cambridge, MA:            Blackwell.  
Garner, W. R. and W. J. McGill 1956 The relations between information and variance analyses.            Psychometrika 21: 219-228.  
Glover, F.    1989  Tabu search.-- Part 1. ORSA Journal on Computing 1: 190-206.  
Goodman, L. A.  1995 A single general method for the analysis of cross-classified data:            Reconciliation and synthesis of some methods of Pearson, Yule, and            Fisher, and also some methods of correspondence analysis and            association analysis.  Journal of the American Statistical Association            91: 408-428.  
Gower, J.C.  1976 The Analysis of asymmetry and orthoganality. In J. Barra, F. Brodeau  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 38          and G. Romier (Eds.), Recent Developments in Statistics, North            Holland, Amsterdam.  
Granovetter, M. 1973 The strength of weak ties. American Journal of Sociology 81: 1287-           1303.  
Holland, J. H.  1962 Outline for a logical theory of adaptive systems. Journal of the ACM,            9:297-314.  Homans, G. C.   1950   The Human Group. New York: Harcourt, Brace and Company.  
Jameson, K. A., M. C. Appleby and L. C. Freeman  1998 Finding an appropriate order for a hierarchy based on probabilistic            dominance. Animal Behaviour 57:991-998.  
Johnson, S. C.   1967  Hierarchical clustering schemes. Psychometrika 32:241-254.  
Koch, G. G. and L. M. LaVange   1991  An overview of statistical issues and methods of meta-analysis              Journal of Biopharmaceutical Statistics 1:103-120  
Luce, R. D., and A. Perry 1949 A method of matrix analysis of group structure," Psychometrika,            14:95-116.  
Mosteller, F.  1968 Association and estimation in contingency tables. Journal of the            American Statistical Association 63: 1-28.  
Newman, M. 2001 The structure of scientific collaboration networks. Proceedings of the            National Academy of Science 98:404-409.  
Osbourn, G. C.  1999 Clustering, pattern recognition and augmentation of data visualization            using VERI algorithm. Invited talk, American Statistical Society            Meeting.  
Phillips, D. P. and R. H. Conviser 1972 Measuring the structure and boundary properties of groups: Some            uses of information theory. Sociometry 35:235-254. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 39 
Richards, W. and A. Seary  1996 Introduction to eigen analysis of networks. Paper presented at the            INSNA Sunbelt Meeting, San Diego.            http://www.sfu.ca/~richards/Pages/wdr97.htm  
Roberts, J. M. Jr. 2000 Correspondence analysis of two-mode networks.  Social Networks            22:65-72.  
Roethlisberger, F. J. and W. J. Dickson 1939 Management and the Worker: An Account of a Research Program            Conducted by the Western Electric Company, Hawthorne Works,            Chicago.  Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.   
Sailer, L. D., and S. J. C. Gaulin  1984 Proximity, sociality and observation: the definition of              social groups. American Anthropologist, 86, 91-98.  
Shanon, C. E.  1963 The mathematical theory of communication.  In C. E. Shannon and            W. Weaver, The Mathematical Theory of Communication. Urbana:             University of Illinois Press.  
Skvoretz, J. and K. Faust 1999 Logit models for affiliation networks. Sociological Methodology            29:253-280.  
Spencer, H.    1895-97  The Principles of Sociology. 3d ed., New York: D. Appleton.   
Thurstone, L. L.    1927  A law of comparative judgment. Psychological Review 34:273-286.  
Tönnies, F.   [1855] 1936  Fundamental Concepts of Sociology (Gemeinschaft und              gesellschaft). Translated and supplemented by C. P. Loomis. New              York:  American Book Company.  
Warner, M.  1987 W. Lloyd Warner: Social Anthropologist. New York: Publishing            Center for Cultural Resources.  
Wasserman, S. and P. Pattison  1997 Logit models and logistic regressions for social networks: I. An            introduction to Markov graphs and p*.  Psychometrika, 60:401-426. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 1Autonomy vs. Equivalence Within Market Network Structure?  Harrison White --Notes,  November 2002  Results from three authorsŠBurt, Podolny, and WhiteŠ will be melded, yielding surprising answers to this title question.   PART I.  SETUP  
Structural Holes proposes formulae for direct and indirect constraints, and back-constraints, upon dickering of ego with all alters in ego's observed network.  With dollar volume of transaction as tie strength, Ron Burt adapts these principled formulae for log regression fitting across the 500 or so four-digit SIC markets in the 1970s American economy.  The constraints are gathered into an overall measure of structural autonomyŠStrautŠand entrepreneurial success is measured by net income to ego market.  His Figure 2.8 illustrates the worst, nightmare context for ego.  
Podolny theorizes the conditions in which single producers (in a finance market) will seek status in this market of theirs versus when instead they will dicker à la BurtŠaround their alters' anxiety of being constrained versus ego's uncertainty in choosing a right offer.  Figure P is his 2x2.  
Markets from Networks predicts emergence of a ranked set of producers as a market to subdue their Knightian uncertainty of sales downstream, when their cost schedules stack in the same order as buyers' valuations of their qualities.  The producers must offer equally good tradeoffs of their quality status versus the volume committed to, and then each can find a unique optimum niche along the observed schedule of producer revenue by volume across that market.    So I cannot apply Burt's formulas for Straut, since I fold into a cost schedule all the charges for procurements from diverse markets upstream to the volume y delivered across all buyers downstream by a producer, in return for revenues, call them worth W(y).  Whereas Burt aggregated the producers as a market, even though he can keep the flows from markets upstream separate from flows to markets downstream.  On the other hand I predict, I don't assume as given, the sizes of the ties to ego once these are aggregated into total inflow and outflow to that producer.  And I predict, not just observe, the profitability to each producer.  Both my predictions draw simultaneously on measures from upstream, from downstream, and from the producer set in between, not just from buyer and seller as two ﬁsides.ﬂ  
In Structural Holes, Burt (his Chapter 6) applies an approximate, aggregate version of this White model, alongside his Straut measures, to the industry data and concludes that they fit Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 2together, partially.  I offered a very crude version of Burt's entrepreneur (my Chapter 5), with the same conclusion.    
But the phenomenologies remain unreconciled:  the joining is ad hoc.  Podolny provides the insight to meld them:  That is the goal of this paper.  PART II.  COMBINING INSIGHTS  
Podolny like Burt deals with just two sides and invokes complementary uncertainties of egos and alters.  
Crucial groundwork comes from the earlier Burt book (1983), where he still troubles to keep procurement ties and sales ties distinct instead of symmetrizing the ties as he does in Structural Holes.  From his fittings there (Table 2.5) to the national data:  
(1) The contribution to Straut from market procurement ties with upstream is much less so that Podolny's looking only at alters downstream is a reasonable fit.  
(2) The backlash, against ego Straut, from alters exploiting weak binding among the firms within ego market is as substantial as the exploiting of structural holes downstream by ego market.  So this market is shown to be a distinct operative level of actorŠalbeit untheorized, merely ad hoc insertion, in Burt.  
This justifies calling on Podolny's framing, Figure P.  
Markets from Networks lays out varieties of market not as a 2x2 table but as a two-dimensional MAP:  see the diagram, where the vertical axis parameter, call it v, scales valuation of volume y by downstream over against valuation of y by ego as cost from upstream for volume produced.  The horizontal axis parameter, call it u, analogously is ratio of valuation downstream of distinctive quality of product versus cost upstream required for that level of quality.  The market mechanism runs off a profile of worth W by volume y committed to as choice set by producers.  Feedback from observations by producers and others is the fuel.  The mechanism is sited with appropriately simple descriptions of cost and attraction schedules.  Producers engage in a self-consistent search for optimal niche on a viable schedule.  Predictions of robustness of the profile vary with location in MAP, as do the volumes and profitabilities predicted across any particular set of qualities for producers.  (1) The outcome profile, being an equilibrating between competing variabilities, each local, necessarily is path dependent, which fits well with the Burt vision of dickering a la Straut.  The path index, k, is a single number, which may be plus or minus.  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 3(2) Only for one median path, indexed by k = 0, can closed formulae replace messy numerical algorithms, guiding qualitative exploration.  (3)  In this special case k = 0, each producer has the same profitability percentage (though not revenue), which also makes for easy comparison with Burt's treatment only of aggregate markets.  
Four regions of MAP are demarcated by the line at v = 1 together with the diagonal for v = u.  So just these two parameters, v and u, tell much about outcomes even without knowing the producers particular locations on quality, effected through different investments for facilities.  Descriptors for the general sort of market found in each region are entered in MAP.  
Now we can apply to Podolny for guidance. Alter uncertaintyŠthat is downstream uneasiness about their deal-making, is surely going to increase with the extent of their being more eager for given quality than producers are to supply it at that volume.  Thus the diagonal should be the split line with alter uncertainty high on the lower diagonal region.  So Podolny would have (Hypothesis 1) a rank based market form such as W(y) activated down and right from the diagonal.  
Ego uncertaintyŠthat is producers' concerns about how best to handle their businessŠsurely will be exacerbated when v is greater than unity which means that downstream eagerness for volume is not conveniently kept in check by cost-based reluctance of producers.  So Podolny would have (Hypothesis 2) ad hoc Burt maneuvering take over markets in contexts in the region above the horizontal line v = 1.  
Presto, we replicate the topology of Poldolny's insightful 2x2, but with changed interpretation of cells:  see the second MAP.    The Low-Low cell Podolny has as pure competition, say wheat markets without much structuring by either rank or maneuver.  But the W(y) feedback rank model has it as the basic ordinary sort of production marketŠand yet exposed also, for path indexed b negative value of k, to dissolution into chaotic maneuver a la Burt.  The lower right cell, High-Low, Podolny argues is premier context for rank market, such as his house roofing. But White locates regional road haulage as prototype there and shows a contradiction between context, which indeed favors rank market, and feedback mechanism, which is prey to cheating by low-quality aspirants for producer slots and thus induces some Burt dickering.  The upper left cell, Low-High, Podolny has as premier context for Burt maneuver. The W(y) feedback model agrees, but with the proviso that for a limited class of paths, a rank market can establish itself, disciplining producers.  
These insights can refine results from Burt, too.  Note the huge scatter in Burt's graphs of market outcomes versus Straut.  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 4According to Burt's results, constraint on alters is heavily increased by perceived extent of joint action by the producer set that they confrontŠBurt uses the conventional Four Leading Firms' share of market as measure.  And Markets from Networks derives how such concentration (using the more general Gini index) will vary with location in MAP.  It is opposite in the bottom half from the top half!:  the sort of result one can expect from non-linear feedback.  More basic still, Burt has the profitability of ego and its four-firm concentration going up together.  Whereas the W(y) model says they vary oppositely, though with opposite polarity for v>1 and v<1.   
I suggest that if markets that do go primarily with W(y) are separated from those that are ﬁcatch as catch canﬂ entrepreneurial, the scatter in Burt's results will lessen because these opposite predictions are segregated out of overall results.  PART III.  A THIRD DIMENSION  
However, the deepest results concern the remaining cell:    
The High-High upper right box maps into the upper right triangle labeled CROWDED:  This is in W(y) terms a viable stable market, and yet also a super-market in outcomes, rather than the unstable market intuited by Podolny with High-Risk Debt as example. Podolny's two hypotheses clash for this cell, whereas the W(y) feedback model shows that the two tendencies can reinforceŠbut only in terms of a further, third dimension to MAP not mentioned earlier.  This third dimension both explicates the CROWDED triangle of MAP and thus the High-High cell for Podolny. And at the same time it rescues a contribution of Burt's from his own discard pile.  
The third dimension, labeled x, measures aggregate impacts on valuations by buyers downstream of the ego market from their awareness of other markets lying cross-stream.  Both the markets upstream from a given market and the markets downstream are reflected in the MAP dimensions u and v. There are, besides, maybe hundreds of markets with no discernible influence, direct or indirect, on the given one.  But there usually are a number of others which are to some extent structurally equivalent to the given one:  that is have a somewhat similar pattern of what producers and/or markets they buy from and sell toŠcall them ﬁcross-stream.ﬂ  Cross-stream markets are a weakened form of the structural equivalence exhibited by the set of producer firms being ranked by quality within the given market.  
So it makes sense to call x a measure of generalized substitutability. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 5 
Now comes my claim:  This x substitutability has impact upon W(y) market size analogous to the impact of secondary structural holes upon Straut in Burt's theory of markets.    Burt is ingenious and persistent in formulating this leveraging upon dickering through intermediary ties:  see Figure 2.8 and associated formulae. Yet Burt largely discards such impacts on several grounds:  
It is hard to trace networks completely enough to permit measurement, except for government generated censuses of ties: in the chapters where Burt treats individual managers rather than markets of firms, Burt could not come up with any of the needed data.  
It is not clear conceptually how to model impact of secondary structural holes upon his dependent variable of profitability.  
So prediction from W(y) of the impact of substitutability x upon market size can suggest how much Burt is missing by discarding secondary holes.  
After all, the really extraordinary outcome is that W(y) markets can ever be stable in the High-High cell, the CROWDED triangle in MAP.  The prediction is that markets in this region are stabilized only through an appreciable degree of substitutability x induced by cross-stream markets.  In other words, my challenge to Podolnys' characterization of High-High context comes only through effects of cross-stream markets, analogous to Burt's second-order structural holes.  Once again this shows how a feedback model can deepen and enrich insights.  Substitutability is being included in only a crude and approximate way, as seen by use of just one parameter as sufficient descriptor.  The benefit is that explicit prediction formulae can be derived.  This is a complex and multi-stage procedure, which is laid out fully in my ISERP Working Paper 02-02, available on the Web from the Columbia site.  
There are two final surprising predictions.  (1) For most of the contexts laid out as points in the parameter space MAP, as the substitutability x from cross-stream markets grows, the aggregate size of the W(y) market (assuming it is reachable by a viable path and so can exist) actually increases!!    
But the quantitative impact generally is slight, which is conformable with Burt's discard.  (2) There is however an exception for much of the High-High cell, that is, for CROWDED markets.  Figure 8 from my Working Paper 02-92 shows the two possible curves for aggregate Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 6market size (sum of revenues across producers) versus substitutability x.  The upper, exceptional curve applies within MAP in and only in a central cone within High-High, CROWDED region.  In this cone the aggregate market size decreases as substitutability increases, just as one might intuit from the siphoning away by the cross-stream markets.  But surprise #1 above shows that the intuition is not generally reliable for such complex feedback situations.  
Putting all this together, the larger surprise is that the most distinctive, profitable and possibly common marketŠespecially, as it turns out, for new product marketsŠis sustainable only through the hidden support of cross-stream markets, Burt's second order holes.  That is, the CROWDED markets (analyzed at length in Chapters 6 and 7 of White, 1992) exist by sufferance, predictable sufferance, of second order maneuvering.  
There is much else to explicate. Besides k, there is another historical descriptor (tau) built into the W(y) model, and each should impact on predictions about dickering versus market profile discipline, plus there are other extensions and generalization, including possible to Small World analyses.  There are hosts of other directions to explore in Burt's writings and in a cascade of articles by Podolny and co-workers.  And each of us point to still other authors contributing to the emerging network based sociology of markets and firms.    References  
Burt, Ronald S.  1992.  Structural Holes:  The Social Structure of Competition.  Cambridge: Harvard University Press.  Podolny, Joel M.  2001.  "Networks as the Pipes and Prisms of the Markets."  American Journal of Sociology. White, Harrison C.  2002. Markets from Networks.  Princeton:  Princeton University Press. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 7 Conditions Limiting i™s Entrepreneurial Negotiation in the Relationship with j(1)P ij is high  (2)Pjq arc high  (3) ( )j is high  (4)Oj is low  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 8HIGH LOW 


˘ˇˆ


˘˙˝ˆˆ˛˘˚˘˜LOW    HIGH  ˝Figure P. Podolny 2x2 table Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 9sensitivity to quality, upstream/down  u sensitivity to quality, upstream/down MAP with varieties of markets Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 10ego uncertainty  high       alter uncertainty high MAP with Podolny gradients in uncertainty Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 11Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Social Influence Network Theory: Toward a Science of Strategic Modification ofInterpersonal Influence Systems1Noah E. FriedkinDepartment of SociologyUniversity of California, Santa BarbaraAbstractSocial influence network theory is a mathematical formalization of the process of interpersonal influencethat occurs in groups, affects persons™ attitudes and opinions on issues, and produces interpersonal
agreements, including group consensus, from an initial state of disagreement. The theory also may be
employed to predict the consequences of particular modifications of a social influence system. A
description of social influence network theory is presented. Using network data from a field study of a
policy group, simulated modifications of an influence system and the consequences of these
modifications are described. The illustration introduces a large subject: the development of a scientific
basis for constructing and modifying the social structures of groups so that the expected outcomes of the
influence system of a group will be close to desirable optimal outcomes for the group with some pre-
specified degree of reliability. Toward the development of such a science and within the framework of
social influence network theory, some key lines of research are outlined that are related to the operation
and structural dynamics of interpersonal influence networks and that, in my view, would advance the
development of a science concerned with the strategic modification of interpersonal influence systems.                                                1 Direct all correspondence to Professor Noah E. Friedkin, Department of Sociology, University ofCalifornia, Santa Barbara, CA 93106. Email: friedkin@soc.ucsb.edu.URL: http://www.soc.ucsb.edu/faculty/friedkin/Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.21.1 INTRODUCTIONIn this paper I briefly describe a formal theory of the formation of attitudes and opinions, including theproduction of consensus, in a network of interpersonal influences. This theory has been advanced in
successive generalizations from the 1950s to the present by social psychologists and mathematicians
concerned with developing a formal model of how consensus is produced in groups through
interpersonal interactions (DeGroot 1974; French 1956; Friedkin and Johnsen 1990; 1999; Harary1959). The theory incorporates an assumption on which there has been a remarkable convergence ofindependent theoretical work: that persons integrate conflicting attitudes and opinions as if they wereutilizing a ﬁcognitive algebraﬂ of weighted averaging (Anderson 1981). The integration is triggered bythe display of differences of opinion and the susceptibility of persons to interpersonal influences (inessence, a social comparison trigger) in which the pursuit of  ﬁcorrectﬂ or ﬁsatisficingﬂ positions on an
issue takes into account the current positions of others on the issue.  Persons™ efforts to integrate
discrepant influences and to form socially validated positions on issues often occur in a structural
context, that is, in a more or less complexly configured network of interpersonal influences. This
network has profound effects on the course of the opinion change process and the revised positions that
persons may settle on.  The content of persons™ equilibrium positions on an issue, the efficiency with
which this content is produced, and the relative net influence of each group member on others depend
on the structure of the influence network in the group. Social influence network theory describes how a
network of interpersonal influence enters into the process of interpersonal influence on attitudes and
opinions in a group, and it allows an analysis of the way in which the structure of the influence network
of the group has shaped individual and group-level outcomes.Social influence network theory offers a distinctly sociological perspective on the attitude andopinion change process; it is a realization of a structural social psychology that was at the core of socialpsychological work in psychology in the 1950s and 1960s, during the flowering of the group dynamicsfield, but that currently is not being addressed by the more cognitively-oriented generation of
psychologists.  Festinger, French, Newcomb, and Cartwright, among other founding members of
modern social psychology, were social network analysts who sought to build a theoretical foundationfor social psychology in which network structures figured prominently; these social psychologistsunderstood the potential importance of social networks in the development of a science of group
dynamics but their agenda was derailed by the cognitive revolution in psychology. Social network
analysis has grown rapidly since the 1970s, especially in sociology and anthropology and, most recently,
in schools of business. The line of work on social influence network theory that is the focus of the
present paper is a continuation of the classical agenda of the group dynamics field to understand the
mechanisms and structures entailed in the process of attitude and opinion change and consensus
production in groups.The present paper is a first effort to bring social influence network theory to bear on thedevelopment of a scientific basis for constructing and modifying the social structures of groups so thatthe expected outcomes of the influence system of a group can be made close to desirable optimal
outcomes for the group with some pre-specified degree of reliability.  My treatment is schematic and
introductory.  First, I briefly describe social influence network theory. Second, using network data from
a field study of a policy group, I describe several simulated modifications of an influence system and theDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3consequences of these modifications.  Third, within the framework of social influence network theory,lines of research are outlined that are related to the operation and structural dynamics of interpersonal
influence networks and that, in my view, would advance the development of a science concerned with
the strategic modification of interpersonal influence systems.1.2 SOCIAL INFLUENCE NETWORK THEORYThere are several lines of work in social psychology on so-called ﬁcombinatorialﬂ theories of consensusformation and group decision-making that focus on how agreements are formed in groups when there is
an initial state of disagreement on an issue (Davis 1973; Friedkin and Johnsen 1990; 1999; Latane1981; 1996; Laughlin 1980; Stasser, Kerr, and Davis 1989; Witte and Davis 1996).  My colleague,Eugene Johnsen, and I have developed one of these combinatorial theoriesŠsocial influence networktheory  (Friedkin 1991; 1998; 1999; Friedkin and Johnsen 1990; 1997; 1999).Social influence network theory includes as special cases French™s formal theory of social power(French 1956; Harary 1959) and DeGroot™s consensus formation model (Berger 1981; Chatterjee andSeneta 1977; DeGroot 1974). The theory has close formal relationships with the rational choice modelof group decision making proposed by Lehrer and Wagner (Lehrer and Wagner 1981; Wagner 1982;1978), the social decision scheme model for quantitative judgments proposed by Davis (1996),  and theinformation integration model of group decision making proposed by Graesser (1991). The theory isformally consistent with Anderson™s weighted averaging model of information integration (Anderson1981; Anderson 1991; Anderson and Graesser 1976).  It also has a close formal relationship with aninterdisciplinary tradition in statistics that includes work in geography, political science, and sociology onmodels of the interdependence of persons and spatial units (Anselin 1988; Doreian 1981; Duncan andDuncan 1978; Duncan, Haller, and Portes 1968; Erbring and Young 1979; Friedkin 1990; Marsdenand Friedkin 1994; Ord 1975).Social influence network theory describes an influence process in a group of N persons in whichthe members™ attitudes and opinions on an issue change as they revise their positions by takingweighted averages of the influential positions other members:yawywywyayitiititiNNtii+=++++-1112211bgbgbgbgbgejbg...(1)for t=12,,K and each of the N persons in the group, iN=12,,...,.  The opinions of persons at time tare yyyttNt12bgbgbg,,..., and their initial opinions areyyyiN1211bgbgbg,,...,.  The set of influences of the groupmembers on person i is wwwiiiN12,,,Klq, where 01££wij, and wijj=å1.  The susceptibility ofperson i to the influence of others is ai, where 01££ai and awiii=-1. Thus, a person™ssusceptibility is equated to the aggregate weight of the interpersonal influences on him or her  (i.e.,awiijji=¹å). Social influence network theory rests on a model of how individuals cognitively integrateconflicting opinions, Eqn. (1), but the outcome of this process depends on the social structure in whichthe process occurs. This social structure consists of the set of members™ initial positions, interpersonalinfluences, and susceptibilities to influence.In a group of N persons, the system of equations described by Eqn. (1) can be represented asyAWyIAy()()()tt+=+-11bg(2)Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4for t=12,,,Kwhere y()t is a N´1 vector of persons™ opinions on an issue at time t, W=wij is aNN´ matrix of interpersonal influences, and A=diagaaaN12,,,Lbg is a NN´ diagonal matrix ofpersons™ susceptibilities to interpersonal influence on the issue.Under suitable conditions, this process transforms persons™ initial opinions into a set of equilibriumopinions:yVy()()¥=1(3)where V=vij is a matrix of reduced-form coefficients, describing the total or net interpersonal effectsthat transform the initial opinions into equilibrium opinions. The coefficients in V are nonnegative01££vijch and each row of V sums to unity vijjå=1ej. Hence, vij gives the relative weight of theinitial opinion of person j in determining the final opinion of person i for all i and j.  If  I-AW isnonsingular, then from Eqn. (2)  VIAWIA=---bgbg1.  More generally, sinceVAWAWIAttkktbgbgbgbg=+LNMOQP-=-å01, for t=12,,K, V can be estimated numerically for a sufficientlylarge t when limtt®¥Vbg exists.All equilibrium opinions will be in range of the group members™ initial opinions. Equilibrium opinionsmay settle on the mean of group members™ initial opinions; they may settle on a compromise opinion thatdiffers from the mean of initial opinions; they may settle on an initial opinion of a group member; or they
may settle on altered opinions that do not form a consensus. When a consensus is formed in a group, Vwill commonly have the form of a stratification of individual contributions,V=LNMMMMOQPPPPvvvvvvvvvNNNNNN112211221122LLMMMML,in which each person™s initial opinion makes a particular relative contribution to the emergent consensus.The production of consensus is a special case of a larger domain of group outcomes encompassed bysocial influence network theory, in which stable patterns of disagreements may be formed. Thus, thetheory satisfies Horowitz™s criterion that "any serious theory of agreements and decisions must at the
same time be a theory of disagreements and the conditions under which decisions cannot be reached"
(1962, p. 182).   Abelson (1964) was frustrated to find that consensus was an inevitable outcome in the broadclass of mathematical models that he examined, and he turned to simulation models in order to accountfor equilibrium disagreements. Similarly, the most prominent combinatorial theories in psychology today
either do not deal with an account of disagreement (Davis 1996) or they rely on simulation models(Gigone and Hastie 1996; Latane 1996; Stasser 1988). I believe that it is one of the more usefulprejudices of the scientific community that simulation models should be maintained as a last resort, afteranalytical approaches have been exhausted or appear to be intractable. Thus, I abandoned work on a
simulation model of attitude and opinion change when it became apparent that a simpler mathematical
model would suffice. In this light, an important contribution of social influence network theory is itsDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5demonstration that both consensus and disagreement are consistent with an analytically tractablemathematical model.1.3 ILLUSTRATIVE MODIFICATIONS OF THE INFLUENCE SYSTEM OF APOLICY GROUPI now briefly report some findings from a study of school board policy groups that will illustrate one wayin which influence systems may be modified to change the systems™ outcomes (Friedkin Forthcoming).In this application, the formal model described by Eqn. (1) was adapted for an account of a binaryopinionŠthe preferences of school board policy group members for a flat or compensatory allocationof a school district™s resources to schools that differ in the average academic achievement of the
students. The flat preference stipulates that schools should receive resources proportionate to the
number of students in a school regardless of their average academic performance. The compensatory
preference stipulates that schools with low average academic performance should receive more
resources than some schools with a higher average performance. Relational, attitudinal and demographic
data were collected on five policy groups. In each group,  the membership was defined on the basis of a
snowball sampling procedure that included all persons (school board members, school district
personnel, and community members) who were reported to be influential in school board decisions
during the year preceding our inquiry. Among the 267 policy group members who were surveyed, the
sample was roughly evenly split between persons who preferred a compensatory or a flat allocation
pattern; there was virtual consensus that high performance schools should not be over-rewarded at the
expense of low performance schools.With data on social network relations (discussion, advice, friendship ties) occurring among thepolicy group members, I employed a technique described in Friedkin (1998) to obtain a measure of theinfluence network, W. Given a measure of the influence network and equilibrium opinions, Y¥bg,ﬁbackwardﬂ estimates were obtained for the unobserved initial resource allocation preferences of thegroup members, Y1bg.  More precisely, estimates of the unobserved preferences were obtained for thesmall subgroup of members whose opinions were influential in determining equilibrium preferences.  Thepreferences of non-influential members cannot be estimated with this approach and, in any case, are
irrelevant to an understanding of group outcomes. The core subgroup of influentials in each of the policy
groups was comprised mainly of key central office staff members in the school district (the
superintendent and other high-level school district administrators), and among these administrators there
was disagreement on the preferred resource allocation pattern for the district. The interpersonal
influences of the core members were projected throughout the network to the other members, including
most of the school board members, and the cross-pressures from the disagreement among theinfluentials produced, in each group, a distribution of resource allocation preferences that was roughlyevenly split between a flat and compensatory preference.I was able to show with a simulation that the equilibrium distribution of allocation preferences issusceptible to substantial modification; i.e., that a change in the initial preference of a core influentialcould produce a substantial shift in the equilibrium distribution of group members™ resource allocation
preferences; see Table 1.  The simulated modifications were of two sorts: (a) a neutralization of a
person™s preference in which the person became indifferent rather than positive or negative about a flator compensatory pattern,  and (b) a reversal of preference in which a person switched positions fromDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6positive to negative, or vice versa. Of course, reversals of positions had stronger impacts thanneutralizations, but it is surprising how much of an impact neutralization sometimes had on theequilibrium distribution.Table 1. Effects of a Simulated Change in the Estimated Initial Position of Each Core Member on the Expected Proportion of theGroup Favoring the Flat (F) versus Compensatory (C) Allocation at EquilibriumCore Member™sID # & RoleEstimatedInitialPositionObservedEquilibriumPositionEffect of aNeutralization ofID™s Position on theDistribution of IssuePositionsEffect of aSwitch ofID™s Position on theDistribution of IssuePositions                              % FlatGroup A (61% Flat)  4 School Board  -7.28C768515 Central Office  -5.76C829229 Central Office-3.60C758421 Central Office   5.82F392134 Central Office 10.25F21  640 Community   7.10F5344Group B (46% Flat)  4 Central Office  -2.00C525815 Central Office  -2.66C576741 Central Office  -2.22C556346 Central Office  -1.92C546149 Central Office  -2.32C525860 Principal -11.39C576717 Central Office  12.98F10  2Group C (54% Flat)32 Central Office-132.28C939536 Central Office  -5.78C789050 School Board  -7.21C698051 Central Office -23.04C939539 Central Office  45.10F  1  043 Principal   8.55F4231Group D (67% Flat)25 Central Office  -3.79C869549 Central Office-267.44C9898  8 Central Office   1.18F666426 Central Office  10.35F24  858 School Board  26.95F  3  2Group E (49% Flat)  9 School Board  -7.97C586520 Central Office  -3.67C627322 Central Office -23.91C929551 Central Office  -2.50C596866 Principal  -3.51C606919 Central Office   3.00F403165 Community  44.51F  3  2Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.71.4 TOWARD A SCIENCE OF STRATEGIC MODIFICATION OF INTERPERSONALINFLUENCE SYSTEMSA science of strategic modifications of influence systems requires clarity on desirable goals, a technologyfor producing structural modifications, an understanding of the possible multiple unintended effects of a
modification on the relevant structure of the situation, and a confident grasp on the theoretical
underpinnings of the dynamic features of the influence system. I now turn to a discussion of various
outcomes of influence systems that might be optimized, the modifications of influence systems that might
be feasible, key problems that need to be addressed, and lines of research that might be developed on
these key problems.1.4.1 Manipulatable OutcomesSome influence networks are not consistent with the production of consensus, or even with theproduction of a degree of agreement (e.g., a majority opinion) that is sufficient to allow a collective
decision. Strategic modifications of an influence system can be designed that will produce a consensus
across a variety of issues, or at least a sufficient amount of agreement to allow decisions to be made.Some influence systems will produce consensus with great difficulty over a range of issues thatarise. Holding constant the initial relative positions of group members on issues, the efficiency ofconsensus production in a group depends on the structure of the influence network. Strategic
modifications of an influence structure can be designed that will produce consensus more efficiently
across a variety of issues, or at least with a sufficient degree of efficiency as the circumstances warrant.Some groups reach consensus too quickly, short-circuiting a careful consideration of alternativepositions on an issue. The overly-rapid convergence to agreement has been referred to as groupthink(Janis 1982), and it appears to be associated with centralized influence networks and homogeneousdistributions of initial positions on an issue. Social influence network theory predicts that equilibriumopinions are always in the range of the distribution of initial opinions; hence, some heterogeneity of initial
positions is crucial to a thorough vetting of an issue. In groups that regularly deal with judgmental issues,
for which proper deliberation is important,  strategic modifications of a group™s influence system can be
designed to slow down the process of convergence to consensus and to maximize the degree of initial
diversity of opinion, consistent with a sufficient degree of efficiency.In some groups, issues of control by a person or subgroup are crucial. Control loss inorganizational hierarchies is a ubiquitous  phenomenon that occurs whenever influence is transmittedindirectly from a single authoritative source to a large number of persons via a series of subordinate
authorities. We have recently analyzed this phenomenon from the perspective of social influence
network theory and shown how control loss may be mitigated by the addition of lateral lines of influence
among subordinates (Friedkin and Johnsen 2002).   The general point is that strategic modifications ofan influence structure can be designed that will produce a  consensus that is more closely representativeof the initial preferences of authoritative sources.The influence system of a group may be made more robust in the sense that its outcomes are lesssensitive to minor changes in the influence structure or initial opinions.  For instance, if the goal were todevelop a robust influence system that is insensitive to a switch or neutralization of the position of anyone person, then the strategic problem would be to find a feasible change in the influence structure ofDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8the group that would make its influence system less sensitive to such idiosyncratic opinion changes.  Fora fixed pattern of interpersonal influence among the initial positions of group members, the influencenetwork can be made more robust so that net relative effects of initial positions are less sensitive or
vulnerable to minor perturbations of initial opinion or interpersonal influence.The foregoing outcomes are illustrative of goals that might be viewed as desirable under particularcircumstances. In this brief treatment, I do not believe that I have come close to exhausting the potentialnumber of manipulatable outcomes.1.4.2 Feasible ModificationsModifications of an influence system can be made in different ways. The initial attitudes and opinions,Y1bg, of one or more members may be modified.  The direct interpersonal influences, W, includingsusceptibilities, A,  may be modified, holding the structure of nonzero weights in W constant; that is, thistype of modification would not alter who influences whom, but only the relative weight of some of theseinfluences.  Feasible structural modifications also include changes in the persons who are involved in the
influence network: the addition of one or more new members who have particular configurations of
interpersonal influences or the loss of one or members. Structural modifications also include changes in
the pattern of nonzero interpersonal influences: the addition of new lines of influence, or the loss of
extant lines. In some influence systems, slight changes may have large effects; in other systems, obtaining
a different outcome from the system might require gross restructuring. Any single set of modifications
may affect outcomes other than the particular outcome that is being optimized.1.4.3 Key ProblemsSets of applied and theoretical problems need to be addressed in order to develop a scientific basis formodifying influence systems. I describe three problems.First, there is the practical problem of developing a technology for generating particularmodifications of persons™ initial attitudes or opinions and their susceptibilities and interpersonalinfluences. Some of the structural components of influence systems may be more feasible to manipulate
than others.Second, there is the problem of ascertaining the precision and reliability of the model and measuresthat are employed to predict attitude and opinion changes in interpersonal influence networks.  Modelsand measures need not be precisely accurate, but they should not be seriously misleading; hence we
must have a priori estimates of the reliability and precision of the predictions that the model andmeasures allow.Third, there is the problem of building a model of structural interdependency that can be dovetailedwith social influence network theory. The social structural components of a group may beinterdependent, so that making a change in one component (e.g., an initial position, a susceptibility, an
interpersonal influence) may generate changes in other parts of the structure. If ceteris paribus is not afeasible assumption, then we must have a reliable prediction of the consequences of making changes in astructure for the other relevant parts of the structure.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.91.4.4 Lines of ResearchCertain lines of research are suggested by the problems that I have just sketched. I do not intend tomake a global assessment about what lines of work are most important in the field of social network
analysis. The lines of work that I describe are important only in the context of an application of social
influence network theory to the development of a science of strategic modification of influence systems.First, there should be fundamental work on the mathematical framework of social influencenetwork theory that would test and refine its assumptions about the influence process. My colleague,Eugene Johnsen, and I have published some work on this problem (Friedkin 1999; Friedkin andJohnsen 1999), and we are hoping to continue to do more work on it. Second, methodological workneeds to be done on the measurement of persons™ susceptibilities and interpersonal influences.  Marchand Simon™s work  (March 1955; 1956; Simon 1953) on the measurement of interpersonal influencehas not been pursued, and my call for more work by social psychologists on the measurement ofinfluence networks (Friedkin 1990) has not had much of an effect either. I regard the structuralmeasures of susceptibility and interpersonal influence that I have developed (Friedkin 1998) as thebeginning of what should be a concerted effort to fill an arbitrarily large NN´ matrix with valid andreliable measures of persons™ susceptibilities and interpersonal influences.Third, theoretical and empirical work on structural interdependencies also is important, becausesuch work shows how a change in one component of a social structure generates changes in othercomponents.  There are extant research programs that deal with interdependency but interdependency
is a vague concept that can be defined in different ways, not all of which bear on the application of
social influence network theory.  In terms of the application of social influence network theory, therelevant interdependencies are defined by two constructs Y1bg and W and concern the effects of achange in any part of these constructs on the other parts of either or both of these constructs. Mycollaborator and I have recently completed a project (Friedkin and Johnsen Forthcoming) in which theevolution of an influence network is described in terms of persons™ initial set of sentiments about oneanother as attitudinal objects.  Hence, changes in the initial sentiment structure, Y1bg, may affect theentire structure of W.A research program on an applied science of influence networks cannot be pursued without abroad appreciation of the various types of work that are important in its development. The programincludes applied work on the technology of making modifications, methodological work on thedevelopment of measures of persons™ susceptibilities and interpersonal influences, mathematical work on
model development and refinement, experimental work that probes the merits of basic assumptions, and
field studies that allow an assessment of the reliability and precision of the model™s predictions.      1.5    CONCLUSIONSThe broad line of research that is represented by social influence theory, involving the formal modelingof interpersonal influence processes as they are played out in a social network, is in the classical
tradition of group dynamics that was initiated by Festinger, French, Newcomb, and Cartwright, among
others. It was a tradition, I might add, that was very strongly supported at one time by the Office of
Navel Research (Guetzkow 1951), one of the sponsor™s of the present symposium on social networks.Thus, an applied science of influence of networks is not a new or odd proposal in any sense; it is anDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10attempt to revisit and revitalize a line of work on influence networks in social psychology that has beensidetracked by the cognitive revolution in psychology and by the ﬁcultural turnﬂ in sociology. My hope is
that the present paper will serve as a useful platform for the future development of an applied science of
influence networks that is based on a formal theory of how influence networks operate to shape
persons™ attitudes and opinions.Although the mathematical structure of social influence network theory is simple, the specifiedprocess is consistent with a number of previous independent efforts to model the process ofinterpersonal influence. Indeed, the theoretical convergence on roughly the same mechanism is a
remarkable development in the social sciences.  For this reason, it is important to find out whether or
not this basic mechanism is correct and, if not, whether it can be refined or should be replaced.  The
potential domain of application of social influence network theory is large. My collaborator and I are
presently engaged in developing the theory™s applications to the literature on group dynamics in
psychology and sociology. Some of this work has already appeared (Friedkin 1999; 2001; Friedkinand Johnsen 1999).  The present paper outlines a largely undeveloped potential application in which thetheory would be employed, in an Operations Research mode (Hillier and Lieberman 1995),  to analyzeand control extant social structures.  In the practical world, theoretical tools are rarely entirely correct,but they may be applied with the understanding that the friction and stress generated by unexpected
results provide an opportunity for learning new things about fundamental mechanisms, and that trial-and-
error is usually implicated in the development of any good theory.1.6 REFERENCESAbelson, R.P. 1964. "Mathematical Models of the Distribution of Attitudes under Controversy." Pp.142-160 in Contributions to Mathematical Psychology, edited by N. Frederiksen and H.Gulliksen. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.Anderson, Norman H. 1981. Foundations of Information Integration Theory. New York:Academic Press.Š. 1991. "Contributions to Information Integration Theory." Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.Anderson, Norman H. and Cheryl C. Graesser. 1976. "An Information Integration Analysis of AttitudeChange in Group Discussion." Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 34:210-222.Anselin, Luc. 1988. Spatial Econometrics: Methods and Models. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic.Berger, R.L. 1981. "A Necessary and Sufficient Condition for Reaching a Consensus Using DeGroot'sMethod." Journal of the American Statistical Association 76:415-418.Chatterjee, S.  and E. Seneta. 1977. "Towards Consensus: Some Convergence Theorems on RepeatedAveraging." Journal of Applied Probability 14:89-97.Davis, James H. 1973. "Group Decision and Social Interaction: A Theory of Social Decision Schemes."Psychological Review 80:97-125.Š. 1996. "Group Decision Making and Quantitative Judgments: A Consensus Model." Pp. 35-59 inUnderstanding Group Behavior: Consensual Action by Small Groups, edited by E. H.Witte and J. H. Davis. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11DeGroot, Morris H. 1974. "Reaching a Consensus." Journal of the American Statistical Association69:118-121.Doreian, Patrick. 1981. "Estimating Linear Models with Spatially Distributed Data." Pp. 359-388 inSociological Methodology, edited by S. Leinhardt. San Fransico: Jossey-Bass.Duncan, Beverly and Otis Dudley Duncan. 1978. "Interaction of Spouses with Respect to anUnobserved Attitude." Pp. 291-296 in Sex Typing and Social Roles. New York: Academic.Duncan, Otis Dudley, Archibald O. Haller, and Alejandro Portes. 1968. "Peer Influences onAspirations: A Reinterpretation." American Journal of Sociology 74:119-137.Erbring, Lutz and Alice A. Young. 1979. "Individuals and Social Structure: Contextual Effects asEndogenous Feedback." Sociological Methods & Research 7:396-430.French, John R. P. , Jr. 1956. "A Formal Theory of Social Power." The Psychological Review63:181-194.Friedkin, Noah E. 1990. "Social Networks in Structural Equation Models." Social PsychologyQuarterly 53:316-328.Š. 1991. "Theoretical Foundations for Centrality Measures." American Journal of Sociology96:1478-1504.Š. 1998. A Structural Theory of Social Influence. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Š. 1999. "Choice Shift and Group Polarization." American Sociological Review 64:856-875.Š. 2001. "Norm Formation in Social Influence Networks." Social Networks 23:167-89.Š. Forthcoming. "Influence Networks in School Board Policy Groups: An Analysis of ResourceAllocation Preferences." in Social Organization of Schooling, edited by L. Hedges and B.Schneider. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.Friedkin, Noah E.  and Eugene C. Johnsen. 1990. "Social Influence and Opinions." Journal ofMathematical Sociology 15:193-206.Š. 1997. "Social Positions in Influence Networks." Social Networks 19:209-222.Š. 1999. "Social Influence Networks and Opinion Change." Advances in Group Processes 16:1-29.Š. 2002. "Control Loss and Fayol's Gangplanks." Social Networks 24:395-406.Š. Forthcoming. "Attitude Change, Affect Control, and Expectation States in the Formation of            Influence Networks." Advances in Group Processes.Gigone, Daniel and Reid Hastie. 1996. "The Impact of Information on Group Judgment: A Model andComputer Simulation." Pp. 211-251 in Understanding Group Behavior: Consensual Actionby Small Groups, edited by E. H. Witte and J. H. Davis. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.Graesser, Cheryl C. 1991. "A Social Averaging Theorem for Group Decision Making." Pp. 1-40 inContributions to Information Integration Theory, vol. 2, edited by N. H. Anderson.Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.Guetzkow, Harold. 1951. "Groups, Leadership and Men." Pittsburgh: Carnegie  Press.Harary, Frank. 1959. "A Criterion for Unanimity in French's Theory of Social Power." Pp. 168-182 inStudies in Social Power, edited by D. Cartwright. Ann Arbor, MI: Institute for SocialResearch.Hillier, Frederick S. and Gerald Lieberman, J. 1995. Introduction to Operations Research. NewYork: McGraw-Hill.Horowitz, Irving L. 1962. "Consensus, Conflict and Cooperation: A Sociological Inventory." SocialForces 41:177-188.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12Janis, I. L. 1982. Groupthink: Psychological Studies of Policy Decisions and Fiascoes. Boston:Houghton Mifflin.Latane, Bibb. 1981. "The Psychology of Social Impact." American Psychologist 36:343-356.Š. 1996. "Dynamic Social Impact: The Creation of Culture by Communication." Journal ofCommunication 46:13-25.Laughlin, Patrick R. 1980. "Social Combination Processes of Cooperative Problem-Solving Groups onVerbal Intellective Tasks." Pp. 127-155 in Progress in Social Psychology, edited by M.Fishbein. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.Lehrer, Keith  and Carl Wagner. 1981. Rational Consensus in Science and Society. Dordrecht: D.Reidel.March, James G. 1955. "An Introduction to the Theory and Measurement of Influence." AmericanPolitical Science Review 49:431-451.Š. 1956. "Influence Measurement in Experimental and Semi-Experimental Groups." Sociometry19:260-271.Marsden, Peter V.  and Noah E. Friedkin. 1994. "Network Studies of Social Influence." Pp. 3-25 inAdvances in Social Network Analysis, edited by S. Wasserman and J. Galaskiewicz.Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.Ord, K. 1975. "Estimation Methods for Models of Spatial Interaction." Journal of the AmericanStatistical Association 70:120-126.Simon, Herbert A. 1953. "Notes on the Observation and Measurement of Political Power." Journal ofPolitics 15:500-516.Stasser, Garold. 1988. "Computer Simulation as a Research Tool: The DISCUSS Model of GroupDecision Making." Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 24:393-422.Stasser, Garold, Norbert L. Kerr, and James H. Davis. 1989. "Influence Processes and ConsensusModels in Decision-Making Groups." Pp. 279-326 in Psychology of Group Influence, editedby P. B. Paulus. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum.Wagner, C. 1982. "Allocation, Lehrer Models, and the Consensus of Probabilities." Theory andDecision 14:207-220.Wagner, Carl. 1978. "Consensus through Respect: A Model of Rational Group Decision-Making."Philosophical Studies 34:335-349.Witte, Erich H. and James H. Davis. 1996. "Understanding Group Behavior: Consensual Action bySmall Groups." Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Information and Innovation in a Networked World1 David Lazer John F. Kennedy School of Government  
  The potential for the diffusion of information regarding successful governmental (international, national or subnational) innovation has increased enormously in recent years.  Information from geographically distant locales is often simply a click away, where networks of intergovernmental information exchange are spontaneously emerging. The intertwining of information technology and globalization Œ extends the pool of accessible innovations and lowers the barriers for their diffusion. (Bernstein & Cashore, 2000; Coleman & Grant, 1998; Coleman & Perl, 1999; Evans & Davies, 1999)  This diffusion process has enormous potential for increasing public welfare, by allowing location B to adopt the successful innovation in location A.  There is, however, a potential dark side to the increased diffusion of information.  First, as information diffuses more efficiently, it becomes more of a public good.  As the publicness of information increases, so does the likelihood of free riding.  There is an incentive for each government to allow another government to take the risks of innovation, and then to simply adopt the successful innovations.  Second, in complex policy areas, the diffusion process may be too efficient:  resulting in either premature convergence on a non-optimal policy, or eliminating policy alternatives that while not optimal in the present, might be in the future.   The governance implication is that in the networked world special attention must be given to increase governments™ incentives to experiment and innovate. (Moon & Bretschneider, 1997)  This paper will be organized as follows.  First, it will briefly discuss some distinctive features of the diffusion process in the public sector.  Second, it will analyze the ﬁinformational efficiencyﬂ of different types of networks.  Third, it will examine the potential for informational free riding in the networked world.  Fourth, it will study the paradoxical possibility that the more efficient the system is at spreading information, the less information the system might contain.  Finally, it will discuss the implication for governance:  how does one design a system that is efficient at ﬁspreading the wordﬂ while encouraging experimentation?  
Inter-organizational diffusion of innovation Networked governance is in vogue (e.g., O™Toole 1997, Rhodes 1997).  By ﬁnetworked governanceﬂ I mean a system of interdependent sovereign units.  Thus, one might think of the relationships among nations as networked governance (although typically with the threat of violence removedŠKeohane and Nye 2000;  Slaughter 2000).  One might also think of the relationship among local governments as ﬁnetworkedﬂ, and                                                  1 This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 0131923.  Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.   Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 1even agencies within the federal government as effectively ﬁnetworkedﬂ in that that hierarchy within the federal government intrudes little on the basic independence of federal agenciesŠespecially where it comes to issues around coordination and cooperation with other agencies.   In the US, due to both shared powers within the federal government, and a system of dual sovereignty between state and federal government, the networked nature of government has been an accepted feature of governance since the founding of the republic (although not with that vocabulary).  As we move into the 21st century there is an increased awareness that the networked nature of governance is universalŠin systems that heretofore might have been considered models of hierarchy (e.g., the BritishŠRhodes 1997) or anarchy (i.e., the international system). Elsewhere I have argued that three strands of interdependence are coordinative, cooperative, and informational (Lazer 2001;  Lazer and Mayer-Schoenberger 2002).  For each of these interdependencies there are large literatures which can and should be mapped into the ideas around networked government, and descriptive and normative theories of ﬁnetworked governmentﬂ developed.  In this paper I will develop the informational dimension. The presence of the informational aspect of networked government is that policy generates potential informational externalities.  When a policy actor adopts a policy, that adoption and subsequent experience conveys information to other policy actors.  Some of those choices may be a matter of public record (statutes and regulations) and in principle accessible to all, and other important information will remain private.  Policy actors thus simultaneously suffer from information overload and information deprivation.  Actors need to adopt both network strategiesŠselective attention to help sift the public information and access private informationŠand internal filtering strategies to eliminate the large majority of information that is publicly available. One may therefore usefully construe the universe of policy actors as a set of nodes among which there is a set of evolving connections.  Over these connections flows information and attention about adoption success and failure, and just raw data.  It is the assertion of this paper that this architecture matters, that some architectures are better at facilitating information transfer than others, and that it is necessary to understand how this structure emerges.  The next section of the paper discusses the general processes by which networks emerge, and what the likely consequences for information diffusion in the emergent structure. There exists, of course, a substantial body of literature on the diffusion of policy innovations Œ  and adjacent topics such as policy networks, policy transfer, and policy convergence. (e.g., Abrahamson & Rosenkopf, 1997; Bennett, 1991; Berry, 1994; Berry & Berry, 1992; Coleman, 1994; Coleman & Grant, 1998; Dolowitz, 2000; Dolowitz & Marsh, 1996 & 2000; Evans & Davies, 1999; Gray, 1973 & 1994; Hubner, 1996; Kogut & Zander, 1995; Mintrom, 1997a & 1997b; Mintrom & Vergari, 1998; Robertson, Swan, & Newell, 1996; Savage, 1985; Schenk, Dahm, & Sonje, 1997; Seeliger, 1996; Stone, 2000; Valente, 1995 & 1996; Walker, 1969, Weenig, 1999)  Similarly, there is a large literature on the diffusion of innovations through inter-organizational networks within and between corporations.  (Atkinson & Bierling, 1998; Coleman & Grant, 1998; Dolowitz & Marsh, 2000; Dyer & Nobeoka, 2000; Evans & Davies, 1999; Gupta & Govindarajan, 1991; Kogut & Zander, 1992 & 1995; Liebeskind Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 2et al., 1996; Nooteboom, 1999; Radaelli, 2000; Robertson, Swan, & Newell, 1996; Rom, Peterson, & Scheve, 1998; Seeliger, 1996; Weale et al., 1996)  This literature suggests that a tremendous amount of information flows through inter-organizational networks (typically measured through overlap of corporate boards).  This voluminous research examines the process of diffusion, how innovation evolves as it diffuses, the characteristics of early versus late adopters, etc. (Rogers 1995).  The objective of this paper is to consider what are the generic processes by which the architecture of diffusion of emergesŠthe network;  what the normative implications of different architectures;  and what is distinctive about diffusion among public organizations.  Information diffusion through intergovernmental networks is quite different on certain dimensions from diffusion in the private sector.  First, in the private sector, many innovations are proprietary, thus increasing both the cost of adopting an innovation, as well as the likelihood of the innovation in the first place, since the innovator may extract most of the benefits of that innovation.2  The profit motive also means that the innovator has an incentive to spread information about the innovation.  Second, where innovations are not proprietary, a corporation has an incentive to keep information secret from competitors as long as possible.  The public sector, in contrast, has relatively little incentive to suppress information about successful innovations.  Third, with survival less of an issue, and relative performance more difficult to measure, bureaucratic inertia is likely a greater barrier to adopting successful innovations in the public sector than in the private.   Fourth, many policy makers are likely ﬁproselytizersﬂŠmoved to innovate and to spread the word in order to increase their impact on society.   There is therefore substantial potential for diffusion of successful policy innovations, both intra and internationally.  The question asked here is what is the impact of the shift from local to global informational networks.  The next section examines the role that the structure of the informational network plays in the speed with which information spreads in a system.  
The architecture of the network  First, a few definitions:  A node is a unit which may contain and pass on information.  It may be an individual or an organization.  In this paper, I will largely focus on public sector actors, but at the end will speculate what the implications are for public-private partnerships.  A connection between two nodes means that there is some passing of information between those nodes.  At its broadest definition, it may mean that some actors are just selectively paying attention to other actors (e.g., everyone is paying attention to California™s experience in electricity deregulation).  At its narrowest (and more typical) definition, it means that there is a private exchange of information among a subset (at least two) actors.  An informational network is a set of connections among nodes.  It is useful to distinguish among three kinds of informational networks:  spatial, organizational, and emergent.                                                  2 Although spillovers occur not just in the public sector but in the private as well, despite the protection of intellectual property law.  Baumol (1999) for example, estimates that innovators retain only approximately 10% of the gains from their innovations.   Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 3A spatial network is a network whose dyadic connections are determined by proximity:  each actor speaks exclusively to other actors in its neighborhood.  For example, in figure 1, A communicates only with its four immediate neighbors to the north, south, east, and west.  
            A             Figure 1: Example of a spatial network  
 The probability of communication between any two actors is strongly related to how close they are to each other.  The relationship between distance and communication, of course, is vastly more complicated than characterized by the lattice in figure 1.  As noted above, the Great Plains excepted, geography is typically not as smooth as  characterized in figure 1.  These irregularities affect the costs of communication between any two nodes. Distance is also partially a social construct.  The probability that two local jurisdictions communicate is probably affected by whether they are in the same state, for example.   Finally, communication frequency is not a linear function of distance.  As a general matter, communication drops off precipitously with distance (McPherson 2001).    An organizational network is simply the communications that result from the groupings within the organization (Mintzberg 1992).  That is, the formal organizational chart is typically related to the architecture of the informational network.  If faculty, for example, are grouped into departments, communication will typically be higher within those departments, in part because of a functional interdependence, in part because the institution then structures serendipityŠdepartments will often be grouped together, departmental meetings guarantee that paths will cross, etc.    Both of these network archetypes are flawed at spreading information.  Spatial networks are often broken by spatial ﬁchasmsﬂŠ mountains, rivers, or climate in a geographic context, buildings in an organizational context, railroad tracks and highways within communitiesŠ  between which little information flows.  Further, even in the absence of these discontinuities a purely grid-type of network, such as in figure 1, would only slowly (if inexorably) spread information.  If one assumed that it takes one period to spread information to a node™s immediate four neighbors, it would take eight periods for a piece of information to spread from one corner of the system to the other.  Similarly, organizational networks are often characterized by dysfunctional chasmsŠcommunication within stovepipes but not between.  In fact, the ﬁnetworkedﬂ organization, cross-functional teams, the matrix form, etc, etc, is often seen as an antidote to the stovepipes of the organizational chart.  However, as discussed below, organic (emergent) network structure have their own disfunctions.  Serendipity is the underlying principle of emergent networks.  Emergent networks result from the myriad of decisions by individual nodes to pay attention or not pay attention, by pairs of nodes to form a relationship, and by larger numbers of nodes to Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 4create formal or informal groupings that then form the basis for larger scale communication.  The assumption I make here is that these decisions are made on an egoistic basis, made in a boundedly rational fashion.  It is this ﬁthink locally, act locallyﬂ assumption that can result in outcomes that at the systemic level are suboptimal.  There are a number of fairly robust patterns that have been observed in a wide range of social networks:  the emergence of cliques, power-laws of connectedness, homophily, powerful core-periphery tendencies, each of which is discussed in the context of governance networks. Cliques:  Networks often break down into cliques, where there is a much higher density of communication within cliques than between.  Thus, for example, a tie between A and B and a tie between B and C predicts a tie between A and C (Davis 1967).  There are a variety of reasons why cliques might emerge.  For example, B™s tie to A and C might facilitate a tie between A and C.  Cliques might also emerge out of a functional need to collectively produce something that all benefit from, and for which a certain scale is required (e.g., a pick up softball game).  Informationally, it might also be more efficient to share information within a group than dyadically (reducing repetition and redundancy).  Cliques might also be epiphenomenal:  the result of homophily or proximity.  As discussed below, similarity and proximity predict communication.  If A is similar/close to B and C, then it is likely that B and C are similar and close to each other. Scale free networks:  Notably, in networks where nodes have no constraints on communication the frequency at the node level of any given level of connectedness of a node is proportional to the inverse of that level of connectedness, raised to some power (i.e., ﬁpower lawﬂ distributed, also known as scale free networksŠsee other contributions to this volume).  In essence, the more connected, the less frequent.  In a power law world, the well connected are vastly more connected than the average connected nodes, and thus play a vastly disproportionate role in the flow of information in the system.   Such a power law distribution has been observed with respect to websites, citation frequencies (Price 1976), and, surprisingly, number of sexual partners.  One suspects, in the policy world, that particular exemplar policies emerge with the bulk of attention;  thus, policymakers look disproportionately at California™s experiences in deregulation, Wisconsin™s experiences with welfare reform, etc. Power law frequency distributions tend to emerge from stochastic growth processes, where the growth of any particular observation is proportionate to its size (e.g., the growth rate of small units is about the same as large unitsŠe.g. Simon 1956).   These hubs, in a power law world, play a disproportionate role.  One could imagine (as discussed below) that they help systems overcome problems in diffusing and processing information that would likely result from the other types of processes enumerated here (and probably do, to a certain extentŠsee small world section below).   One could imagine that hubs are the nodes with the highest processing capacity, and serve as instruments to aggregate and re-disseminate information (and they probably do, to a certain extentŠsee information aggregation section below).  However, the conditions under which they typically arise limits their potential as conduits of informationŠsince for most of the cases enumerated above, the well connected nodes only send information, and do not receive.  That is, one might imagine a power law world where the exceptionally well connected received as much as they sent;  however, in the policy Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 5world, it seems unlikely, for example, that California pays as much attention (and then retransmits) the experiences of others as much as others pay attention to California.  Homophily:  It does turn out that birds of a feather do tend to flock together.  Similarity turns out to be a strong predictor of communication across a wide variety settings (McPherson 2001).  There are a number of likely explanations for this.  First, similar actors will be more likely to have useful information for each other.  Imagine moving to a new city:  would it make any sense to talk to someone who had a much larger income than you, and thus could afford a much more expensive house?  Similarly, one might expect that policymakers would do best to pay attention to those in similar circumstances.  Second, especially in political contexts, there are strategic reasons to share information more with those with similar preferences.  Information assists actors in achieving their goals.  If the goals of another individual are opposed to your goals, you would be unlikely to share information with them. Cores and peripheries: Emergent networks often will have a ﬁrich get richerﬂ dynamic.  Assume that nodes have unequal access to private information.  Those nodes with more private information will be more desirable as partners with which to exchange information.  If all nodes have constraints on how much they communicate (this does not apply to attention networks, for example) then the node with the most information will be in the greatest demand to form ties with.  It would presumably choose ties with those who have the most private information.  Those with less information would be in a less of a position to be so picky.  Out of a process where the most informed choose the most informed, the moderately informed will be left with each other to choose to communicate with, and the least informed to choose each other.  That is, the network will have a well-informed core, that distributes information internally, and a less-informed periphery, with occasional leakage of information from core to periphery.  Thus, while the diffusion of information has the potential to reduce informational inequalities in a system, it will potentially just replicate those inequalities. This tendency will be exacerbated by the fact that nodes that are the most informed will often have the capacity to form more connections.  If connectedness were roughly proportional to the informedness of nodes, it is conceivable that the spread of information would (while raising the absolute informedness of everyone) actually exacerbate the informational inequalities in the system.  One would expect that out of such a scenario would emerge a highly informed and interconnected core, and a highly uninformed and unconnected periphery.  
Small worlds  Emergent networks thus tend to result in clusters of nodes which are highly similar to each other, within which there are many connections, and between which there are very few connections.  Clearly, this is not an effective architecture for spreading information.  Might networks automatically adjust themselves so as to reduce the worst effects of this inefficient configuration?  For example, Burt (1995) enumerates the competitive advantage actors can achieve by bridging these ﬁstructural holesﬂ in the network.  One might imagine the larger the advantage, the greater the likelihood that actors will seek to close these holes.  There are a number of obstacles to this, however, especially in the public sector.    The combination of cheap intra-clique communication Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 6and lack of property rights may discourage such communication. By their very nature, cliques allow for accidental (and inexpensive) collisions.  The lack of property rights means that a node that seeks extra-clique communication that brings novel information may pay a high price for novel information, where the benefits quickly diffuse to the entire clique.3  Those nodes that do not attempt to bridge the structural holes will actually fair better, under these circumstances, than those that do.  An additional deterrent to inter-clique communication is that inter-clique information may be less reliable, because the communicators have fewer reputational concerns.  If they pass on inaccurate information, there are few/no consequences, since the two nodes are not embedded in the same social structure (Granovetter 1985, Uzzi 1996).  The above analysis suggests that it is likely that organizational, spatial, and emergent informational networks in the public sector world will tend to be inefficient at spreading information.  However, what may be true of each of these networks may not be true of the networks together, as the ﬁsmall worldﬂ findings of Watts and Strogatz (1998) illuminate.  What these findings demonstrate that is that while a highly structured network (e.g., the lattice) is not effective at spreading information, and a purely random network (e.g., where the probability of a tie between A and B is uncorrelated with the probability of a tie between any other dyad in the system), an overlay of structure and random networks is very effective at spreading information.  This is indicative of a more general phenomenon:  cross-cutting types of networks are typically more effective at spreading information than equally dense networks of a single type.  A simple illustration will demonstrate why.  Consider the network represented by figure 2, where each actor communicates with its immediate four neighbors.  
                                                                                                                         Figure 2:  11 x 11 world  
Assume, now, that the actor in the middle of the chess board has a successful innovation, which is then adopted by its four neighbors, which is in turn adopted by each of their neighbors, and so on.  It will take 10 rounds of communication before the whole system has adopted the innovation. By comparison, a ﬁrandom-collisionﬂ network, where actors                                                  3 Obviously, this is a critical assumption that will differ in different systems.   Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 7randomly ﬁcollideﬂ with four other actors each round, will take just 4 rounds before the whole (99+%) system has adopted the innovation.4  A spatial network is inefficient at spreading information simply because the informed are spending most of their time communicating with other informed actors.  Only at the periphery of the informed set of actors is information actually spreading.  An overlay of an emergent network on a spatial network is potentially far more effective at spreading information than just a spatial network, for the simple reason that the emergent network will provide bridges between the regions (or, alternatively, the spatial network will provide bridges between the cliques), thus increasing the proportion of the uninformed in communication with the informed.5  A minor elaboration of the above example will illustrate why.  Imagine, now, that while all actors still communicate with all other actors, the actor in the middle of the chessboard communicates also with an actor in the distant corner.6  What impact will adding just this one tie to the 242 that already exist have on the speed with which the innovation spreads?  It will take 40% less time for innovation to spread.  Alternatively, what is the impact of simply accentuating the existing spatial network by doubling the neighborhood with which an actor communicates?  Increasing the number of neighborhood ties by 242 is only slightly more effective than adding one non-neighborhood tie-- the time it would take for an innovation to spread drops by 50%.  Figure 3 presents the rate of diffusion for four diffusion models:  random-collision, spatial with 4 neighbors, spatial with 8 neighbors, and spatial with 4 neighbors + one non-spatial tie.                                                  4 Note that this is a very different notion of a ﬁrandom networkﬂ than Watts and Strogatz (1998) use. 5 Note that this general observation works with any cross-cutting networksŠe.g., two emergent networks, two organizational networks, etc.  The key is that each network have a logic that is orthogonal to the other network. 6In this scenario I am assuming that the chess board ﬁwraps aroundﬂ;  i.e., the actors on the top communicate with the parallel actor on the bottom;  actors on the left communicate with the parallel actor on the right. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 8 Figure 3:  Four modes of diffusion  
 The above analysis highlights how even the slight overlay of one network on another can dramatically increase the rate of the diffusion of information in that network.  It also demonstrates how technologies that reconfigure the logics of the networks in a system can have effects disproportionate to their use.  
Producing information The second key dimension of an informational network is the production of information by the network nodes.  Does the architecture of the network affect the incentives to produce information?  YesŠand there is a potential downside to a more informationally efficient system, however.  Generally, the absence of property rights discourages investment in producing information in the public sector (although see caveats to this general proposition below).7  A system that is more effective at spreading information may further aggravate this.  Specifically, governments may become more complacent with respect to innovating, in the hope that someone else will bear the costs of a successful innovation.   An  illustration highlights why this might happen.  Imagine a potential innovation that yields $1.10 worth of benefits and costs $1.00 to produce if a government produces the initial innovation, or is free if some other government produces the innovation.  Assume, further, that there are 100 governments.  In the absence of any information diffusion (call this the ﬁisland scenarioﬂ), every government will spend $1.00, and produce $1.10 worth of benefits, for a total of $110 of benefits for $100 of costs.  In the networked world where there is rapid diffusion of information, assume that there is an initial innovator, that spends the initial $1.00, and reaps $.10 worth of net benefits.  All other states then adopt the innovation, for $1.10 worth of net benefits.  From the systemic                                                  7 See Strumpf forthcoming;  Rose-Ackerman 1980. 00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91024681012RoundProportion adopting innovationspatial-- 4 diffusionrandomspatial+1spatial-- 8Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 9point of view, that $1.00 of cost has yielded $109.10 of net benefits, as compared to just $10 in the previous scenario.  From a systemic point of view, this is an enormous success.  From 99 governments point of view, this is an enormous success.  For the 100th government, this is, in absolute terms, exactly the same as the island scenario.  The networked world scenario is therefore pareto superior to the island scenario.  However, it is not a stable scenario if you assume that the choice to innovate is endogenous.  If you assume (1) that each government is choosing whether to innovate;  and (2) that governments are in part benchmarked by each other™s performance (Beslsy and Case 1995) and that therefore the innovation decision, over the long run, is itself modeled on the decisions of the governments that produce the highest net benefits, the equilibrium scenario is zero innovation by any government-- 0 net benefits.8  The impact of free riding is particularly acute because the benefits of an innovation would be so much greater in the networked scenario-- in fact, innovations that result in net absolute losses for an innovator could result in welfare gains for the system.  If one assumes that the initial costs of an innovation are F, the costs of adoption for each government after the initial innovator are c, the benefits for each government from that innovation are B, and N governments benefit from that innovation, then the innovation would result in net benefits if N*(B - c) - F > 0.  For example, if N = 100, c = 0, B = $1.10, that innovation would produce net systemic benefits even if F = $109.  The innovator, however, would face net losses of $107.90.  If the innovator retained rights to its information, then it could, in principle, extract many of the benefits that everyone else in the system receives.  The danger of free riding is determined, in part, by whether governments have different underlying preferences with respect to a potential innovation.  Free riding is a great danger where ﬁone size fits allﬂ-- governments have identical preferences.  It is no danger if each government requires a unique solution (of course, in this latter scenario, there is no benefit to the networked world either).  The possibility of free riding may be reduced to the extent that policy makers are ﬁproselytizersﬂ, valuing the possibility that their innovation will spread.  If one assumes that, rather than being egoists, policy makers are proselytizers, then the rate of innovation in the networked scenario will be greater than the rate of innovation in the island scenario.  That is, those who seek to maximize their impact on the world rather than their jurisdiction will have greater opportunities to affect a networked world.  
The Rabbit and the Hare    A second danger in the highly networked world is that some diversity of policy solutions will be lost, to the detriment of the system.  The decision to attempt an innovation will rely in part on a government™s assessment of the innovations adopted by other states, and whether there is a consensus in the system as to what best practice is.  In a poorly networked world, a government will occasionally look at what a small number of other governments are doing-- if none have a clearly superior alternative, that government may experiment.  A successful innovation somewhere in the system will spread slowly,                                                  8More technically, ﬁno innovationﬂ is an evolutionarily stable strategy-- see Axelrod 1984. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 10resulting in continued experimentation in the rest of the system during a slow ﬁtake offﬂ period.  If that innovation is the optimal solution this is clearly dysfunctional;  however, if it is not, the continued experimentation in the rest of the system may uncover a better solution.  Alternatively, even if the successful innovation is optimal, it may not be optimal in the future, and maintaining a diversity of approaches would therefore be healthy.  Heterogeneity is a systemic property that may yield benefits to all within a system.  Adherence to unconventional and suboptimal policies today may provide diversity in the system for all to benefit from tomorrow.  It also serves as a platform to experiment from.  Excellent policy solutions may only differ from policy disasters on a few dimensions. A world where everyone rapidly converges to ﬁbest practiceﬂ will likely have better policy outcomes in the short run than a world where everyone experiments in different ﬁneighborhoodsﬂ of the policy space and then only slowly converge to best practice.  However, the latter world will have more experimentation and may be more likely to produce better policy outcomes in the long run.9 A classic example of premature convergence is the convergence on the QWERTY layout of keyboards.  Early in the typewriter industry, there was substantial diversity of key layout.  The QWERTY layout was originally designed to slow typing to prevent the mechanical jamming of the typewriter, and, over time, through a diffusion process, the QWERTY layout became standard.  While the mechanical jamming of typewriters is no longer a problem, the QWERTY standard remains.10  One might hypothesize that QWERTY-type of outcomes are more likely in an informationally efficient system.  The likelihood of A adopting B™s innovation should drop as the similarity of A and B™s policy objectives drops, since B™s innovation would presumably be tailored to its policy objectives.  Heterogeneity in underlying policy objectives should therefore help maintain a diversity of policy approaches (although limit the benefits to policy diffusion as well).  
Aggregating information  The third dimension to thinking about informational networks is how well that network aggregates information.  Bad information as well as good spreads in informational networks.  A more efficient network at spreading information is also a more efficient network at spreading fads, manias, etc.  As the information cascade literature demonstrates, in a system where adoption is the only thing that one actor can observe about another can easily result in the spread of misinformation (Strang and Macy 2001).  Essentially, if one imagines that each node in the system has private information about the value of an innovation, but that this private information can be outweighed by the observation of the adoption decisions of others, then all it might take for the system to get rolling in the wrong direction is for a few of the initial adopters to have incorrect signals.  At that point, the private information of subsequent adopters is outweighed by                                                  9 See March (1991) more generally on the trade off between exploration and exploitation. 10 See David 1986.  Also see Liebowitz and Margolis (1990) for a critique of David™s analysis, which debunks Dvorak as a superior alternative to QWERTY (although does not demonstrate that QWERTY is an optimal layout of keys). Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 11what they observe others to have adopted, resulting in a potential bandwagon going in the wrong direction.    These potential bandwagon effects might be ameliorated by a number of potential dynamics.  First, potential adopters could pool their private information regarding an innovation.  Given a large enough set of nodes sharing their private evaluations, this pooled knowledge could outweigh the information conveyed by a ﬁbandwagonﬂ (since, actually, bandwagons do not convey that much information).  Second, adopters might send information about their experiences.  That is, not only is adoption information conveyed, but success/failure information.  This would vastly increase the amount of information conveyed in the adoption process;  and every bandwagon would contain the seeds of its own destruction since the bandwagon would create a body of data about its failings.  The potential of success/failure information to eliminate bandwagons depends on (1) the lag between adoption and success/failure data;  (2) whether such data are even generated by the process (as noted above).  It is in fact not in the interest of adopters to produce data that demonstrate that they chose failing policies.  There is an incentive to suppress negative feedback, and, even worse, to suppress any feedback at all in fear that it could be negative.  
Parallel processing  The vision sometimes conveyed of networks is that they distribute the informational load over the many nodes within the system, as compared to an hierarchical system, which overloads the top node.  It is not at all clear that such a network would emerge organically, however, or that the ideal configuration differs greatly from an hierarchy.  Imagine the following scenario:  each node receives a signal about the state of the worldŠlet™s say a quantitative estimate of something of importance to the system.  Each node has a certain processing capacityŠlet™s say a capacity to ﬁaverageﬂ its information and the information of 10 other nodes.  What would be the most efficient organization of the system?  An hierarchy, where at the bottom of the hierarchy nodes were grouped by 10, each communicating with one node above it, which averaged the 10 bits of information along with its own.  This layer would be identically organized in groups of 10 passing information upwards.  This structure would continue iteratively upwards, until the single top node averaged the information from its immediate 10 subordinates.  Would such structures emerge organically, without centralized intervention?  It seems unlikely.  The hierarchical structure described above is, arguably, at best, a very hard to reach equilibrium, if one posits that the nodes are seeking to maximize their own informedness.  The reason for this is that there is little reason for nodes to communicate with the nodes below them, as compared to the nodes above them, or at their own level.  Consider the nodes one level down from the top.  A pair of nodes at this level, given  the opportunity to switch one communication from one of their subordinates each to each other, would certainly improve the quality of information they were receiving.  The one caveat here (and the reason why the hierarchy is a potential equilibrium) is that if one assumes that the top node ﬁbroadcastsﬂ its solution once it has calculated it, none of its subordinates will have the incentive to deviate from their communication pattern, since it would be detrimental to the quality of this signal.  However, there is no smooth path to Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 12that equilibrium, because the actors that emerged as more central would have an incentive to drop their ties to less central nodes, which would undermine the hierarchical structure outlined above.  
Institutions in the middle There are potential institutions that can play an aggregating role.  In particular, one might imagine institutions that have both high processing capacity and high levels of connectedness.  For example, the federal government might play the role of a central node that processes the experiences of the states, develops and disseminates best practices.  However, arguably, the federal government focuses more of its analytical capacities on developing its own mandates, rather than enabling state and local governments develop their policies. There are also a variety of national organizations of local and state governments (the National Governors Association, the National Conference of State Legislatures, the National District Attorneys Association, etc).  There exist also various international organizations that serve (in a network sense) a similar function, such as the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development, the World Bank, etc.  In the US context, however, these organizations often have a somewhat limited desire to serve as a conduit of information, in significant part because they really act as industry associationsŠrepresenting their collective needs to the outside world, rather than facilitating the smooth flow of information among their members.  In fact, the reason for this is that these two objectives are at odds:  facilitating the smooth flow of information, aggregating information into studies of best practice, etc, in fact means picking the practices of a small number of members as winners and the rest as losers.  Such a strategy might quickly undermine the support of such an organization.11 Finally, academia plays a potential role as a central nodeŠcollecting, comparing, and critically examining the practices of many jurisdictions.  
The organizational nexus:  networks, markets, and hierarchies  Markets, networks, and hierarchies offer different mechanisms to deal with the issues around information diffusion, creation, and aggregation.  Networks rely on reciprocity and embeddedness to regulate the behavior of their members.  They are relatively poor at dealing with complex chains of exchangeŠfor example, where A has something B needs, and C has something A needs, and B has something C needs.  In this scenario, the network cannot be sustained by reciprocity or reputation, but instead may at best be supported a complicated system of arbitrage.  Networks, in the absence of markets and property rights, may do poorly at encouraging significant investment in new information, because of the lack of control of that information once it is produced. Markets institutions standardize goods along salient dimensions, offer a standard for exchange (money).  Supporting institutions, such as property rights, also encourage                                                  11 I thank Robert Behn for this point.  Notably, some of the international organizations are exceptions.  Arguably, this is in part because of the political irrelevance of those organizations.  Further, in many of these casesŠthe international development organizationsŠcritical examination is not of donor countries, but of recipients. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 13production of information (although at the cost of efficiency in the monopoly rights conveyed).  People thus write books, develop new medicines, create new software, in the expectation that the properties of the goods will somehow be captured by dimensions that have emerged as salient in the market (of course, these dimensions are themselves highly contested).   Markets work less well at supporting transactions where the properties of the good is not easily captured by the dimensions that the market has defined.  Consider the vast array of little bits of information, gossip, etc, exchanged in informational networks:  ﬁthe biggest difficult we encountered in implementation was–ﬂ ﬁthe next division chief is going to be–ﬂ etc.  These non-standard bits of information, essential to the operation of any system, would be impossible to put valuations on (or far too costly).  Instead, this type of information exchange is governed by reciprocity, norms, etc. Hierachies (by which I mean authority structures), have a variety of mechanisms to deal with the issues raised above.  At the simplest level, information sharing and information production can simply be commanded.  Thus, if A is in a position to discover something, A is ordered to do so.  If A has information B would find useful, A is ordered to share information.  Of course, such a system would typically put demands that would quickly outstrip the capacity of the apex an organization. There are other, less blunt, authority tools.  Hierarchies standardize behavior and information, facilitating information flow.  Hierarchies also create the public goods for information exchangeŠe.g., infrastructure.  Hierarchies can also recognize and reward information production and information sharing ex post, a less difficult task than doing it a priori.    A particular system will generally operate by multiple institutional logics.  The prescriptive question is whether there is a match between what a particular institutional logic is effective at, and what it is being asked to do.  
Conclusion:  how to maintain innovation.gov?  The objective of this paper has to be view the intergovernmental network as an informational network:  each node producing information and potentially transferring information to other nodes.  The shift from relatively geographically bound networks to global networks should greatly increase the informational efficiency of international policy networks.  Yet, by increasing the rate at which successful innovations spread through the system, globalization may discourage policy experimentation due to free riding and premature policy convergence.  This suggests a counter-intuitive governance prescription:  as governments receive more information regarding what other governments are doing, incentives for all governments to continue experimenting (and thus creating information) should be increased. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 14References:  
Abrahamson, E., & Rosenkopf, L.  1997.  ﬁSocial Network Effects on the Extent of Innovation Diffusion: A Computer Simulation,ﬂ Organization Science, 8: 289-309. Atkinson, M. M., Bierling, G.  1998.  ﬁIs there convergence in provincial spending priorities?,ﬂ Canadian Public Policy, 24: 71-89. Axelrod, Robert (1984). The Evolution of Cooperation.  New York: Basic Books. Baumol, William J. (1999). Pareto optimal sizes of innovation spillovers.  Working paper, Starr Center for Applied Economics, New York University. Bennett, C. J.  1991.  ﬁHow States Utilize Foreign Evidence,ﬂ Journal of Public Policy, 11: 31-54. Bernstein, S., & Cashore, B.  2000.  ﬁGlobalization, four paths of internationalization and domestic policy change: The case of ecoforestry in British,ﬂ Canadian Journal of Political Science, 33: 67-99. Berry, F. S.  1994.  ﬁSeizing Up State Policy Innovation Research,ﬂ Policy Studies Journal, 22: 442-456. Berry, F. S., & Berry, W. D.  1990.  ﬁState Lottery Adoptions as Policy Innovations: An Event History Analysis,ﬂ American Political Science Review, 84: 395-415. Burt, Ronald. 1995.  Structural Holes:  The Social Structure of Competition. Belknap Press. Case, Anne, and Timothy Besley.  1995. ﬁIncumbent Behavior:  Vote Seeking, Tax Setting, and Yardstick Competition.ﬂ  American Economic Review 85:  24-45. Coleman, W. D.  1994.  ﬁPolicy convergence in banking: a comperative study,ﬂ Political Studies, XLII, 274-299. Coleman, W. D., & Grant, W. P.  1998.  ﬁPolicy convergence and policy feedback: Agricultural finance policies in a globalizing era,ﬂ European Journal of Political Research, 34: 225-247. Coleman, W. D., & Perl, A.  1999.  ﬁInternationalized policy environments and policy network analysis,ﬂ Political Studies, 47: 691-709. Davis, James A. 1970. ﬁClustering and Hierarchy in Interpersonal Relations: Testing Two Graph Theoretical Models on 742 Sociomatrices.ﬂ American Sociological Review  35: 843-851. Dolowitz, D. P.  2000.  ﬁSpecial issue on policy transfer - Introduction,ﬂ Governance,  13: 1-4. Dolowitz, D. P., & Marsh, D.  1996.  ﬁWho learns what from whom: a review of the policy transfer literature,ﬂ Policy Studies, 44: 343-357. Dolowitz, D. P., & Marsh, D.  2000.  ﬁLearning from abroad: The role of policy transfer in contemporary policy-making,ﬂ Governance, 13: 5-24. Dyer, J. H., & Nobeoka, K.  2000.  Creating and managing a high-performance knowledge-sharing network: The Toyota case, Strategic Management Journal, 21: 345-367. Evans, M., & Davies, J.  1999.  ﬁUnderstanding policy transfer: A multi-level, multi-disciplinary perspective,ﬂ Public Administration, 77: 361-385.  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 15Granovetter, Mark. 1985. Economic action and social structure: The problem of embeddedness. American Journal of Sociology, 91(3): 481-510. Gray, V.  1973.  ﬁInnovation in the states: A Diffusion Study,ﬂ American Political Science Review. 67: 1174-1185. Gray, V.  1994.  ﬁCompetition, Emulation, and policy Innovation,ﬂ L. C. Dodd & C. Jillson, Washington, DC: CQ Press. Gupta, A. K., & Govindarajan, V.  1991.  ﬁKnowledge flows and the structure of control within multinational corporations,ﬂ Academy of Management Review, 16: 768-792. Hubner, H.  1996.  ﬁDecisions on innovation and diffusion and the limits of deregulation,ﬂ Technovation, 16: 327-339. Keohane, Robert, and Joseph Nye.  2000.  Power and Interdependence, 3rd edition, Addison-Wesley. Kogut, B., & Zander, U.  1995.  ﬁKnowledge and the speed of the transfer and imitation of organizational capabilities Œ an empirical test,ﬂ Organization Science, 6: 76-92. Lazer, David.  2001. ﬁRegulatory Interdependence and International Governance,ﬂ Journal of European Public Policy:  474-492. Lazer, David, and Viktor Mayer-Schoenberger.  2002. ﬁGoverning Networks,ﬂ Brooklyn Journal of International Law, 27, number 3: 819-851. Liebeskind, J. P., Oliver, A. L., Zucker, L, & Brewer, M.  1996.  ﬁSocial networks, learning, and flexibility: Sourcing scientific knowledge in new biotechnology firms,ﬂ Organization Science, 7: 428-443. Liebowitz, Steve and Stephen Margolis. 1990. ﬁThe Fable of the Keys.ﬂ Journal of Law and Economics 33: 1-24. March, James. 1991. ﬁExploration and exploitation in organizational learning.ﬂ Organization Science, 2(1): 71-87 McPherson, M., Smith-Lovin, L., & Cook, J. M. 2001. Birds of a feather: Homophily in social networks. Annual Review of Sociology, 27: 415-444. Mintrom, M.  1997a.  ﬁPolicy entrepreneurs and the diffusion of innovation,ﬂ American Journal of Political Science, 41: 738-770. Mintrom, M.  1997b.  ﬁThe state-local nexus in policy innovation diffusion: The case of school choice,ﬂ Publius, 27: 41-59. Mintrom, M., & Vergari, S.  1998.  ﬁPolicy networks and innovation diffusion: The case of state education reforms,ﬂ Journal of Politics, 60: 126-148. Henry Mintzberg.  1992.  Structure in Fives:  Designing Effective Organization.  Prentice Hall. Moon, M. J., & Bretschneider, S.  1997.  ﬁCan state government actions affect innovation and its diffusion?: An extended communication model and empirical test,ﬂ Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 54: 57-77. Nooteboom, B.  1999. ﬁInnovation and inter-firm linkages: new implications for policy,ﬂ Research Policy, 28: 793-805.  
O™Toole, Laurence J., Jr., ﬁTreating Networks Seriously: Practical and Research-based Agendas in Public Administration. Public Administration Review 57, 1 (January-February 1997):45-52 Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 16Price, D. J. de Solla.  1976. ﬁA general theory of bibliometric and other cumulative advantage processesﬂ, J. Amer. Soc. Inform. Sci. 27: 292-306. Radaelli, C. M.  2000.  ﬁPolicy transfer in the European Union: Institutional isomorphism as a source of legitimacy,ﬂ Governance, 13: 25-43. Rhodes, R.A.W. 1997. Understanding Governance: Policy Networks, Governance, Reflexivity and Accountability, Open University Press. Robertson, M., Swan, J., & Newell, S.  1996.  ﬁThe role of networks in the diffusion of technological innovation,ﬂ Journal of Management Studies, 33: 333-359. Rogers, E.  1995.  Diffusion of Innovations, 4th edition, New York, NY: Free Press. Rom, M. C., Peterson, P. E., & Scheve, K. F.  1998.  ﬁInterstate competition and welfare policy,ﬂ Publius, 28: 17-37. Rose-Ackerman, Susan. 1980.  ﬁRisk Taking and Re-election:  Does Federalism Promote Innovation?ﬂ Journal of Legal Studies 9:  593-616. Savage, R. L.  (ed.)  1985.  Special issue.  ﬁPolicy Diffusion in a Federal System,ﬂ Publius, 15: 1-27. Schenk, M., Dahm, H., & Sonje, D.  1997.  ﬁThe importance of social networks concerning the diffusion of new communication technology,ﬂ Kölner Zeitschrift für Soziologie und Sozialpsychologie, 49: 35-. Seeliger, R.  1996.  ﬁConceptualizing and researching policy convergence,ﬂ Policy Studies Journal, 24: 287-306. Simon, Herbert. 1955. ﬁOn a class of skew distribution functions,ﬂ Biometrika, 42:425-440. Slaughter, Anne-Marie.  2000.  ﬁAgencies on the Loose:  Holding Government Networks Accountable,ﬂ in George Bermann, Matthias Herdegen, and Peter Lindseth (eds), Transatlantic Regulatory Cooperation. Stone, D.  2000.  ﬁNon-governmental policy transfer: The strategies of independent policy institutes,ﬂ Governance, 13: 45-70. Strang, David, and Michael Macy.  2001.   ﬁ‚In Search of Excellence™: Fads, Success Stories, and Adaptive Emulationﬂ American Journal of Sociology, 106. Strumpf, Kenneth. Forthcoming.  ﬁDoes Government Decentralization Increase Policy Innovation?ﬂ Journal of Public Economics. Brian Uzzi. 1996. The Sources and Consequences of Embeddedness for the Economic Performance of Organizations:  The Network Effect. American Sociological Review 61:  674-698. Valente, T. W.  1996.  ﬁSocial network thresholds in the diffusion of innovations,ﬂ Social Networks, 18: 69-89. Valente, T. W.  1995.  Network models of the diffusion of innovations, Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press. Walker, J. L.  1969.  ﬁThe Diffusion of Innovations Among the American States,ﬂ American Political Science Review, 63: 880-899. Duncan Watts and Steven Strogatts. 1998, Collective dynamics of ‚small-world™ networks, Nature 393:440-42. Weale, A., Pridham, G., Williams, A., & Porter, M.  1996.  ﬁEnvironmental administration in six European states: Secular convergence or national distinctiveness?,ﬂ Public Administration, 74: 255-274. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 17Weenig, M. W. H.  1999.  ﬁCommunication networks in the diffusion of an innovation in an organization,ﬂ Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 29: 1072-1092.  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SESSION IIDynamic Social Networks
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Informal Social Roles and the Evolution and Stability of Social Networks1  
Jeffrey C. Johnson, East Carolina University  
Lawrence A. Palinkas, University of California San Diego  
James S. Boster, University of Connecticut  
Introduction  
From a series of cross-cultural studies on the evolution of group or network structure in Antarctic research stations it is evident that despite similarity in natural environments (e.g., cold, isolation), organizational goals (e.g., conducting science), formal organizational structure, physical settings, group size, and duration of isolation across years group dynamics can vary dramatically from one group to another even within the same physical and cultural settings (Johnson et al. in press; Johnson et al. 2002). Thus, network dynamics are largely a function of both formal and informal factors (e.g., the emergence of informal social roles) that have variable effects on the patterns of interaction and connection among network actors and ultimately on such things as performance, productivity, morale, and individual psychological well-being.              
An important distinction needs to be made between formal, informal, and latent social roles in networks. Formal social roles are those proscribed by groups, organizations, or cultures and are reflected in the designation of formal positions (e.g., manager, CEO). Although formal aspects of groups are certainly important, much of network dynamics are the result of informal influences and the interaction between formal and informal processes.   Although early work in organization studies recognized a link between latent and informal roles in organizations (Gouldner 1957; Becker and Geer 1960) there is a fundamental difference between the two. Whereas all latent roles are informal, not all informal roles are latent. In this sense there are informal, as well as formal social roles, that are visible and active throughout a group™s existence.  On the other hand, there are informal social roles that can be dormant or hidden emerging only when circumstances or conditions warrant (e.g., due to external or internal events).  The presence or absence of informal social roles and the nature of hidden, dormant, or latent roles all have an impact on a network™s emergent properties. Emergent properties here refer to the emergence of higher level group phenomena, such as cohesion or other global structural properties, that stem from the characteristics of lower level constituent entities, such as the mix of individual actors. The focus of this this paper is the relationship between these emergent properties and the evolution of network structures as they relate to such things as network stability, adaptability, and robustness.     
In a study of the relationship between informal social roles and emergent properties of networks Johnson et al. (in press) found that the evolution of globally coherent networks in Antarctic winter-over groups was associated with group consensus on the presence of critically important informal social roles (e.g., expressive leadership) where global coherence is the extent to which a network forms a single group composed of a unitary core and periphery as opposed to being fragmented into two or more subgroups.  Conversely, the evolution of multiple subgroups was associated with the absence of consensus on informal social roles, above all the critically important role of instrumental leader and the lack of role redundancy in expressive leadership.  Thus the nature, multiplicity, and coincidence of both formal and informal social roles in networks can have an impact on the evolution and stability of network structures. More importantly, however, these network structures all have implications for such group outcomes as productivity, group morale, efficiency, individual psychological well-being, group communication, and group conflict (Johnson et al. 2002).    Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 2Although there are a wide range of informal role properties and structural correlates we will concentrate on 5 primary forms. Table 1 summarizes these properties in terms of the implications of their presence or absence for group functioning in terms of their effect on network structure.  Each of these properties will be discussed in more or less detail in the examples that follow. Briefly, role complementarity is important for diminishing role competition and conflict.  Whereas we may want homogeneity in the backgrounds of group members in order to diminish any bases for intra-group divisions (white collar vs. blue collar), role complementarity or  heterogeneity is desirable since it helps ensure that group member™s roles fit in with one another (Johnson et al. in press).  Role consensus, or agreement on informal roles, reflects a lack of role competition and conflict in that there is agreement on the set or sets of actors performing such roles. For some of these informal roles, redundancy is important in that removal of a single actor in a set of multiple roles still ensures proper role function. As later examples will show, lack of replacement may leave groups structurally vulnerable due to the loss of critically important roles that function to foster group coherence or cohesion. Similarly, unforeseen internal or external events that threaten groups may require latent or hidden informal roles that function to maintain structural integrity during these events, in a sense informal roles in reserve being called on in times of need.  Finally, the overlap between formal and informal leadership is important for producing group consensus on the group™s instrumental goals and objectives and for reducing role competition for leadership.  A more in-depth discussion of these properties can be found in Johnson and Finney (1986) and Johnson et al. (in press).  
Table 1.  Consequences of the presence or absence of network informal role properties.  
Informal Role Properties Presence Absence Role Complementarity People fit in with one another Role Homogeneity: Role competition/conflict (ﬁToo many chiefs and not enough Indiansﬂ) Role Consensus Agreement on individual status, role, and function Role collisions leading to group divisions Role Redundancy For certain informal roles can enhance network adaptability Structural Vulnerability Role Latency Promotes adaptive responses to unforeseen events Structural Vulnerability Formal/Informal Role Isomorphism Promotes agreement on group goals and objectives Role collisions leading to group divisions  
 
 Informal Roles and Emergent Properties: Examples of the Ties That Bind  
In a dynamic world there is no guarantee of group or network stability over time despite the best intentions of formal organizational efforts (Johnson and Parks 1998).  Groups are, in a sense, constantly under attack from both within and from the outside.  Interpersonal tensions, for example, always have the potential to tear at the very fabric of group structures from within, inhibiting adaptation to changing circumstances and thereby have the potential to lead to divisive and less cohesive or coherent groups (Johnson et al. in press). Different forms of deviance can work to either integrate or divide group structure (Johnson and Miller 1983; Johnson et al. in press; Dentler and Ericksen 1959). Outside events or organizations can also present threats in terms of such things as withholding resources or outside meddling in internal group affairs that can also impact a group™s ability to adapt to changing conditions. Although these outside influences can sometimes serve as group reference points that can foster group cohesion (i.e., internal group alliance to fight outside threats in an us versus them mentality) such phenomena tend to be short-lived, and once such threats are diminished tend to exacerbate preexisting tensions and conflicts (Johnson and Finney 1986).  In either case, the ability of a group to respond to such challenges depends on number of important factors. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 3Example 1: The Emergence of the Latent Informal Social Role of ‚Court Jester™   
We now turn to an example of a latent informal social role that contributed to positive group function during a time of external threat.  Johnson and Miller (1983) and Johnson and Finney (1986) described the function of the informal social role of ‚court-jester™ for fostering group cohesion during periods of stress in both fishers in an isolated fish camp in Alaska and in Antarctic expeditions.  What makes these examples important is the presence of informal latent social roles that fostered the emergence of group coherence during a stressful event.                          
Every spring fishermen travel to Bristol Bay, Alaska in the pursuit of king, sockeye, and dog salmon, among other species.  The fishing is crowded, competitive, and has historically been very lucrative.  Bristol Bay, an arm of the Bering Sea, is extremely isolated and the purchasing, processing, and marketing of salmon has traditionally been dominated by a small set of oligopolistic firms.  Within recent times, however, fishers have gained more power due to increasing competition from outside firms and the organization of fishers under the Alaska Independent Fishermen™s Marketing Association. Most fishers are associated with large firms staying in bunkhouses within canneries or in fish camps during the salmon season (2-3 months).  One such fish camp was owned and operated by a large, powerful firm.  The fish camp was multi-ethnic but dominated by a large group of Italians who had mostly emigrated from Sicily to the U.S in the 1960™s.  The network of interest consists of 16 Italian boat captains. A more detailed ethnographic background for this example can be found in Johnson and Miller (1983).       
In a multidimensional scaling of unconstrained judged similarity pile sort data among the 16 captains (not shown) two distinct groups were clear based mostly on bunkhouse residence with the group from bunkhouse 2 being highly among residents while those from bunkhouse 1 had moderate density (Johnson and Miller 1983).  There were a number of important exceptions including a fisher who lived in bunkhouse 1 but who interacted most frequently with fishers in bunkhouse 2 and a fisher who lived in bunkhouse 2 but socialized in bunkhouse 1.  Another important actor is ﬁfisher 1ﬂ who was described by captains during the pile sort task as ﬁthe bridge between the two groupsﬂ and ﬁbelonging to everyoneﬂ.  Fisher 1 is the focal point in this example.    
Table 2 shows the timeline of events leading up to the emergence and disappearance of the role of court jester over the course of the fishing season. Initially fishers are extremely busy during the period before the opening of sockeye season preparing boats and gear.  During this period there is little free time and fishers work throughout the long Alaskan days (daylight until after midnight).  Just prior to opening, the fishers begin to negotiate season prices with firms.  If prices have not been settled prior to season opening, the fishers will strike until a satisfactory price can be negotiated.  In the year of this study, the strike was quite bitter and protracted (2 weeks of a 4 week season) creating an extremely stressful atmosphere (e.g., captains could gross more than $10,000 a day).  With the preparations for the season mostly completed the fishers had little to occupy their time during the strike, contributing further to potential conflicts among and between fishers and management.    
Table 2.  Timeline for the emergence and disappearance of the role of court jester.    
Preparation for salmon season (May-June) Strike Begins (approx 1 week before season opening) Season Opens, Strike Still in Effect (Tension, Boredom) Court Jester Role Emerges Strike Ends/Fishing Begins (just prior to the season peak) Court Jester Role disappears Role Rewarded with over limit fish  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 4During this strike period fisher 1 emerged in the role of court jester and provided hours of comic relief for the fishers of both bunkhouses.  Fishers from bunkhouse 1, for example, would come to bunkhouse 2 to engage in a number of activities one of which included a mock funeral and burial in the tundra for fisher1 (Johnson and Miller 1983).  Thus, fisher 1 provided comic relief and brought fishers together in positive face to face interactions thereby diminishing chances for intra-group conflicts during this particularly stressful period.   
Once fish prices were settled, the role of court jester receded as fishers immersed themselves in their fishing activities.  However, despite the lack of need, for this role the role was still recognized as being important to the function of the group.  During the remainder of the season fisher 1 received over limit fish transfers from a wide range of fishers as a reward for his role as court jester. The receivers were primarily from bunkhouse 2 with the exception of fisher1 (i.e., reflecting the relative status of members of the respective bunkhouses).  Among receivers, fisher 1 had a unique status and role in the group reflected in his high indegree centrality in the fish transfer network.  Although he received fish from a wide range of fishers he tended to receive small amounts, generally being at the bottom of the list behind those related by kinship to the giver.  This network of Italians was highly interconnected through kinship, and fisher 1 had no kinship relation to any other members of the group, either captains or crew (Johnson and Miller 1983).       
There are a number of structural factors and actor characteristics that facilitated the emergence of role of court jester with respect to fisher 1: · Lower Status actor living in the higher status bunkhouse, · Worst fisher in the camp (deviant in terms of productivity norms ala Homans (1974)), · No kinship relations to the group, · Willingness to be the brunt of jokes and pranks These structural and individual features allowed fisher 1 to play the role of court jester without the fear of violating norms, despite his formal status as fishing captain.  What was important in this case was his informal position and role as court jester bridged the gap between the two bunkhouses during a time of extreme stress, thus significantly contributing to the group™s structural integrity.  Although there were certainly other forces, such as extensive kinship relations, that also fostered group cohesion, the role of court jester encouraged actual face-to-face interactions at a particularly critical time.       
Example 2: The Bridging Informal Role of Clown in Antarctic Groups  
The next example of a bridging informal role comes from research on the group dynamics of Antarctic winter-over crews at the Amundsen-Scott South pole Station.  Three separate years at the station were studied throughout the Austral winter in which station crews were isolated for approximately 9 months.  Network data, informal role data and morale and psychological data were collected on a monthly basis throughout the 9 months of the winter.  Similar to the example above we concentrate on the role of ‚clown™. However, in this case the informal role of clown was recognized throughout winter in each of the three years studied.  The role term itself was derived from in-depth interviews with former winter-overs prior to the beginning of the study (see Johnson and Weller 2002 for a discussion).  This term and 10 other informal role terms (e.g., social director, work leader, peacemaker) were a part of a informal role sentence completion task in which respondents were asked to associate each of his or her fellow winter-over crewmembers with each of the 11 informal role terms.     
Figure 1 shows a series of graphs revealing the connections among winter-over crew from year A in the middle of winter (July) one of the most stressful periods of the winter-over period (Palinkas et al. 1998, 2000a, 2000b, 2001, 2002; Johnson et al. 2002). The series of network graphs reveals the important bridging function of the clown role during this year (more than 67 % of the crew nominated this actor for Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 5the role of ‚clown/comedian™).  This role was particularly important in maintaining connections between trades crew (i.e., the contractors) and scientists (i.e., primarily NSF grantees).  The trades and scientists, often jokingly referred to by the trades crew as ﬁbeakersﬂ (as in laboratory beaker), a distinction that has historically been a potential source of intra-group conflicts in Antarctic winter-over groups.       
What this series dramatically reveals is that the clown role functioned to bridge relations between the two major social categories in the station.  The crewmember who played this role was central to a wide range of both trade and science crew.   With respect to trade crew he linked different segments among members of the trades themselves, particularly the two isolates to the lower left in graph II.  Similarly, he provided a link between the major cluster of scientists in the upper right of the graph both with other scientists, particularly the isolated science personnel, and the primary trades contingent.      
 
   I.  Clown II.    Clown III.  Figure 1. The network structure in the middle of the winter (July) derived from a stacked correspondence analysis of the ratings of social interaction during each of the 9 winter months.  Edges are shown for rij > 4, where r ranges between 0 and 10. The graphs show (I) ties among scientists in the middle of winter for year A, (II) ties among trades in the middle of winter with clown role highlighted, and (III) ties between scientists and trades in the middle of winter with clown role highlighted  
In addition to the clown noted in Figure 4, there were several other crewmembers who were nominated as clowns by winter™s end in year A, 2 with high consensus (consensus c>0.66) and 4 with moderate consensus (0.33<c<0.67). Of the remaining 2 years, year B had high consensus on 3 individuals in the role of clown while year C had only moderate consensus on one crew member in this informal role. Further, year C had high consensus on one crew member in a negative deviant role, while the remaining 2 years had limited negative deviance with the exception of moderate consensus on one deviant role in year Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 6A.  Thus, Years A and B displayed a high degree of role redundancy with respect to the informal role of clown. This stands in stark contrast to year C where this informal role was largely absent.            
Example 3: Expressive Leadership, Role Redundancy, and Adaptability  
In this example we examine the consequences of the degree of expressive leadership available to groups.  What separates expressive from instrumental leadership is the arena in which each operates.  Whereas instrumental leadership generally deals with achieving organizational goals and objectives related to work, expressive leadership, as its name entails, involves leadership and direction in a variety of mostly non-work realms. Expressive leaders, referred to in the study as social directors, organized events that were primarily expressive or leisure oriented (e.g., dinner parties, theme costume parties, sports competitions, dance lessons, etc.).  These events brought people of various backgrounds together in face-to-face interactions that were of a positive nature.          Expressive Leader (April) Expressive Leader (October) Figure 2a. Graph showing the position of the single expressive leader two months after the start of the Austral winter for year C.  Edges are shown for rij > 4, where r ranges between 0 and 10. Figure 2b. Graph showing the position of the earlier nominated expressive leader at the end of the winter for year C.  Edges are shown for rij > 4, where r ranges between 0 and 10.   
 
Figure 2c. The network structure in the middle of the winter (July) for year A derived from a stacked correspondence analysis of the ratings of social interaction during each of the 9 winter months.  Edges are shown for rij > 4, where r ranges between 0 and 10. The graph shows the position of the 3-crew members who were highly nominated as expressive leaders.     Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 7Figures 2a & 2b show the position of the single expressive leader for year C in the beginning and end of the Austral winter.  In the beginning of the winter this actor is central to the group bridging connections between science and trades crewmembers.  However, by the end of the winter this crewmember had become less central and the group had fragmented into several subgroups with two primary divisions being between science and trades crew.          
This single expressive leader for this year dropped out of most group interactions in about the middle of winter because of problems with harassment, particularly from one crewmember (see discussion on negative deviant roles above).  Whereas this expressive leader was an organizer of social events and dinner parties in the earlier months of the winter, by mid-winter this crewmember had dropped out of most social activities, particularly as the important organizer of events that functioned to bring group members together in face-to-face interactions.  Thus, just at the time when the integrating functions of expressive leadership were most needed (mid-winter), this crewmember went into relative social isolation and the expressive leadership role was lost with no one to fill that important informal role.  Paralleling this decline in the presence of expressive leadership, the group structure began to fragment into various subgroups (see discussion below on instrumental leadership).  
In contrast to year C, year A had 3 crewmembers in the role of expressive leader (Figure 2c). In each case these expressive leaders provided crucial bridges between science and trades crewmembers.  For example, the expressive leader at the top left (a science crew member) was central to the science subgroup and connected to the clown role (a trades crewmember) at the center of the network.  In any event these 3 crew members helped in organizing events, dinner parties, sports competitions, dance lessons, card games, etc., all activities that increased chances for face-to-face interactions across all crew members.  Of the 3 years of the study, this winter-over crew had the most extra-work related activities of any year.  It should also be noted that role redundancy in this case lessened the potential vulnerability of this important role in that elimination of a single expressive role still afforded chances for the remaining expressive leaders to perform this critically important function. Thus, this year had a number of informal roles in reserve that could be called on in times of need.    
Example 4: Isomorphism Between Formal and Informal Instrumental Leadership  
In the final example we look at the important relationship between informal and formal instrumental leadership. Johnson et al. (in press) discuss the importance of the overlap in the formal and informal instrumental leadership roles for proper group function. The idea is that the overlap between the two roles diminishes chances for role competition within a group for the important leadership role, whether formal or informal.     
Figure 3 shows the final group structures for the three years and the position of the formal station managers in each of the networks in the final month of the winter.  There are a number of striking features with respect to the placement of formal managers in the network structure.  For year A, the station manager is embedded in the middle of a rather cohesive network.  The station manger for year B is also central to the structure but in a much less cohesive or coherent structure.  Finally, year C finds the station manager less central in the network that is divided into three primary network subgroups.    
As might be expected from the differences of the network positions of the three station mangers there are also differences on the overlap between formal and informal instrumental leadership.  By winter™s end 100 percent of the crew in year A nominated the formal station manager as the informal work leader with moderate consensus on informal work leadership for two other crewmembers.  For year B, there was high consensus for the station manager as also filling the role of informal work leader with moderate consensus on one other crewmember.  For year C, however, there was a lack of high consensus on an informal work Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 8leader and there was moderate consensus on three crewmembers including the station manager. Thus, in years A and B in terms there was high agreement with respect to the station manager as informal work leader, reflecting a considerable degree of role consensus. The moderate agreement for three crew for year C, on the other hand, reflects role competition for instrumental leader that included the station manager.  It should be noted that initially year C had high consensus on the station manager as the exclusive informal instrumental leader.  This is important in that the lack of extensive informal role properties in this year allowed for potential problems in the future stemming from interpersonal conflicts and external threats of various kinds. Good leadership alone cannot produce stable, productive groups.  It requires a combination of informal roles, all improving the chances for the evolution of cohesive and productive groups.                 ManagerA BNight ShiftCouplesCouch GroupManager Biomed GroupLibrary GroupBar GroupManageroutlierC Figure 3. Final (October) group structures for winter-over crews for the 3 showing the position of station manager and the delineation of groups as determined by the winter-overs in in-depth interviews (from a correspondence analysis of the ratings of interaction). Year A formed a single group (global coherence), while years B and C had varying degrees of subgroups.  Year C had subgroups determined primarily on the basis of a science versus trades split.  The library group consisted mostly of scientists while the bar group consisted of trades crew members (e.g., carpenters, plumbers, mechanics, etc.) [from Johnson et al., in press]    
 
Informal Role Properties and Group Outcomes  
In this section we examine the consequences of the informal role properties discussed above.  In an earlier paper, Johnson et al. (in press) demonstrated that informal role properties of these winter-over groups were important for understanding the evolution of coherent group structures. Globally coherent structures were associated with role consensus, role heterogeneity, expressive leadership, functional deviance, and an overlap between formal and informal instrumental leadership, while local coherence (presence of Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 9network fragmentation) was associated with the lack of extensive informal social roles, negative deviance, and role competition for instrumental leadership.  In this case, year A™s structure evolved to be highly coherent over time, year B™s structure was moderately coherent, while year C™s structure became locally coherent over time, fragmenting into several subgroups (Figure 3). Aside from these structural consequences of informal role properties, what effect do these factors have on such things as group morale, psychological well-being, and group productivity?        
Figure 4 is a graph of changes in ‚overall morale™ of group members over the 9 months of the winter.  Whereas there is no significant difference between years initially [F=2.297, p<0.2] there is a dramatic decline in morale for year C over the 8.5 months of the winter.  Although each year experiences a downward trend in morale as mid-winter approaches, year C shows a much more dramatic decline relative to the other two years.  In a two way repeated measures analysis of variance there is a significant difference between years [F=19.375, p<0.0001] in overall morale. More importantly, however, there is an interaction effect between year and month [F=2.495, p<0.002] indicating significantly different linear trends in morale over the winter.  Although year A declines slightly in morale as the winter progresses, by August (when the sun first appears) the trend is upward.  This is in contrast to the other two years that experience further downward movements in morale only rebounding at the end of the winter-over in anticipation of station opening.  However, this trend is much larger for year C than year B.          
A further example of the consequences of differences in informal role structures across the 3 years can be seen in a comparison of anger and tension/anxiety over the winter. Figure 5 is a scatter plot of the relationship between group means for tension/anxiety and anger over the winter gained from the profile of mood states (POMS) instrument that was administered on a monthly basis (Palinkas et al. 1998, 2000a, 2000b, 2001, 2002; Johnson et al. 2002). A 68 percent confidence ellipse is shown for each of the years.  Year A has the least variation in these psychological measures over the course of the winter and has the lowest overall values across the three groups. Year C has somewhat more variability in these psychological indices over the winter and is the most extreme overall in values over the winter months.  Year B has a high degree of variation over the winter and is in between the other years in terms of the magnitude of psychological indices.  
 051015MONTH2345Overall MoraleYEARCAB Figure 4.  Comparison of ﬁoverall moraleﬂ over the Austral winter across the three years of South Pole crews (intervals shown as standard errors)  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 1023456789ANGER34567mayaugustaprilmarchoctoberseptemberjunejulymaymarchjuneapriljulyaugustseptemberoctoberoctobermaymarchaugustseptemberjulyapriljuneYEARC
AB Figure 5.  Relationship between anger and tension/anxiety over the 8 months for the three years studied (years are encompassed by 68 percent confidence level ellipses).               
Table 3 summarizes the comparison between the three years with respect to the informal role properties discussed above.  Year A had by far the richest combination of role properties, followed by year B.  Year C lacked many of the informal role properties that are hypothesized as important for the proper functioning of groups.  It is clear from this analysis that the presence of informal role properties lead to more desirable group outcomes. Year A had higher levels of morale and lower levels of tension, anxiety, and anger. This was followed by year B that had more moderate levels of informal role properties and correspondingly lower levels of morale and higher levels of anger, tension, and anxiety.  Year C actually started with the most coherent structure of the three years at the beginning of winter (Johnson et al. in press) but the structure fragmented into several subgroups over the course of the winter that mostly reflected the trades versus science categories.  Although year C initially displayed a cohesive structure, it lacked the informal role properties needed to effectively deal with the inevitable internal and external threats faced by groups (e.g., negative deviance, interpersonal conflicts, meddling from outside agents or agencies).               
Table 3. Summary of informal role properties present in the 3 years at the South Pole Station by winter™s end.     Informal Role Properties Year A Year B Year C Role Complementarity High Moderate Low Role Consensus High  High Low Role Redundancy High High-Moderate Low*  Role Latency Moderate Moderate Low Role Isomorphism High Moderate Low *Redundancy is low in terms of expressive leadership but high in terms of instrumental leadership leading to role competition for the work leadership position Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 11Concluding Remarks: Informal Roles and Implications for Network Evolution, Stability, and Adaptability   
This paper provided a brief discussion and examples of the importance of the recognition of the informal and latent role properties of networks for understanding network evolution and change particularly with respect to the direction of change (i.e., the evolution of network fragmentation or coherence).  The examples above have suggested that groups that have a rich mix of informal role properties fair better in terms of both the evolution and stability of group cohesion or coherence. In addition, these properties appear to enhance the ability of groups to adapt to a number of both internal and external threats to group structure and function.  Whereas this research has largely been interested in the factors that keep networks together (e.g., cohesion, coherence) and productive, such an understanding can similarly be used to achieve just the opposite, the fragmentation or disruption of network structures.  Steve Borgatti (this conference) has been concerned with the removal of nodes and its effect on network fragmentation and inter-node distances. Kathleen Carley has recently examined the importance of node insertion in disrupting network structures and the importance of extra-network information in predicting network change and adaptability (e.g., a talk at the Cambridge Colloquium Complexity and Social Networks in December 2001). In either case, an understanding of the relationship between structural properties and role properties of the kind discussed here can aid in producing more informed theories on network fragmentation and disruption.  It is important, for example, to know not only the network or nodal properties of actors, but also their informal role properties.  Such combined information can lead to a deeper understanding of the potential impacts of both node removal (e.g., the removal of expressive leaders that bridge various categories of actors) and insertion (e.g., increased role competition for instrumental leader) on network structures. This entails knowledge of related but distinctly different forms of social structural data.                   
The examples described here have been relatively simplistic in that they involved well-bounded and enduring groups with little or no movement in or out of the network. Despite their simplicity, however, such examples can help inform us about the importance of informal role properties across a wider range of network contexts.  Further research is needed on the types of informal role properties at work in networks in other settings (e.g., terrorist networks).  In addition, we need a better theoretical understanding of the structural correlates of these informal role properties and their ultimate effect on network evolution and stability.          
 
 
 
Footnotes  
1. This research was supported by the National Science Foundation grants BNS-9011351 and OPP-9610231.  In addition, a portion of this work was sponsored by a grant from the National Aeronautics and Space Administration grant NAG-5-4571.  We would like to warmly thank the winter-over crews of South Pole Station for their kindness, friendship, and generous cooperation.        
 
 Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 12 
 
 
 
References  
H.S. Becker and B. Geer. Latent culture: A note on the theory of latent social roles. Administrative Science Quarterly, Volume 5, Issue 2 Sep. 1960, 304-313.  
R.A. Dentler and K.T. Erickson. The function of deviance in small groups. Social Problems, 1959, 99-107  
A.W. Gouldner. Cosmopolitans and locals: Towards an analysis of latent social roles. Administrative Science Quarterly, Volume 2, Issue 3 Dec. 1957, 281-306.  
G. Homans (1974). Social Behavior, 2nd edn, New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.  
J.C. Johnson and S. Weller. Elicitation Techniques in Interviewing. (2002) In Handbook of Interview Research (J. Gubrium and J. Holstein, eds.), pp 491-514,  Sage:Newbury Park.  
J.C. Johnson and M.L. Miller. ﬁDeviant Social Positions in Small Groups: the Relation Between Role and Individual,ﬂ Social Networks 5:51-69, 1983.  
J.C. Johnson and B.R. Finney. ﬁStructural Approaches to the Study of Groups in Space: A Lookat Two Analogs,ﬂ Journal of Social Behavior and Personality 1(3):325-347, 1986.  
J.C. Johnson, J. Boster, and L. Palinkas. "Social Roles and the Evolution of Networks in Isolatedand Extreme Environments. The Journal of Mathematical Sociology (In Press).  J.C. Johnson and D. Parks. ﬁCommunication Roles, Perceived Effectiveness, and Satisfaction in an Environmental Management Program.ﬂ Journal of Computational and Mathematical Organization Theory VOL 4(3) 223-239, 1998.  
J. C. Johnson, L.A. Palinkas,.,  J. S. Boster, S. Rakusa-Suszczewski, V. P. Klopov, X. Quan Fu,  and Usha Sachdeva. Network Evolution, Social Roles, and Well-being in Isolated Groups: A Cross-Cultural Comparison. ..  PPaappeerr  pprreesseenntteedd  aatt  tthhee  SScciieennttiiffiicc  CCoommmmiitttteeee  ffoorr  AAnnttaarrccttiicc  RReesseeaarrcchh  ((SSCCAARR))  mmeeeettiinngg,,  SShhaanngghhaaii,,  CChhiinnaa,,  JJuullyy  22000022..  
L.A. Palinkas, E.K.E. Gunderson, J.C. Johnson, and A. Holland,. "Behavior and Performance on long Duration Space Flights: Evidence from Analog Environments." Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine Vol. 71, No. 49: September 2000. L.A. Palinkas, E.K.E. Gunderson, A. Holland, C. Miller, and J.C. Johnson. "Predictors of Behavior and Performance in Extreme Environments: The Antarctic Space Analogue Program." Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine Vol. 71, No. 41: 1-7, April 2000.  
L.A. Palinkas, J.C. Johnson, J.S. Boster, and M. Houseal.  Longitudinal Studies of Behavior and Performance During a Winter at the South Pole. Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 69(1) 73-77, 1998.   
L.A. Palinkas, J.C. Johnson, and J.S. Boster. Social Support and Depressed Moods in Isolated and Confined Environments. In  The proceedings of the 52nd International Astronautical Congress, IAF/IAA-010G3.b.01, Oct. 2001.  
L. A. Palinkas,  J. C. Johnson., J.S. Boster, S. Rakusa-Suszczewski, V. P. Klopov,  X. Quan Fu, U. Sachdeva.  CCuullttuurraall  DDiiffffeerreenncceess  iinn  MMoooodd  aanndd  SSoocciiaall  SSuuppppoorrtt  iinn  AAnnttaarrccttiiccaa..  PPaappeerr  pprreesseenntteedd  aatt  tthhee  SScciieennttiiffiicc  CCoommmmiitttteeee  ffoorr  AAnnttaarrccttiicc  RReesseeaarrcchh  ((SSCCAARR))  mmeeeettiinngg,,  SShhaanngghhaaii,,  CChhiinnaa,,  JJuullyy  22000022..  
 Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Dynamic Network Analysis  Kathleen M. Carley  Institute for Software Research International Carnegie Mellon University  
 Abstract  
Dynamic network analysis (DNA) varies from traditional social network analysis in that it can handle large dynamic multi-mode, multi-link networks with varying levels of uncertainty.  DNA, like quantum mechanics, would be a theory in which relations are probabilistic, the measurement of a node changes its properties, movement in one part of the system propagates through the system, and so on.  However, unlike quantum mechanics, the nodes in the DNA, the atoms, can learn.  An approach to DNA is described that builds DNA theory through the combined use of multi-agent modeling, machine learning, and meta-matrix approach to network representation. A set of candidate metric for describing the DNA are defined.  Then, a model built using this approach is presented.  Results concerning the evolution and destabilization of networks are described.  Acknowledgement  
The research reported herein was supported by the National Science Foundation NSF IRI9633 662, the Office of Naval Research (ONR) Grant No. N00014-97-1-0037 and Grant No. 9620.1.1140071, Additional support was provided by the NSF IGERT 9972762 for research and training in CASOS and by the center for Computational Analysis of Social and Organizational Systems at Carnegie Mellon University (http://www.casos.ece.cmu.edu ). The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of the Office of Naval Research, the National Science Foundation or the U.S. government.  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 2Dynamic Network Analysis  
Terrorist organizations have network structures that are distinct from those in typical hierarchical organizations Œ they are cellular and distributed. While most commanders, politicians and intelligence agents have at least an intuitive understanding of hierarchies and how to affect their behavior, they have less of an understanding of how to even go about reasoning about dynamic networked organizations (Ronfelt and Arquilla, 2001).  It is even more difficult for us to understand how such networks will evolve, change, adapt and how they can be destabilized.   Clearly social network analysis can be applied to the study of covert networks (Sparrow, 1991). Many are stepping forward suggesting that to understand these networks we just need to ﬁconnect the dotsﬂ and then isolate the ﬁkey actors who are often defined in terms of their ﬁcentralityﬂ in the network.  To an extent, this is right.  However, it belies the difficulty of ﬁconnecting the dotsﬂ in terms of mining vast quantities of information, pattern matching on agent characteristics for people who go under multiple aliases, and still ending up with information the may be intentionally misleading, inaccurate, out-of-date, and incomplete. Further, this belies the difficulty in ﬁknowingﬂ who is the most central when you have at best only a sample of the network.  Finally, and critically, this approach does not contend with the most pressing problem Œ the underlying network is dynamic.  Just because you isolate a key actor today does not mean that the network will be destabilized and unable to respond.  Rather, it is possible, that isolating such an actor may have the same effect as cutting off the Hydra™s head;  many new key actors may emerge (Carley, Lee and Krackhardt, 2001). To understand the dynamics of terrorist, and indeed any, network we need to understand the basic processes by which networks evolve.  Moreover, we have to evaluate isolation strategies in the face of an evolving network and in the face of missing information.  To ignore either the dynamics or the lack of information is liable to lead to erroneous, and possibly devastatingly wrong, policies.  Taking in to account both the dynamics and the lack of information should engender a more cautious approach in which we can ask, ﬁif we do x what is likely to happen?ﬂ  Limitations to Traditional SNA  
Traditionally, social network analysis (SNA) has focused on small, bounded networks, with 2-3 types of links (such as friendship and advice) among one type of node (such as people), at one point in time, with close to perfect information.  To be sure there are a few studies that have considered extremely large networks, or two types of nodes (people and events), or unbounded networks (such as inter-organizational response teams); however, these are the exception not the norm.  However, such studies are still the exception not the rule.  Further, while it is understood, at least in principle how to think about multi-modal, multi-plex, dynamic networks, the number of tools, the interpretation of the measures, and the illustrative studies using such ﬁhigher orderﬂ networks are still in their infancy relative to what is available for simpler networks.  Finally, many of the tools do not scale well with the size of the network or degrade gracefully with errors in the network; e.g., they may be too computationally expensive or too sensitive to both type 1 and 2 errors.  What is needed is a dynamic network analysis theory and toolkit.  We are working Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 3to develop such a tool kit and the associated metrics and decision aids.  In this paper, one such tool, DyNet is described and used to examine various isolation strategies.  Dynamic Network Analysis   
Recently there have been a number of advances that extend SNA to the realm of dynamic analysis and multi-color networks. There are three key advances: 1) the meta-matrix, 2) treating ties as probabilistic, and 3) combining social networks with cognitive science and multi-agent systems.  These advances result in a dynamic network analysis. Meta-Matrix:  Carley (2002) combined knowledge management, operations research and social networks techniques together to create the notion of the meta-matrix Œ a multi-color, multiplex representation of the entities and the connections among them.  The Meta-matrix is an extension and generalization of the PCANS approach forwarded by Carley and Krackhardt (1999) that focused on people, resources and tasks.  For our purpose, the entities of interest are people, knowledge/resources, events/tasks and organizations Œ see table 1.  This defines a set of 10 inter-linked networks such that changes in one network cascade into changes in the others; relationships in one network imply relationships in another.  For example, co-membership in an organization or co-attendance at an event for two people suggests a tie in the social network between these two people.  A group, such as a terrorist network, can be represented in terms of an overtime sequence of such networks.  In fact, any organization or group can be represented in this fashion and we have used this representation on numerous occasions to characterize actual organizations and to predict their ability to adapt.   All graph theory and network measures can be defined in terms of whether they can or have been applied to which cells. Further, on the basis of this meta-matrix new metrics can be developed that better capture the overall importance of an individual, task, or resource in the group.  An example of such a metric is cognitive load Œ the effort an individual has to employ to hold his role in the terrorist group  - and it takes in to account, who he interacts with, which events he has been at, which organizations he is a member of, the coordination costs of working with others in the same organization or at the same event or in learning from an earlier event or training for an upcoming event.  A large number of such metrics have been developed and analyzed in terms of their ability to explain the evolution, performance, and adaptability of dynamic networks. A key difficulty from a growth of science perspective, is that as we move from SNA to DNA the number, type, complexity, and value of measures changes.  A core issue for DNA is what are the appropriate metrics for describing and contrasting dynamic networks.  Significant new research is needed in this regard.  To date, our work suggests that a great deal of leverage can be gained in describing networks by focusing on measures that utilize more of the cells in the meta-matrix.  For example, cognitive load, which measures the cognitive effort and individual has to do at one point in time has been shown to be a valuable predictor of emergent leadership (Carley and Ren, 2001).   Cognitive load is a complex measure that takes into account the number of others, resources, tasks the agent needs to manage and the communication needed to engage in such activity.  In addition, we find that for any of the cells in the meta-matrix, particularly for large scale networks,  many of the standard graph level measures have little information content as the network grows in size (Anderson, Butts and Carley, 1999) and/or are highly correlated with each other.  A set of measures that are generally not correlated, scale well, and are key in characterizing a network are the Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 4size of the network (number of nodes), density (either as number of ties or the typical social network form number of ties/number of possible ties), homogeneity in the distribution of ties (e.g., the number of clusters or subcomponents, the variance in centrality), rate of change in nodes, and rate of change in ties.  The point is not that these are the only measures needed to characterize dynamic networks.  The point is that these are a candidate set that have value and that as a field we need to develop a small set of metrics that can be applied to networks, regardless of size, to characterize the dynamics.  Table 1. Meta-Matrix  People Knowledge/Resources Events/Tasks Organizations People Social network Knowledge network Attendance network Membership network Knowledge/Resources  Information network Needs network Organizational capability Events/Tasks   Temporal ordering Institutional support or attack Organizations    Inter-organizational network  Probabilistic Ties: The ties in the meta-matrix are probabilistic.  Various factors affect the probability, including the observer™s certainty in the tie and the likelihood that the tie is manifest at that time. Bayesian updating techniques (Dombroski and Carley, 2002), cognitive inferencing techniques, and models of social and cognitive change processes (Carley, 2002; Carley, Lee and Krackhardt, 2001) can be used to estimate the probability and how it changes over time.   We are in the process of exploring techniques for combining the cognitive inferencing with the cognitive change process models. Multi-Agent Network Models: A major problem with traditional SNA is that the people in the networks are not treated as active adaptive agents capable of taking action, learning, and altering their networks.  There are several basic, well known, social and cognitive processes that influence who is likely to interact with whom: relative similarity, relative expertise, and co-worker.  Carley uses multi-agent technology in which the agents use these mechanisms, learn, take part in events, do tasks to model organizational and social change.  The dynamic social network emerges from these actions.  The set of networks linking people, knowledge, tasks and other groups or organizations co-evolve.  Carley, Lee and Krackhardt (2001) use simple learning mechanisms to dynamically adjust networks as the agents in them attended events, learned new information, or were removed from the network.  In DyNet, described herein, additional mechanisms center on agent isolation are also considered. DNA has a wide range of applications.  For example, this approach is being used to examine the likely impact of unanticipated events in the VISTA project (Diedrich et al, forthcoming), the possible effects of biological attacks on cities in BioWar (Carley et al, 2002), in evaluating CIO response strategies to denial of service attacks (Chen, 2002), and evaluating information security Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 5within organizations Œ ThreatFinder Project (Carley, 2001).  See also www.casos.ece.cmu.edu current projects and working papers.  Dynamic Network Theory  
To move beyond representation and method, we need to ask, ﬁHow do networks change?ﬂ  What are the basic processes?  From the meta-matrix perspective, the processes are easy Œ things that lead to the adding and dropping of nodes and/or relations Œ see table 2.  Again, no claim is being made that the processes listed in table 2 cover the complete spectrum; rather, they illustrate the types of node change processes that need to be postulated.  A full theory of dynamic networks needs to speak to such mechanisms.    Table 2.  Basic Change Processes for Nodes in the Meta-Matrix People Knowledge/Resources Events/Tasks Organizations Birth Death Promotion Mobility Recruitment Incarceration Isolation  Innovation Discovery Forgetting Consumption  Goal Change Re-engineering Development of new technology Stop usage of technology Organizational birth Organizational death Mergers Acquisitions Legislation of new entity  
Similarly, there are a set of processes that lead to the addition and removal of relations.  Basic processes are cognitive, social and political in nature.  Cognitive processes have to do with learning and forgetting, the changes that occur in ties due to changes in what individuals know.  Social changes occur when one agent or organization dictates a change in ties, such as when a manager re-assigns individuals to tasks.  Finally, political changes are due to legislation that effect organizations and the over-arching goals.  To illustrate what is meant, a limited number of such processes are described in Table 3.  Further, and this should be obvious, processes that add or eliminate nodes also affect relations to/from that node.  For example, if all individuals in a society forget a particular piece of information that knowledge node, no longer exists and all connections from people to it are now eliminated. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 6  Table 3. Change Processes for Relations in the Meta-Matrix  People Knowledge/ Resources Events/ Tasks Organizations People Motivation to Interact Change in access Learning Acquisition Re-assignment Mobility Recruitment Knowledge/ Resources  Discovery Analogical reasoning  Innovation  IP development Events/Tasks    Re-engineering Out-sourcing Organizations    Alliances Coalitions  DyNet  
The purpose of the DyNet project is to develop the equivalent of a flight simulator for reasoning about dynamic networked organizations.  Through a unique blending of computer science, social networks and organization theory we are creating a new class of tools for managing organizational dynamics. The core tool is DyNet Œ a reasoning support tool for reasoning under varying levels of uncertainty about dynamic networked and cellular organizations, their vulnerabilities, and their ability to reconstitute themselves.  Using DyNet the analyst would be able to see how the networked organization was likely to evolve if left alone, how its performance could be affected by various information warfare and isolation strategies, and how robust these strategies are in the face of varying levels of information assurance.   Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 7Figure 1. DYNET:  A desktop tool for reasoning about dynamic networked and cellular organizations.  
DyNet is intended to be a desktop system that can be placed in the hands of intelligence personnel, researchers, or military strategists.  Through hands-on what if analysis the analysts will be able to reason in a what Œif fashion about how to build stable adaptive networks with high performance and how to destabilize networks.  There are many applications for such a tool including: threat assessment; assessing information security risks in corporations; intel training; simulation of the red team in a gaming situation, and estimation of efficacy of destabilization policies.  Currently an alpha version exists as a batch program (no visualization) and it has been used to evaluate simple isolation strategies.  The system can handle data on real networks.  The DyNet tool is a step toward understanding how networks will evolve, change, adapt and how they can be destabilized.  The goal will be to incorporate all of the evolutionary mechanisms previously discussed.  DyNet, which is a computer model of dynamic networks, can also be thought of as the embodiment of a theory of dynamic networks.  The focus of this theory is on the cognitive, and to a lesser extent, social processes by which the networks in the meta-matrix evolve.  The basic cognitive forces for change in DyNet are learning, forgetting, goal-setting, and motivation for interaction.  The basic social forces for change are recruitment, isolation, and to a limited extent the initiation of rumors and training. The basic motivations for interaction are relative similarity, relative expertise or some combination of the two.  Relative similarity is based on the fundamental finding of homophilly, the tendency of interacting partners to be similar.  Arguments surrounding this fundamental process include the need for communicative ease, comfort, access, and training.  Relative expertise is based on the fundamental finding that when in doubt people will turn they view as experts for information.  Arguments surround this fundamental processes include the need to acquire, desire to minimize search, desire to optimize information, and so on.  Other basic motivations such as the need to exhibit competence and the need to coordinate have also been identified and will be added to DyNet but are not in the current system. Among the attrition strategies are removal of the most ﬁcentralﬂ individual, removal of the individual with the highest cognitive load, and removal of individual™s at random.  User™s can control the frequency and severity of such attrition strategies.  Previous studies using this system have shown that a) it is difficult to completely destabilize a network, b) that the best strategy AttackScenarioNetworkProfileDatabase ofOrganizationalScenariosCharacteristics Of known orHypotheticalNetwork or Cellular OrganizationCriticalIndividualsObserveDynamicsDYNET505050505050505050505050505050505050505050505050505050505050505050505050505050505050505050505050505050505050505050505050N =
ROUND28.0026.0024.0022.0020.0018.0016.0014.0012.0010.008.006.004.002.00.0095% CI PERF.98.97.96.95.94KT      .00     1.00Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 8Highest  CentralityHighest  CentralityHighest Cognitive LoadHighest Cognitive LoadRandomdepends on the structure of the network, and c) attrition strategies vary in whether there effectiveness is enhanced or diminished by removing multiple agents at once or sequentially (Carley, 2002).  Agents can be distinguished based on fixed characteristics such as race, family and gender, and on knowledge (or training).  Further, the agents can operate in a world without information technology or augmented by access to email, web pages, or manuals.  Access to others can be restricted, as might be the case when operatives live in different countries.  Performance metrics include task completion, accuracy, energy for tasks, information diffusion, and group cohesion.  Finally, the basic networks can be extracted continually in order to see the system evolve.  Among the networks that can be extracted are the knowledge network, the overall social network, the emotive or ﬁfriendshipﬂ networks, and the acquisition or ﬁadviceﬂ network. The network evolutionary strategies include learning (during interaction), forgetting, personnel attrition, misinformation, and changing task demands.  DyNet offers the user the choice of entering specific networks or entering network characteristics (such as size and density).   Results Using DyNet a series of virtual experiments were run.  These experiments were designed to examine the interaction between network structure, dynamics (particularly in response to isolation), and the information that the observer has on which to base the isolation strategies.  In figure 2, a very high level conceptualization of these differences is shown.  Three possible isolation strategies:  isolating individuals at random, isolating those who are the most central (degree centrality), and isolating those with the highest cognitive load are shown relative to a specific organization and networks within it.  Given that the networks are evolving at issue is which of these strategies will be the most effective?  Further, we might ask, if the social network was different, e.g., less hierarchical, would that matter?                                                                       
 
 
Figure 2.  Structure, Isolation and Dynamics  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 9The Structure of the Network Matters  
The first finding, and it is quite robust, is that the structure of the network matters.  That is, random networks in which the relations are distributed in an independent and identical fashion, hierarchies, and cellular networks all evolve quite differently, require different strategies to destabilize, have different abilities to diffuse information, and exhibit different performance for the same task.  In Figures 3 and 4, this difference is illustrated with respect to the networks ability to recover from isolation strategies.  In figure 3 we see the impact of the three isolation strategies on a random iid network and in figure 4 the impact of the same strategies on a cellular network.  As an aside, the particular cellular network simulated here is one whose features map onto available information about covert networks, such as the cells are completely connected internally and cell size ranges from 3-10 members.  In these figures not only do we see that the isolation strategies vary in their effectiveness based on the structure of the network they are attacking, but in addition, cellular networks are able to recover from the attacks.   
 Networks Can Heal Themselves  
A second key finding is that networks are generally able to heal themselves.  That is isolation of a node that links disparate groups together typically does not leave those groups disconnected.  Rather the basic social and cognitive processes outlined lead individuals to seek alternative contact points to interact with.  For example in Figure 5 we see on the left a network where the person with the highest cognitive load, the emergent leader was isolated.  A consequence is that multiple new leaders emerge, each of whom ends up being more directive than the original leader.  Healing is not guaranteed and in fact depends on the underlying structure, the cultural basis for interaction, the degree of isolation, the frequency of isolation, and the strategy for isolation.  For example, as was seen in Figure 4, cellular networks heal themselves regardless of which isolation strategy is used against it.  In this case, the cell structure of the network enables Figure 3: Impact of Isolation Strategy on Performance for Standard Network505560657012039587796115134153172191TimeAccuracyLeaderCentralRandom Figure 4: Impact of Isolation Strategy on Performance for Cellular Network50525456586011835526986103120137154171188TimeAccuracyLeaderCentralRandom Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 10 Performance 2425262728293031no-isolationperfectknowledge90% people75% people50% peoplethe network as a to engage in what appears as ﬁmeta-learning,ﬂ i.e., learning how to recover from unanticipated attrition.  Cellular networks, which are the structure most like those used by terrorist organizations, are very difficult to destabilize.  The reasons are complex, but a key factor is that such network structures are able to heal relatively faster than other structure both in terms of the re-emergence of leaders and in terms of performance recoveries after personnel have been removed.   Full Information is Not Necessary  
In the foregoing two examples, we saw the impact of destabilization strategies on network without considering ﬁhow is it that we know what we know?ﬂ  Or in other words, ﬁif we are not sure what the underlying network looks like, how confident can we be in our predictions about how to destabilize it?ﬂ  Notice, that in traditional SNA, typically we have close to full information.  For covert networks we do not.  Information may be missing because we don™t know some of the nodes Œ the people involved, or because we don™t know some of the relations.    
Figure 5.  The network before (left) and after (right) the isolation of the leader.  
Figure 6.  The impact of incomplete information about who is in the network.  
In Figure 6 we see the impact of not knowing al the nodes.  Here we see the comparison of no attack, versus the average impact of isolating personnel Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 11(across the three isolation strategies) under conditions of full information, knowing 90% of the nodes, 75% and only 50%.  Clearly having close to perfect or perfect knowledge means that more effective isolation strategies are found.  Note, however, that any isolation is better than none, assuming our goal is to degrade the performance and that we don™t need perfect information to be quite effective. Now, consider the case where we don™t have perfect information about the relations.  One way for this to occur is if we don™t know all the knowledge or resources that are available to the network.  In figure 7 we see the impact of having imperfect knowledge of the relations as a function of how much do we know about the other entities, in this case what there is for the other to know.  Here we see that we actually do better knowing less.  This is due to the interaction between what we know and the isolation strategy.  Essentially, when we don™t really know the underlying social and knowledge network we may overestimate the primacy of a person, who although not the key in terms of degree centrality, is more central in terms of cognitive load.  Thus, in effect, less knowledge makes both the centrality and the cognitive load strategies more similar resulting in on average lower performance due to the fact that cellular networks are more devastated by the extraction of such emergent leaders, at least in the short run.  Further, reduced information about relations makes all isolation strategies more mixed thus inhibiting the ability of the opponent to engage in meta-learning.  
Figure 7.  The impact of incomplete information about what people know.  Summary  
Thinking about networks from a dynamic perspective is absolutely essential to understanding the modern world. An approach toward dynamic networks has been outlined.  There are several distinctive hallmarks to this approach.  First, in contrast to other multi-agent work, the agents we describe are in actual social networks.  Here, the networks and the agents co-evolve. Secondly, the web of affiliations connects not just agents, but agents and other entities such as knowledge, tasks and organizations.  The agents described here in are more cognitively realistic than the typical a-life agents.  They are also more socially realistic in terms of interaction than the typical e-commerce agents as the agents we use are boundedly rational rather than optimizers.  Another distinction compared to most systems is that DyNet can take real networks as input. Performance 2425262728293031no-isolationperfect knowledge90% knowledge75% knowledge50% knowledgeDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 12In contrast to traditional SNA, DNA considers the role of the agent in terms of processes and not just position.  That is, the agents can do things Œ communicate, store information, learn.  Further, the networks are dynamic and changing even as the agents change.  The links are probabilistic, the networks multi-colored and multi-plex to the extent that the set of networks combine in to one complex system where changes in one sub-network inform and constrain changes in the others, often leading to error cascades.   Finally, DNA explores the sensitivity of the measures and the impacts to error.   The approach, theory, and results described here are illustrative.  Clearly much work needs to be done before we have a complete understanding of network dynamics.  Are there likely to be other change mechanisms than those currently in DyNet Œ to be sure.  However, since all human action is cognitively mediated Œ it is unlikely that such mechanisms will not be derivable, at a basic level from what the physical and physiological constraints, what the agent knows, the basic learning and information processing mechanisms, and the way in which groups, organizations and institutions store such information.  To create a truly dynamic network theory we need to create the equivalent of a quantum dynamics for the socio-cognitive world, where the fundamental entities, the people, unlike atoms, have the ability to learn. ReferencesAnderson, Brigham S., Carter Butts & Kathleen M. Carley, 1999, ﬁThe Interaction of Size and Density with Graph-Level Measuresﬂ to Social Networks. ﬁ  Social Networks. 21: 239-267. Butts, C. 2000. ﬁNetwork Inference, Error, and Informant (In)Accuracy: A Bayesian Approach,ﬂ to appear in Social Networks  Carley K. (1990). ``Group Stability:  A Socio-Cognitive Approach,©©  in Lawler E., Markovsky  B.,  Ridgeway  C.  and  Walker  H.  (Eds.),   Advances in Group Processes},  JAI Press, Greenwich, CN. Carley, Kathleen M.  & Yuqing Ren, 2001, ﬁTradeoffs Between Performance and Adaptability for C3I Architectures.ﬂ  In Proceedings of the 2001 Command and Control Research and Technology Symposium.  Conference held in Annapolis, Maryland, June, 2001. Evidence Based Research, Vienna, VA. Carley, Kathleen M. 1999, ﬁOn the Evolution of Social and Organizational Networks.ﬂ In Steven B.  Andrews and David Knoke (Eds.) Vol. 16 special issue of Research in the Sociology of Organizations. on ﬁNetworks In and Around Organizations.ﬂ  Greenwhich, CN: JAI Press, Inc. Stamford, CT, pp. 3-30. Carley, Kathleen M. 2002, ﬁInhibiting Adaptationﬂ In Proceedings of the 2002 Command and Control Research and Technology Symposium.  Conference held in Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA. Evidence Based Research, Vienna, VA. Carley, Kathleen M. 2002, ﬁSmart Agents and Organizations of the Futureﬂ The Handbook of New Media.  Edited by Leah Lievrouw & Sonia Livingstone, Ch. 12 pp. 206-220, Thousand Oaks, CA, Sage. Carley, Kathleen M. Ju-Sung Lee and David Krackhardt, 2001, Destabilizing Networks, Connections 24(3):31-34. Diedrich, Frederick J., Kathleen M. Carley, Jean MacMillan, Keith Baker, MAJ Jerry L. Schlabach, LTC J, Victor Fink, forthcoming, VISualization of Threats and Attacks (VISTA) in Urban Environmentsﬂ Military Intelligence Professional Bulletin Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 13Krackhardt, David & Kathleen M. Carley, 1998, ﬁA PCANS Model of Structure in Organizationﬂ Pp. 113-119 in Proceedings of the 1998 International Symposium on Command and Control Research  and Technology.  Conference held in June. Monterray, CA. Evidence Based Research, Vienna, VA. Ronfeldt, D. and J. Arquilla. September 21, 2001. ﬁNetworks, Netwars, and the Fight for the Future,ﬂ First Monday, Issue 6 No. 10. online: http://firstmonday.org/issues/issue6_10/ronfeldt/index.htm. Skvoretz, J. 1990. ﬁBiased Net Theory: Approximations, Simulations, and Observations,ﬂ Social Networks, Vol. 12. pp. 217-238 Sparrow, M. (1991). The application of network analysis to  criminal intelligence: An assessment of the prospects. Social  Networks 13:251-274.  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AccountingforDegreeDistributions
inEmpiricalAnalysisofNetworkDynamics
TomA.B.Snijders
UniversityofGroningen

December2002
Abstract
Degrees(thenumberoflinksattachedtoagivennode)playaparticular
andimportantroleinempiricalnetworkanalysisbecauseoftheirobvious
importanceforexpressingthepositionofnodes.Itisarguedherethatthere
isnogeneralstraightforwardrelationbetweenthedegreedistributiononone
handandstructuralaspectsontheotherhand,asthisrelationdependson
furthercharacteristicsofthepresumedmodelforthenetwork.Therefore
empiricalinferencefromobservednetworkcharacteristicstotheprocesses
thatcouldberesponsiblefornetworkgenesisanddynamicscannotbebased
only,ormainly,ontheobserveddegreedistribution.
Asanelaborationandpracticalimplementationofthispoint,astatistical
modelforthedynamicsofnetworks,expressedasdigraphswithavertex
set,isproposedinwhichtheoutdegreedistributionisgovernedbyparameters
thatarenotconnectedtotheparametersforthestructuraldynamics.The
useofsuchanapproachinstatisticalmodelingminimizestheof
theobserveddegreesontheconclusionsaboutthestructuralaspectsofthe
networkdynamics.
Themodelisastochasticactor-orientedmodel,anddealswiththede-
greesinamannerresemblingTversky'sEliminationbyAspectsapproach.A
statisticalprocedureforparameterestimationinthismodelisproposed,and
anexampleisgiven.

TomA.B.Snijders,ICS,DepartmentofSociology,GroteRozenstraat31,9712TG
Groningen,TheNetherlands,email
<t.a.b.snijders@ppsw.rug.nl>
.Thepreparation
ofthisworkhasfromstimulatingdiscussionswithPhilippaPattisonandMark
HandcockandfromparticipationinNIHgrant1R01DA12831-01A1,\ModelingHIVand
STDinDrugUserandSocialNetworks".IamverygratefultoJohnsonforputting
atmydisposalthedatausedintheexample,andgivingpermissiontousethemhere.
1
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.I.Introduction
Considerasocialnetworkwiththefocusononerelationrepresentedbya
directedgraph(digraph),referringtothenodesasactors(whichcouldbe
individualhumansorotherprimatesbutalso,e.g.,companiesorwebsites).
Insuchanetwork,thedegreesrepresentanimportantaspectofnetwork
structure.Theoutdegreeofanactor,asthenumberoftiesfromthis
actortootheractors,thetotalamountofactivityoftheactorinthis
network,whichcouldbedependentontheimportanceofthenetworkfor
thisactor,theaveragecostsandbforthisactorofhavingoutgoing
ties,and,iftheoutgoingtiesarebasedonself-reports,theactor'sresponse
tendenciesorconstraintsofthedatacollectionmethods.Theindegreeofan
actor,asthenumberoftiesfromotherstothisactor,willthe
importanceandeasinessfortheothersofextendingatietothisparticular
actor,etc.Theimportanceofthedegreesasanaspectofnetworkstructureis
generallyrecognized(e.g.,WassermanandFaust,1994;Albertandasi,
2002).Degreesreferdirectlytotheindividualactors,whichgivestheman
interestingpositioncombiningstructuralandindividualrelevance.Degrees
oftenareconstraintsin,butalsoconsequencesof,theprocessesthatgenerate
networksanddeterminenetworkdynamics.
Thishasledtovariousproposalstocontrolfordegreesinthestatistical
evaluationofnetworks.Onepossibilityfordoingthisistotestobserved
networkcharacteristicsforthenullhypothesisastheuniformdis-
tributiongiventheoutdegrees,the
Uj
X
i
+
distribution,ortheuniformdis-
tributiongiventhein-aswellastheoutdegrees,denotedthe
Uj
X
i
+
;X
+
i
distribution(Wasserman,1977;Wasserman&Faust,1994;Snijders,1991,
2002b).HowtogeneratesuchgraphswasstudiedbySnijders(1991)witha
focusonMonteCarlosimulationmethodsforthedirectedcase,andbyMol-
loyandReed(1995)whoproposedasimulationmethodfortheundirected
casewhichalsocanbefruitfullyusedtoobtainasymptoticresultsforsparse
undirectedgraphswithagivendegreesequence.Variouswaystotakeac-
countofthedegreedistributioninthecontextofthe
p

modelofWasserman
&Pattison(1996)werediscussedinSnijders&vanDuijn(2002).Stimu-
latedbyobservationsofthelong-tailednatureofthedegreedistributionsof
linksintheworldwideweb,asiandAlbert(1999)proposedmodelsfor
networkdynamics(modeledasundirectedgraphswithagrowingnumberof
vertices)inwhichthecreationofnewlinksdependsstronglyonthecurrent
degrees,andisrandomconditionalonthecurrentdegreevector.Newman,
Strogatz,andWatts(2001)andNewman,WattsandStrogatz(2002)derived
variousasymptoticpropertiesofrandomundirectedgraphswithgivendegree
sequences.Theyfollowedthementionedliteratureinunderliningtheimpor-
2
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.tanceofstudyingforempiricalnetworkswhetherobservednetworkstructure
canbeaccountedforbythedegreesequenceplusrandomness;iftheanswer
isnegative,thereisevidenceforstructuralmechanismsinadditiontothe
degrees.
Itisarguedherethatthedegreedistributionisaprimarycharacteris-
ticforthestructureofdigraphsbutmanyotherfeatures,suchastransi-
tivity,occurrenceofcycles,segmentationintosubgroups,etc.,arealsoof
greatimportance.Althoughthedegreedistributionmayposeconstraints
tothevaluesoftheseotherstructuralfeatures(Snijders,1991;Newman,
Strogatz,andWatts,2001;Newman,WattsandStrogatz,2002),itdoesnot
determinethemandanempiricalfocusondegreesexclusivelywouldclose
oureyestomuchthatnetworkanalysiscantellus.Thispaperpresents
atwo-stepmodelfornetworkdynamics,inwhichthedeterminationofthe
outdegreesisseparatedfromthefurtherdeterminationofnetworkstructure.
Thisgivesagreateryinmodeling,andallowstomodelstructural
networkdynamicswithoutcontaminationbyunfortunateassumptionsabout
thedynamicsoftheoutdegrees.
II.Atwo-stepmodelfornetworkdynamics:
outdegrees,thennetworkstructure
Thispaperisconcernedwiththestatisticalmodelingofnetworkevolution
fordataconsistingoftwoormorerepeatedobservationsofasocialnetwork
foragivensetofactors,representedbyadirectedgraphwithagiven
vertexset.Whenproposingstatisticalmodelsfornetworkevolution,theo-
reticalcredibilityofthemodelhastobecombinedwithempiricalapplicabil-
ity.Thestochasticactor-orientedmodelofSnijders(2001,2003),extended
tonetworksofchangingcompositionbyHuisman&Snijders(2003),tried
todojustthis,embeddingthediscrete-timeobservationsinanunobserved
continuous-timenetworkevolutionprocessinwhichthenetworkchangesin
smallstepswherejustonearcisaddedordeletedatanygivenmoment.The
networkchangesaredeterminedstochasticallyinstepsmodeledbyrandom
utilitymodelsfortheactors.
Thepresentpaperadaptsthismodeltohavemorefreedomin
observeddistributionsofoutdegrees.Thefollowingfeaturesoftheearlier
modelareretained.Themodelisastochasticprocessincontinuoustime,in
whichthearcsinthenetworkcanchangeonlyoneatthetime.Itisactor-
orientedinthesensethatthemodelisdescribedinsuchawaythatnetwork
changestakeplacebecauseactorscreateanewoutgoingtie,orwithdrawan
existingoutgoingtie.Theactorwhochangesanoutgoingtieisdesignated
3
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.randomly,withprobabilitiesthatmaydependontheactors'characteristics
asbycovariatesandbynetworkpositions.Giventhatanactor
changessometie,(s)heselectsthetietobechangedaccordingtoarandom
utilitymodel,whichisbasedonnetworkstructure(e.g.,
transitivity).
Theprecisewayinwhichitisdeterminedstochasticallywhichactorwill
makeachange,andwhatisthechangetobemade,istly
thanintheearlierpapers,soastoallowmodelingadiversityofdegree
distributionsinamorenaturalway.Thefocushereisonthedistributionof
theoutdegrees;ofcourse,byreversingdirection,thiscanbeappliedequally
welltomodelingthedistributionoftheindegrees.Themodelproposedhere
iscomposedoftwosubstepsinamannercomparabletoTversky's(1972)
EliminationbyAspects
approach.Inthesubstep,theactorischosen,
andtheactordecideswhethertocreateanewoutgoingtie,ortodelete
anexistingtie.Inthesecondstep,iftheresultofthesubstepwasto
addatie,theactorchoosestowhichoftheotheractorsthenewtiewillbe
created;andifthesubstepledtothedecisiontodeleteatie,theactor
chooseswhichexistingtiewillbewithdrawn.Thus,theaspectthatthe
actortakesintoconsiderationishisorheroutdegree;thesecondaspectis
thefurtherpositionoftheactorinthenetworkstructure.
Notation
Thenetworkisrepresentedbyadirectedgraphon
n
verticeswithadjacency
matrix
x
=(
x
ij
),where
x
ij
indicateswhetherthereisatiedirectedfrom
actor
i
toactor
j
(
i;j
=1
;:::;n
)(inwhichcase
x
ij
=1)ornot(
x
ij
=0).
Thediagonalisformallyby
x
ii
=0.Itissupposedthatatime-
series
x
(
t
)
;t
2f
t
1
;:::;t
M
g
ofsocialnetworksisavailablewherethe
t
m
are
strictlyincreasingand
M

2.Theseobservednetworksareregardedas
M
discreteobservationsonastochasticprocess
X
(
t
)onthespaceofall
digraphson
n
vertices,evolvingincontinuoustime.Thisprocessistakento
beleft-continuous,i.e.,
X
(
t
)=lim
t
0
"
t
X
(
t
0
)forall
t:
Thestateofthenetworkimmediatelyaftertime
t
isdenoted
X
(
t
+
)=lim
t
0
#
t
X
(
t
0
)
:
Noassumptionofstationarityismadeforthemarginaldistributionsof
X
(
t
),andthereforetheobservation
x
(
t
1
)isnotusedtogivedirect
informationonthedistributionofthisstochasticprocess,butthestatistical
analysisconditionsonthisobservednetwork.
4
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Summationisdenotedbyreplacingthesummationindexbya+sign:
e.g.,
x
i
+
istheoutdegreeand
x
+
i
theindegreeofactor
i
.
Modelratesofchange
Atrandommoments,oneoftheactors
i
is`permitted'tochangeoneofhis
orheroutgoingtievariables
X
ij
.Forthetactors,theserandom
momentsareindependentconditionallygiventhepresentnetwork.Therate,
inthetimeinterval
t
m

t<t
m
+1
,atwhichactor
i
adds
atieisdenoted
ˆ
m

i
+
(
x
);therateatwhichthisactor
deletes
atieis
ˆ
m

i

(
x
).Here
x
isthecurrentnetworkand

isaparameterindicatinghowtheratefunction
dependsonthepositionof
i
inthecurrentnetwork(e.g.,asafunctionof
theoutdegreeorindegreeof
i
)and/oroncovariates,iftheseareavailable.
Themultiplicativeparameters
ˆ
m
dependon
m
(theindexnumberofthe
observationinterval)tobeabletoobtainagoodtotheobservedamounts
ofchangebetweenconsecutiveobservations.Together,thesetwochangerates
implythatforactor
i
,duringthetimeinterval
t
m

t<t
m
+1
,theserandom
momentsofchangefollowanon-homogeneousPoissonprocesswithintensity
function

i
(
x
)=
ˆ
m


i
+
(
x
)+

i

(
x;
)

;
(1)
conditionalon
X
(
t
)=
x
.Giventhatactor
i
makesachangeatmoment
t
,
theprobabilitythatthechangesamountstocreatinganewtieis
P
f
X
i
+
(
t
+
)=
X
i
+
(
t
)+1
j
changebyactor
i
attime
t;X
(
t
)=
x
g
=

i
+
(
x
)

i
+
(
x
)+

i

(
x;
)
:
(2)
Thisseparationbetweentheratesofaddinganddeletingtiesallowstofocus
sponthedistributionofthedegrees.
Modelobjectivefunction
Giventhatactor
i
makesachangeatsomemoment
t
forwhichthecurrent
networkisgivenby
X
(
t
)=
x
,theparticularchangemadeisassumedtobe
determinedbytheso-called
objectivefunction
{whichgivesthenumerical
evaluationbytheactorofthepossiblestatesofthenetwork{togetherwith
arandomelement{accountingfor`unexplainedchanges',inotherwords,
forthelimitationsofthemodel.Thisobjectivefunctioncouldbet
betweenthecreationofnewtiesandthedeletionofexistingties.Denote
thesetwoobjectivefunctionsby
f
i
+
(
;x
)and
f
i

(
;x
),respectively.These
functionsindicatewhattheactorstrivestomaximizewhenaddingordeleting
5
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ties,respectively;theydependonaparametervector

.Inasimplemodel
spitcanbeassumedthat
f
i
+

f
i

.(Thiscorrespondstoazero
functioninthemodelofSnijders,2001).
Thewayinwhichtheobjectivefunctionsandarandomelementtogether
thechangesintheoutgoingrelationofactor
i
isasfollows.
Supposethatatsomemoment
t
,actor
i
changesoneofhisoutgoingrelations.
Thecurrentstateofthenetworkis
x
(
t
).Atthismoment,actor
i
determines
theotheractor
j
towhomhewillchangehistievariable
x
ij
.Denoteby
x
(
i
;
j
)theadjacencymatrixthatresultsfrom
x
whenthesingleelement
x
ij
ischangedinto1

x
ij
(i.e.,from0to1orfrom1to0).Ifatmoment
t
actor
i
adds
atie,thenhechoosestheotheractor
j
,amongthoseforwhich
x
ij
=0,forwhich
f
i
+
(
;x
(
i
;
j
))+
U
i
(
t;x;j
)
ismaximal;where
U
i
(
t;x;j
)isarandomvariable,indicatingthepartofthe
actor'spreferencenotrepresentedbytheobjectivefunction,andassumedto
bedistributedaccordingtothetype1extremevaluedistributionwithmean
0andscaleparameter1(Maddala,1983).Similarly,ifatmoment
t
actor
i
deletes
atie,thenhechoosestheotheractor
j
,amongthoseforwhich
x
ij
=1,forwhich
f
i

(
;x
(
i
;
j
))+
U
i
(
t;x;j
)
ismaximal.Thetype1extremevaluedistributionisconventionallyusedin
randomutilitymodeling(cf.Maddala,1983);ityieldsthechoiceprobabilities
for
j
givenbythemultinomiallogit(orpotentialfunction)expressions
p
ij
+
(
;x
)=
(1

x
ij
)exp

f
i
+
(
;x
(
i
;
j
))

P
n
h
=1
;h
6
=
i
(1

x
ih
)exp

f
i
+
(
;x
(
i
;
h
))

(
j
6
=
i
)(3)
foraddingatie,and
p
ij

(
;x
)=
x
ij
exp

f
i

(
;x
(
i
;
j
))

P
n
h
=1
;h
6
=
i
x
ih
exp

f
i

(
;x
(
i
;
h
))

(
j
6
=
i
)(4)
fordeletingatie.
ThespoftheobjectivefunctionisdiscussedextensivelyinSnij-
ders(2001).Itisproposedtheretouseobjectivefunctions
f
i
+
and
f
i

of
theform
f
i
(
;x
)=
X
k

k
s
ik
(
x
)
;
(5)
6
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.wherethe

k
arestatisticalparametersandthe
s
ik
arenetworkstatistics.A
basicnetworkstatisticisthenumberofreciprocatedrelations
s
ik
(
x
)=
X
j
x
ij
x
ji
:
(6)
Networkclosure,ortransitivity,canbeexpressedbyvarioustermsinthe
objectivefunction,e.g.,bythenumberoftransitivepatternsin
i
'srelations
(orderedpairsofactors(
j;h
)tobothofwhom
i
isrelated,whilealso
j
is
relatedto
h
),
s
ik
(
x
)=
X
j;h
x
ij
x
ih
x
jh
;(7)
orbyanegativeforthenumberofotheractorsatgeodesicdistance
equalto2,
s
ik
(
x
)=
]
f
j
j
d
x
(
i;j
)=2
g
;
(8)
where
d
x
(
i;j
)istheorientedgeodesicdistance,i.e.,thelengthoftheshortest
directedpathfrom
i
to
j
.Manyotherexamplesofpossiblyrelevantfunctions
s
ik
areproposedinSnijders(2001).
Intensitymatrix
Theintensitymatrix
q
(
x;y
),for
x
6
=
y
,ofthecontinuous-timeMarkovchain
bythismodel,indicatestherateatwhichthecurrentvalue
x
changes
intothenewvalue
y
.Sincerelationshereareallowedtochangeonlyoneat
atime,theintensitymatrixcanberepresentedbythechangerates
q
ij
(
x
),
from
x
to
x
(
i
;
j
)for
j
6
=
i
,by
q
ij
(
x
)=lim
dt
#
0
P
f
X
(
t
+
dt
)=
x
(
i
;
j
)
j
X
(
t
)=
x
g
dt
:
Themodelgivenabovecorrespondstoanintensitymatrixgiven
by
q
ij
(
x
)=
(
ˆ
m

i
+
(
x
)
p
ij
+
(
;x
)for
x
ij
=0
ˆ
m

i

(
x
)
p
ij

(
;x
)for
x
ij
=1
:
(9)
III.Ratefunctionsandstationarydistributions
Inasimplemodeltherates

i
+
and

i

dependonlyonthe
outdegreeofactor
i
.Thiswillbeassumedhenceforth,anditimpliesthatthe
7
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.outdegreeprocesses
X
i
+
(
t
)areindependentcontinuous-timerandomwalks
ontheset
f
0
;:::;n

1
g
.Forthesakeofbrevity,andwithaslightabuse
ofnotation,denotetheratesofaddingandwithdrawingtiesby

+
(
s
)and


(
s
),where
s
=
x
i
+
istheoutdegreeofactor
i
.Thus,

+
(
x
i
+
)isshorthand
for

i
+
(
x
)andsimilarlyfor


(
x
i
+
).Itisassumedthattheseratesare
strictlypositiveexceptfortheboundaryconditions


(0)=

+
(
n

1)=0.
Thenetworkevolutionmodelisnotnecessarilyassumedtobestationary,
andindeeditislikelythatinempiricalobservations,networksoftenwillbefar
fromthestationarydistributionsofthecorrespondingevolutionprocesses.
Itisinterestingneverthelesstoconsiderthestationarydistributionofthe
process,asthisindicatesthedirectionintowhichtheevolutionisgoing.
Theprobabilitydistribution
p
(
s
)ontheset
f
0
;:::;n

1
g
isthestationary
distributionfortherandomwalkprocessoftheoutdegreesifandonlyif
p
(
s
)

+
(
s
)=
p
(
s
+1)


(
s
+1)for0

s

n

2
:
(10)
(Thisfollowsdirectlyfromthefactthatthisistheconditionfordetailed
balance,cf.Norris,1997.)
Asabenchmarksituation,itisinstructivetoconsiderthestationarydis-
tributionoftheoutdegreesintheactor-orientedmodelofSnijders(2001)with
theverysimpleobjectivefunction
f
i
(
x
)=

1
x
i
+
.Inthismodel,thechoice
ofwhichactorchangesanoutgoingtievariableismadestrictlyrandomly.
Inthismodelalso,theoutdegreesofthetverticesareindependent
stochasticprocesses.Thismodelcanbeobtainedintheformulationofthe
presentpaperby

i
+
(
s
)=
(
n

s

1)exp(

1
)
(
n

s

1)exp(

1
)+
s
exp(


1
)

i

(
s
)=
s
exp(


1
)
(
n

s

1)exp(

1
)+
s
exp(


1
)
;
ascanbecheckedfromtheintensitymatrices(see(5)and(8)inSnijders,
2001,and(9),(3),(4)above).Thisimplies

i
+
(
s
)

i

(
s
+1)
=
(
n

s

1)exp(

1
)
(
s
+1)exp(


1
)
(
n

s

2)exp(

1
)+(
s
+1)exp(


1
)
(
n

s

1)exp(

1
)+
s
exp(


1
)
whichiscloseto
p
(
s
+1)
=p
(
s
)forthebinomialdistributionwithdenominator
n

1andsuccesprobabilityexp(2

1
)
=
(1+exp(2

1
)).Thus,forthismodel,
8
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.theoutdegreesarefor
t
!1
closetobinomiallydistributedwiththese
parameters.
Thechangerates

i
+
and

i

togethertwoaspectsoftheevolution
processoftheoutdegrees:the
distributionaltendency
,i.e.,theequilibrium
distributiontowardswhichtheoutdegreedistributiontends;andthe
volatil-
ity
,i.e.,howquicklythetiesarechanging.Itfollowsfrom(10)thatthe
distributionaltendencydependson
˘
(
s
),by
˘
(
s
)=

i
+
(
s
)

i

(
s
+1)
:
(11)
Itismathematicallyconvenienttoexpressthevolatilityby

(
s
)=

i
+
(
s
)+

i

(
s
+1)
:
(12)
Theseimplythattheratesaregivenby

i
+
(
s
)=

(
s
)
˘
(
s
)
1+
˘
(
s
)
;
(13)

i

(
s
)=

(
s

1)
1+
˘
(
s

1)
:
Withthese
p
isthestationarydistributionifandonlyif
˘
(
s
)=
p
(
s
+1)
p
(
s
)
s
=0
;:::;n

2
:
(14)
Forthepurposeofstatisticalmodeling,itisnecessarytoconsiderparametric
familiesofdistributions
p
.If
p
(
s
)isamemberofanexponentialfamily
p
(
s
)=
p
0
(
s
)exp(

0
t
(
s
)

 
(

))
where
t
(
s
)isavectoroftstatistics,

isaparametervector,and
 
(

)isanormalizingconstant,thenthisyields
˘
(
s
)=
p
0
(
s
+1)
p
0
(
s
)
exp


(
t
(
s
+1)

t
(
s
))

:
(15)
E.g.,foratruncatedPoissondistribution(
p
0
(
s
)=1
=s
!
;t
(
s
)=
s
),thisbe-
comes
˘
(
s
)=
1
s
+1
e

=exp(


log(
s
+1))
:
(16)
9
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Foratruncatedpowerdistribution(
p
0
(
s
)=1
;t
(
s
)=log(
s
+1)
;<
0),the
ratefunctionsare
˘
(
s
)=

s
+2
s
+1


ˇ
exp


s
+1

:
(17)
ThePoissondistributionisshort-tailed,correspondingto
˘
(
s
)becoming
smallas
s
getslarge,incontrasttothelong-tailedpowerdistribution,for
which
˘
(
s
)becomescloseto1.
Amodelcontainingthetendenciestowardeitherofthesedistributionsas
submodelsisobtainedby
˘
(
s
)=exp


1


2
log(
s
+1)


3
s
+1

:
(18)
Forthevolatilityfunction

(
s
),thedependenceon
s
couldbelinear,anal-
ogoustowhatwasproposedinSnijders(2001).Thisisunattractive,however,
ifoneconsidersdigraphswitharbitrarilylargenumbers
n
ofvertices.Ahy-
perbolicfunction,tendingtoaconstantas
s
grows,seems
moreattractive:e.g.,

(
s
)=

1+

4
1
s
+1

;
(19)
wheretherestrictionmustbemadethat

4
>

1.Thefunctions
˘
and

canalsobemadetodependoncovariates,e.g.,throughanexponentiallink
function.
IV.Parameterestimation
Fortheestimationofparametersofthistypeofnetworkevolutionmodelsfor
observationsmadeatdiscretemoments
t
1
;:::;t
M
,Snijders(2001)proposed
animplementationofthemethodofmomentsbasedonstochasticapproxi-
mation,usingaversionoftheRobbins-Monro(1951)algorithm.Themethod
ofmomentsiscarriedoutbyspecifyingasuitablevectorofstatisticsofthe
networkanddetermining(inthiscase,approximating)theparametersso
thattheexpectedvaluesofthesestatisticsequaltheobservedvalues.To
applythisapproach,statisticsmustbefoundthatareespeciallyinformative
abouttheseparameters.
Firstconsidertheparametersof
˘
.Foramodelofthegeneralexponen-
tialform(15),e.g.,(18),thestatistic
t
(
S
)isatstatisticforthe
10
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.limitingdistribution,andthereforeitseemsadvisabletousethestatistic
P
i
t
(
X
i
+
(
t
m
+1
)),orformultipleobservationperiods
M

1
X
m
=1
n
X
i
=1
t
(
X
i
+
(
t
m
+1
))
:
(20)
Formodel(18),somesimplifyingapproximationsmaybeused;e.g.,forpa-
rameter

2
,thiscanbebasedonStirling'sformula.Thisleadsforthethree
parametersinthismodeltothestatistics
M

1
X
m
=1
n
X
i
=1
X
i
+
(
t
m
+1
)
M

1
X
m
=1
n
X
i
=1
(
X
i
+
(
t
m
+1
)+
1
2
)

log(
X
i
+
(
t
m
+1
)+1)

1

(21)
M

1
X
m
=1
n
X
i
=1
log(
X
i
+
(
t
m
+1
))
:
Fortheparametersinthevolatilityfunction

,thesameapproachcan
betakenasinSection7.4ofSnijders(2001).Thisleadsforparameter
ˆ
m
to
thestatistic
n
X
i;j
=1
j
X
ij
(
t
m
+1
)

X
ij
(
t
m
)
j
(22)
andforparameter

4
in(19)tothestatistic
M

1
X
m
=1
n
X
i;j
=1
j
X
ij
(
t
m
+1
)

X
ij
(
t
m
)
j
X
i
+
(
t
m
)+1
:
(23)
V.Example
Asanumericalexampleoftheanalysis,thedynamicsofanetworkofpolitical
actorsisconsidered,basedonastudybyJohnsonandOrbach(2002).The
datausedherearefromasecondandthirdwaveofdatacollectionbetween46
actors,mostofwhomthesameindividualsasthoseinthewaveofwhich
resultsarepresentedinJohnsonandOrbach(2002).Theyareself-reported
dyadicinteractiondata,ratedona0-10scalewhichherewasdichotomized
as0-6vs.7-10.Spacelimitationsprohibitdoingjusticetotherichnessofthe
originaldataandthesocialprocessesinvolvedinthenetworkdynamics.
11
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Preliminaryanalysesindicatedthatthereisevidenceforanetworkclosure
expressedbetterbythenumberofgeodesicdistancesequaltotwo,cf.
(8),thanbythenumberoftransitivetriplets,see(7);andthatthereis
evidenceforagenderpopularitySetsofestimatesarepresentedhere
fortwocorrespondingmodels,astohowthedegreesaremodeled.
ThemodelisaccordingtothespinSnijders(2001),witha
constantratefunctionandwithoutthetiationbetweenaddingand
withdrawingtiesproposedinthepresentpaper.Theobjectivefunctionis
spas
f
i
(
;x
)=

1
x
i
+
+

2
X
j
x
ij
x
ji
+

3
#
f
j
j
d
x
(
i;j
)=2
g
+

4
X
j
x
ij
z
j
where
z
j
indicatesthegenderofactor
j
.Thesecondmodelfollowsthe
spproposedabove.Preliminaryanalysesshowedthatagoodis
obtainedbyusingmodel(18)with

2
=

3
=0.Thevolatilityfunctionis
heldconstant,


1.Theobjectivefunctionhereisas
f
i
+
(
;x
)=
f
i

(
;x
)=

2
X
j
x
ij
x
ji
+

3
#
f
j
j
d
x
(
i;j
)=2
g
+

4
X
j
x
ij
z
j
(notethatinthismodel,itismeaninglesstoincludeaterm

1
x
i
+
inthe
objectivefunction;therolethatthistermhasintheearliermodelishere
takenoverbytheratefunction).Theparameterestimates,obtainedfromthe
SIENAprogram(version1.98;seeSnijders&Huisman,2002)arepresented
inTable1.Genderiscoded1(female)vs.0(male),andcenteredinthe
programbysubtractingtheaveragevalueof0.17.
Parameterscanbetestedbyapproximate
z
-testsbasedonthe
t
-ratios
(parameterestimatedividedbystandarderror).Usingthisprocedure,all
mentionedinTable1aret(
p<:
001).Theofthetwo
modelscanbecomparedbyconsideringthedistributionsofthedegree
sequences.Arathersubtlewayofdoingatthisistolookattheobserved
rankedoutdegreesandtheirdistributions.Figures1and2show,for
thesetwomodels,theobservedrankedoutdegreescombinedwithsimulated
90-%intervalsforthedistributionsoftherankedoutdegrees.Figure1indi-
catesapoorthedistributionsofthe9highestoutdegreesinthe
modelareconcentratedontoolowvaluescomparedtotheobservedhighest
outdegrees;inthemiddlelowrange,thedistributionoftheranked
12
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Table1.Parameterestimatesfortwomodel
fortheJohnson-Orbachpoliticalactordata(waves2-3).
Model1
Model2

par.(s.e.)
par.(s.e.)
Ratefactor(
ˆ
1
)
23.09
22.78
Ratefunction:
˘
Outdegrees(

1
)
-0.57(0.07)
Objectivefunction
Outdegrees

1.14(0.19)
Reciprocatedties
1.37(0.11)
1.77(0.23)
Indirectrelations

0.50(0.21)

0.62(0.30)
Gender(F)popularity
0.28(0.10)
0.39(0.11)
outdegreesistoolowcomparedtotheobservations.Combined,thisimplies
thattheoutdegreedistributionistoocloselypeakedaboutitsmean
value.Ontheotherhand,Figure2indicatesagoodforthesecondmodel,
eachobservedrankedoutdegreebeingsituatedwithinthe90-%intervalof
itsdistribution.
10203040
5
10
15
20
25
30
k
degrees






























-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Fig.1.Observed(

)and90%intervalsforrankedoutdegrees,Model1.(
k
=rank)
TheparameterestimatesandstandarderrorsinTable1forbothmodels
pointtothesameconclusions.Inthenetworkdynamicsthereisclearevi-
denceforreciprocityofchoices,foranetworkclosureandforagreater
popularityoffemaleactors.(Agendersimilarityalsowastested,but
13
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10203040
5
10
15
20
25
30
k
degrees



























-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Fig.2.Observed(

)and90%intervalsforrankedoutdegrees,Model2.(
k
=rank)
thiswasnott.)Iftherewouldhavebeenimportantbe-
tweentheresultsofthetwomodels,thenmodel2wouldhavebeenthemore
trustworthy,giventhatitshowsabetterfortheoutdegreedistribution.
VI.Discussion
Thedegreedistributionisanimportantcharacteristicofnetworksandhas
receivedmuchattentioninrecentwork.However,attentionforthedegrees
shouldbecombinedwithtattentionpaidtootheraspectsofnetwork
structure.Thecurrentpaperproposesamoofthemodelpresented
inSnijders(2001),addressingthefollowingpointsofcriticismthatcould
beaddressedtotheearliermodel.First,itmaybehardtospecifythe
earliermodelinawaythatgivesasatisfactoryfortheveryskeweddegree
distributionsthataresometimesempiricallyobserved(cf.themanyexamples
mentionedinNewman,Strogatz,andWatts,2001).Themodelproposedhere
givesalmostunlimitedpossibilitieswithrespecttotheoutdegreedistribution
thatisgenerated.Second,theextrapolationpropertiesoftheearliermodel
maybeunrealisticinthesensethat,dependingontheparametersofthe
model,lettingthemodelrunonforalonghypotheticaltimeperiodmay
leadtounrealisticphasetransitions.Moresp,similarlytowhatis
explainedinSnijders(2002a),theearliermodelcanbespsothatquite
agoodisobtainedfortheevolutionoveralimitedtimeperiodofanetwork
with,say,aratherlowdensityandarelativelyhighamountoftransitivity,
butthatthegraphevolutionprocesssowillwithprobabilityonelead
toan`explosion'inthesensethatatsomemoment,thegraphdensityvery
14
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.rapidlyincreasestoavalueof1andremains1,oralmost1,forawaitingtime
thatisforallpracticalpurposes.(Acloselyrelatedproperty,butfor
thecaseofagraphevolutionprocesswherethenumberofverticestends
toy,wasnoticedbyStrauss,1986.Thisphenomenonalsoresembles
thephasetransitionsknownfortheIsingmodelandotherspatialmodels
instatisticalphysicsdiscussed,e.g.,inNewmanandBarkema,1999.)Such
phasetransitionscanbeavoidedinthemodelproposedbelowbecausethe
outdegreedistributionisdeterminedindependentlyofthefurtherstructural
networkproperties.
Athirdreason,ofamoretheoreticalnature,forproposingthismodel,is
todemonstratethatquiteplausiblemodelsarepossiblefordigraphevolution
inwhichthedistributionoftheoutdegreesisdissociatedcompletelyfrom
theotherstructuralnetworkpropertiessuchastransitivityandsubgroup
formation.Thisimpliesthatwecanlearnlittleabouttheprocessesleading
totransitivityandrelatedstructuralpropertiesofgraphsanddigraphsby
lookingonlyatdegreedistributions,orbylimitingattentiontonetwork
evolutionprocessesthatarebasedonlyondegrees.
REFERENCES
Albert,R.,andasi,A.-L.(2002).Statisticalmechanicsofcomplex
networks.
Reviewofmodernphysics
,74,47{97.
asi,A.-L.,andAlbert,R.,(1999).Emergenceofscalinginrandom
networks.
Science
,286,509{512.
Huisman,M.E.,andT.A.B.Snijders.2003.Statisticalanalysisoflongitudi-
nalnetworkdatawithchangingcomposition.
Submittedforpublication
.
Johnson,J.C.,andM.K.Orbach.2002.PerceivingthePoliticalLandscape:
EgoBiasesinCognitivePoliticalNetworks.
SocialNetworks
,24,291{
310.
Maddala,G.S.1983.
Limited-dependentandqualitativevariablesinecono-
metrics
.Cambridge:CambridgeUniversityPress.
Molloy,M.,andB.Reed.1995.Acriticalpointforrandomgraphswitha
givendegreesequence.
RandomStructuresandAlgorithms
,6,161{179.
Newman,M.E.J.,andBarkema,G.T.(1999).
MonteCarlomethodsinsta-
tisticalphysics.
Oxford:ClarendonPress.
Newman,M.E.J.,Strogatz,S.H.,andD.J.Watts.2001.Randomgraphs
witharbitrarydegreedistributionsandtheorapplications.
PhysicalRe-
viewsE64
,026118.
Newman,M.E.J.,Watts,D.J.,andStrogatz,S.H.2002.Randomgraphmod-
elsofsocialnetworks.
ProceedingsoftheNationalAcademyofSciences
15
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.USA
,99,2566{2572.
Norris,J.R.1997.
MarkovChains
.Cambridge:CambridgeUniversityPress.
Robbins,H.,andS.Monro.1951.Astochasticapproximationmethod.
AnnalsofMathematicalStatistics
,22,400{407.
Snijders,T.A.B.1991.Enumerationandsimulationmethodsfor0-1matrices
withgivenmarginals.
Psychometrika
,
56
,397{417.
Snijders,T.A.B.2001.TheStatisticalEvaluationofSocialNetworkDynam-
ics.M.E.SobelandM.P.Becker(eds.),
SociologicalMethodology-2001
,
361{395.BostonandLondon:BasilBlackwell.
Snijders,T.A.B.2002a.MarkovChainMonteCarloEstimationofExpo-
nentialRandomGraphModels.
JournalofSocialStructure
vol.3no.
2.
Snijders,T.A.B.2002b.Manualfor
ZO
version2.3.Groningen:ICS,Uni-
versityofGroningen.
Obtainablefrom
http://stat.gamma.rug.nl/snijders/socnet.htm
.
Snijders,T.A.B.2003.ModelsforLongitudinalNetworkData.In:P.J.
Carrington,J.Scott,andS.Wasserman(eds.),
ModelsandMethodsin
SocialNetworkAnalysis.
NewYork:CambridgeUniversityPress,in
preparation.
Snijders,T.A.B.,andHuisman,J.M.2002.
ManualforSIENAversion1.95.
Groningen:ICS,UniversityofGroningen.
Obtainablefrom
http://stat.gamma.rug.nl/snijders/socnet.htm
.
Snijders,T.A.B.,andvanDuijn,M.A.J.2002.Conditionalmaximumlikeli-
hoodestimationundervariousspofexponentialrandomgraph
models.Pp.117{134inJanHagberg(ed.),
ContributionstoSocialNet-
workAnalysis,InformationTheory,andOtherTopicsinStatistics;A
FestschriftinhonourofOveFrank
.UniversityofStockholm:Depart-
mentofStatistics.
Strauss,D.1986.Onageneralclassofmodelsforinteraction.
SIAMReview
,
28,513{527.
Tversky,A.1972.Choicebyelimination.
JournalofMathematicalPsychol-
ogy
,9,341{367.
Wasserman,S.1977.Randomdirectedgraphdistributionsandthetriad
censusinsocialnetworks.
JournalofMathematicalSociology
,5,61{86.
Wasserman,S.,andK.Faust.1994.
SocialNetworkAnalysis:Methodsand
Applications
.NewYorkandCambridge:CambridgeUniversityPress.
Wasserman,S.,andP.Pattison.1996.Logitmodelsandlogisticregres-
sionforsocialnetworks:I.AnintroductiontoMarkovgraphsand
p

.
Psychometrika
,61,401{425.
16
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  1Polarization in Dynamic Networks: A Hopfield Model of Emergent Structure  
Michael W. Macy, Cornell University; James A. Kitts, University of Washington; Andreas 
Flache, University of Groningen; Steve Benard, Cornell University 
 
ABSTRACT
 Why do populations often self-organize into antagonistic groups even in the absence of 
competition over scarce resources? Is there a tendency to demarcate groups of ﬁusﬂ and ﬁthemﬂ 
that is inscribed in our cognitive architecture? We look for answers by exploring the dynamics of 
influence and attraction between computational agents. Our model is an extension of Hopfield™s 
attractor network. Agents are attracted to others with similar states (the principle of homophily) 
and are also influenced by others, as conditioned by the strength and valence of the social tie. 
Negative valence implies xenophobia (instead of homophily) and differentiation (instead of 
imitation). Consistent with earlier work on structural balance, we find that networks can self-
organize into two antagonistic factions, without the knowledge or intent of the agents. We model 
this tendency as a function of network size, the number of potentially contentious issues, and 
agents' openness and flexibility toward alternative positions. Although we find that polarization 
into two antagonistic groups is a unique global attractor, we investigate the conditions under 
which uniform and pluralistic alignments may also be equilibria. From a random start, agents can 
self-organize into pluralistic arrangements if the population size is large relative to the size of the 
state space.
  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  2INTRODUCTION: GROUP POLARIZATION 
Why do populations often self-organize into antagonistic groups even in the absence of 
competition over scarce resources? Is there a tendency to demarcate groups of ﬁusﬂ and ﬁthemﬂ 
that is inscribed in our cognitive architecture? We look for answers by exploring the dynamics of 
influence and attraction between computational agents.  
Our model builds on recent work using agent-based models of cultural convergence and 
differentiation (1,2,3). Scholars contend that the abundance of social groups containing highly 
similar actors is due to dual processes of attraction and social influence. Formal models generally 
assume that each agent chooses interaction partners that are similar to itself, while social 
interaction also leads agents to adopt each other™s traits and thus grow more similar. In this 
positive feedback loop, a minimal initial similarity increases the probability of interaction which 
then increases similarity. 
This process of consolidation (4) will presumably continue until all agents engaged in 
mutual interaction have converged to unanimity. While this self-reinforcing dynamic seems to 
imply a ﬁmelting pot,ﬂ or inexorable march toward homogeneity, scholars have shown that 
global diversity can survive through impermeable barriers to interaction between distinct 
subcultures. If bridge ties between groups are entirely absent, then this local convergence can 
indeed lead to global differentiation, in spite of cultural conformity among the individual agents. 
Stable minority subcultures persist because of the protection of structural holes created by 
cultural differences that preclude interaction. Given such barriers, homogenizing tendencies 
actually reinforce rather than eliminate diversity. 
The models thus predict social stability only where a population is entirely uniform or 
where agents cluster into mutually exclusive uniform subpopulations that are oblivious to one 
another. This global pluriformity depends on the assumption that interaction across these 
boundaries is impossible. Any allowance for interaction between dissimilar agents, no matter 
how rare, leads diversity to collapse into global homogeneity. This also reflects earlier analytical 
results obtained with models of opinion dynamics in influence networks (21,22,23). Abelson 
proved that a very weak condition is sufficient to guarantee convergence of opinions to global 
uniformity: The network needs to be ﬁcompact,ﬂ such that there are no subgroups that are 
entirely cut off from outside influences. This apparently ineluctable homogeneity in fully 
connected networks led Abelson (
21, p. 153) to wonder
 ﬁ... what on earth one must assume in 
order to generate the bimodal outcome of community cleavage studies?" 
We will pursue this interest in cleavages, or structural bifurcations, as an alternative 
explanation for both the disproportionate homogeneity in social groups and the persistence of 
diversity across groups. First let us revisit the generative processes, the psychological and 
behavioral foundations of attraction and social influence.  
These models of convergence implement one of the starkest regularities in the social 
world: ﬁhomophily,ﬂ or the tendency for each person to interact with similar others (5, 6, 7). 
Several explanations for homophily have been proposed. Social psychologists posit a ﬁLaw of 
Attractionﬂ based on an affective bias toward similar others (8; see also 9,10,11,12). Even 
disregarding such an emotional bias, structural sociologists (3,2,14) point to the greater 
reliability and facility of communication between individuals who share vocabulary and syntax 
as an inducement for homophilous relations.  
Others counter that homophily is the spurious consequence of social influence, as in 
classic research on ﬁpressures to uniformityﬂ (16,17,18) and recent work in social networks 
(19,20). Even if relations are held constant in an exogenously clustered social network, social 
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  3influence from network neighbors will lead to local homogeneity, without the need to assume 
homophilous interaction. 
Scholars have thus overwhelmingly attributed homophily in observed social networks to 
some combination of differential attraction and social influence, where agents choose similar 
partners and partners grow more similar over time. Much less attention has been directed to an 
alternative explanation Œ that homophily is largely a byproduct of its antipole. It is not so much 
attraction to those who are similar that produces group homogeneity but repulsion from those 
who are different. Xenophobia leads to the same emergent outcome as attraction between similar 
actors: disproportionate homogeneity in relations. In fact, Rosenbaum (15) argues that many 
experimental findings of homophily in relations may have spuriously represented this effect of 
repulsion from those who are different.  
The most sustained treatment of positive and negative ties has appeared in the literature 
on Balance Theory. Following Heider (24), scholars have assumed that actors are motivated to 
maintain ﬁbalanceﬂ in their relations, such that two actors who are positively tied to one another 
will feel tension when they disagree about some third cognitive object. Formally, we can think of 
this as a valued graph of agents 
A and 
B along with object 
X, where the graph will be balanced 
only when the sign product 
A*B*X
 is positive. For example, if 
A and 
B are positively tied but 
A positively values 
X and 
B negatively values 
X, then the graph is imbalanced. In order for this 
dissonance to resolve and result in a stable alignment, there will either be a falling out between 
A and 
B or one (but not both) of these actors will switch evaluations of 
X. A parallel process 
operates if the tie between 
A and 
B is negative. 
A prolific line of research Œ Structural Balance Theory (32) Œ has examined a special case 
of Heider™s model, where the object 
X is actually a third actor, 
C. The model simply extends to 
triadic agreement among agents 
A, B
, and 
C, where balance obtains when the sign product of the 
triad 
A-B-C is positive. This formalizes the adage that a friend of a friend or an enemy of an 
enemy is a friend, while an enemy of a friend or a friend of an enemy is an enemy. Extended to a 
larger network, it is well known that the elemental triadic case suggests a perfect separation of 
two mutually antagonistic subgroups.  
Our model integrates the attraction-influence feedback loop from formal models of social 
convergence with the bivalent relations in Balance Theory. Following Nowak and Vallacher 
(29), the model is an application of Hopfield™s attractor network (25, 26) to social networks. Like 
Heider™s Balance Theory, an important property of attractor networks is that individual nodes 
seek to minimize ﬁenergyﬂ (or dissonance) across all relations with other nodes. As we will see, 
this suggests self-reinforcing dynamics of attraction and influence as well as repulsion and 
differentiation. 
More precisely, this class of models generally uses complete networks, with each node 
characterized by one or more binary or continuous
 states
 and linked to other nodes through 
endogenous 
weights
.  Like other neural networks, attractor networks learn stable configurations 
by iteratively adjusting the weights between individual nodes, without any global coordination. 
In this case, the weights change over time through a Hebbian learning rule (27): the weight 
wij is 
a function of the correspondence of states for nodes 
i and 
j over time. To the extent that 
i and 
j tend to occupy the same states at the same time, the tie between them will be increasingly 
positive. To the extent that 
i and 
j occupy discrepant states, the tie will become increasingly 
negative.  
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  4Extending recent work (30), we apply the Hopfield model of dynamic attraction to the 
study of polarization in social networks. In this application, observed similarity/difference 
between states determines the strength and valence of the tie to a given referent.  
MODEL DESIGN 
In our application of the Hopfield model, each node has 
N-1 undirected ties to other 
nodes. These ties include weights, which determine the strength and valence of influence 
between agents. Formally, social pressure on agent 
i to adopt a binary state 
s (where 
s = ±1) is 
the sum of the states of all other agents 
j, conditioned by the weight (
wij) of the dyadic tie 
between 
i and 
j (-1.0 < 
wij < 1.0):  
ijNswPjNjijis−== , 11      (1) 
 Thus, social pressure (-1< 
Pis <1) to adopt 
s becomes increasingly positive as 
i™s ﬁfriendsﬂ adopt 
s (s=1) and 
i™s ﬁenemiesﬂ reject 
s (s=-1). The pressure can also become negative 
in the opposite circumstances. The model extends to multiple states in a straightforward way, 
where [1] independently determines the pressure on agent 
i for each binary state 
s. Strong positive or negative social pressure does not guarantee that an agent will 
accommodate, however. It is effective only if 
i is willing and able to respond to peer influence. If 
i is closed-minded or if a given trait is not under 
i™s control (e.g., ethnicity or gender), then no 
change to 
s will occur. Let 
v classify states as fixed (
v=0) or free (
v=1) and 
X represent an 
exogenous determination of 
s. We then find 
i™s propensity 
 to adopt state 
s as a cumulative 
logistic function of social pressure: 
isPsisXvevis)1(110−++=−    (2) 
Agent 
i adopts 
s if >0.5+
, where 
 is a random number (-0.5<
<0.5) and 
 is an 
exogenous error parameter (0
1). At one extreme, 
=0 produces deterministic behavior, such 
that any social pressure above the trigger value always leads to 
s=1 and pressure even slightly 
below the trigger value always leads to 
s=-1. Following Harsanyi (31), 
>0 allows for a 
ﬁsmoothed best replyﬂ in which pressure levels near the trigger point leave the agent relatively 
indifferent and thus likely to explore behaviors on either side of the threshold. 
In the Hopfield model, the path weight 
wij changes as a function of similarity in the states 
of node 
i and 
j. Weights begin with uniformly distributed random values, subject to the 
constraints that weights are symmetric (
wij=wji). Across a vector of 
K distinct states 
sik, (or the 
position of agent 
i on issue 
k), agent 
i compares its own states to the observed states of another 
agent 
j and adjusts the weight upward or downward corresponding to their aggregated level of 
agreement or disagreement.
 Based on the correspondence of states for agents 
i and 
j, their weight 
will change at each discrete time point 
t in proportion to a parameter 
, which defines the rate of 
structural learning (0<
<1): 
 ijssKwwiktKkjktijttij+−==+,)1(11,   (3) 
 Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  5As correspondence of states can be positive (agreement) or negative (disagreement), ties 
can grow positive or negative over time, with weights between any two agents always 
symmetric. Note that both processes Œ adjustment of social ties and adjustment of behavior Œ 
seek to maximize balance in relations between any two agents across their vectors of states. 
Given an initially random configuration of states and weights, these agents will search for a 
profile that minimizes dissonance across their relations. 
METHODS 
We tested the dynamics of network polarization by manipulating three agent-level 
behavioral rules: 
flexibility
, broad-mindedness
, and 
open-mindedness
: 1. Rigid vs. flexible (a.k.a. ﬁwafflingﬂ): the extent to which the state adoption decision is 
stochastic near indifference, ranging from 
=0 (agent 
i always picks the strictly preferred 
position even when almost indifferent) to 
=1 (
i adopts state 
s with propensity
 is). 2. Narrow- vs. broad-minded: the multiplexity of the state space, that is, the number of 
salient cross-cutting dimensions that agents consider in evaluating each other.  
3. Closed- vs. open-minded: the proportion of these salient dimensions that can be affected 
by social pressure, with a minimum of at least one free state. A fixed state can be a 
position on an issue about which an agent is strictly uncompromising. It can also be an 
attribute that is difficult to change, such as ethnicity or gender.  
Thus, we consider a range of stylized character profiles for agents, ranging from 
ﬁextremistsﬂ who focus on ascriptive differences and are rigidly narrow- and closed-minded, to 
more broad-minded ﬁmoderatesﬂ who tend to waffle on the issues, and are open to influence 
(and/or focused on behavior rather than ascriptive traits). 
We measure network polarization as the degree of segregation among mutually exclusive 
cohesive subgroups of agents, measured after all weights and states have converged to 
equilibrium. This measure is based on the graph theoretical LS-set (32). An LS-set is a subset of 
agents who have stronger ties to members within the subset than they have to members outside 
the subset.
* For the cohesive subgroups thus identified, we calculated their segregation in terms 
of the normalized difference between the average internal tie strength and the average tie 
strength between the subgroup and its complement. To obtain an overall polarization score, we 
generated all partitionings of the graph into mutually exclusive cohesive subgroups and took 
from these the average segregation of all subgroups in the most segregated partitioning. 
We allowed each experimental condition to repeat for 1000 iterations, which was 
sufficient for almost all conditions to arrive at an equilibrium. Only equilibrium outcomes 
(converged solutions) were analyzed. For all the experiments, we set the structural learning rate 
() at 0.5, which means that agents consider current states equally with previous impressions in 
determining the tie weight for the next (arbitrary) time interval.
ƒ Each parameter combination 
was repeated 20 times, yielding a total of 44,000 observations. 
                                               
 *  More technically, for each of the subsets of an LS-set, average tie strength between members of the subset and 
its complement within the LS set is higher than the average tie strength to members outside the LS set. We first 

identified subgroups of agents that agree on those states that they are free to change. We then searched through 
coalitions of these subgroups to find maximal LS-sets in the graph defined by agreement on free states. Finally, 
we used these LS-sets to identify the maximally segregated partitioning of the network, based on the relational 

weights (which reflect agreement on all states -- fixed and free). 
ƒ  Qualitative patterns shown appear to be robust to a very broad range of assumptions about the learning rate, 
though extremely low learning rates make waiting for convergence impractical. 
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  6RESULTS 
Experiment 1 tests the effects on network polarization of agent broad-mindedness, while 
holding flexibility and openness constant (
=0 and 
v=1). With zero flexibility and no fixed states, 
network dynamics converged to equilibrium in every case. Network polarization is measured as 
the degree of segregation in the most segregated equilibrium partitioning of the weight graph into 
mutually exclusive cohesive subgroups. Maximum segregation (1.0) occurs in a perfectly 
bifurcated network, composed of exactly two internally cohesive and mutually antagonistic 
groups. Broad-mindedness is operationalized as multiplexity, or the number of dimensions in the 
state space. Intuitively, we would expect polarization to be most likely in a world where agents 
focus single-mindedly on one highly salient issue, and indeed, Figure 1 confirms the intuition. 
What is surprising, however, is that network polarization can also be caused by 
too many 
salient 
issues. With 100 agents scattered over a state space larger than 2
5, the dynamics quickly 
approach the bifurcation we would expect in a single-issue population. As 
N declines, the non-
monotonic effect becomes less pronounced. For 
N>100, the U-shape function is little changed 
but the critical value of 
K increases, from 5 dimensions with 
N<100 to 11 dimensions with 
N=300.   104070100
1234567891000.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1NMultiplexity
Polarization
 Figure 1. Effect of network size (10
N100) and agent multiplexity (1
K10) on network 
polarization (with 
=0 and 
v=1). 
 Experiment 1 assumes rigidly deterministic agents (
=0) who never explore alternative 
positions, even when they approach indifference. It also assumes that agents are willing and able 
to change all positions in response to social influence (
v=1), which would not be the case, for 
example, if race or ethnicity were a salient dimension of social differentiation. Experiment 2 
relaxes these assumptions under conditions that make polarization relatively unlikely, namely, 
that there are at least five dimensions of differentiation (see Figure 1).
⁄ Intuitively, we might 
                                               
 ⁄  Fewer than five dimensions also constrains the ability to manipulate the relative number of dimensions that 
agents can alter. 
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  7expect less network polarization in a population that is less rigid and more polarization in a 
population that is less open-minded. The surprising result is that the effect is quite the opposite. 
Figure 2 displays the polarizing effects of flexibility and open mindedness in greater 
detail. As in Experiment 1, polarization is based on the relational partition that maximizes 
segregation of the weight graph among coalitions of distinct subgroups in the matrix of free 
states. Flexibility is simply the error level, ranging from 
=0 (always pick the strictly preferred 
position) to 
=1 (adopt the position with propensity 
). Openness is the proportion of 
K states 
that are affected by social pressure (or 
vs/K), where there must always be at least one free state. 
Results were averaged over 20 replications of each treatment condition, in which 
N ranged from 
10 to 100 and 
K ranged from 5 to 10 (hence openness ranged from 0.2 to 1.0).  
 00.5
10.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
100.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1Flexibility
Openness
Polarization
 Figure 2. Effect of agent flexibility (0

1) and open-mindedness (
vs/K) on network 
polarization (with 
K=[5–10], 
N=[10–100]). 
 The surprising result is that polarization sharply increases with flexibility across all levels 
of openness. A population of ﬁhardlinersﬂ (who never reveal ambivalence by waffling on the 
issues) is generally less prone to become polarized. Less surprisingly, polarization also increases 
with openness to social influence, for the simple reason that agents cannot alter their fixed states 
as a way of reducing dissonance in their relations. Note that Figure 2 is based only on 
equilibrium outcomes. As flexibility increases, the rate of convergence declines, due to the 
destabilizing effects of stochasticity. If we include nonconverged outcomes (coded with zero 
polarization), the effect of flexibility goes from convex to concave when most states are fixed, 
and when all states are free, the effect becomes non-monotonic, with polarization declining at 
maximum flexibility. In other words, with maximum flexibility and openness, the network is less 
likely to develop stable factions, but if this should happen, the number of factions is almost 
certain to be two.  
DISCUSSION 
With binary agent states, the dynamics of homophilous influence and xenophobic 
differentiation create an energy landscape in which there is only one basin of attraction, 
polarization. Any configuration with more than two cohesive subgroups represents global tension 

for a reason that is readily apparent: A binary state precludes the ability to hold a position that 
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  8differs from each of two opposing positions. As the number of dimensions increases, it is 
possible for many more than two unique combinations to persist at equilibrium, but for each, 
there must always be some similarity with all other combinations except one. Surprisingly, as 
these combinations explode, they lead not to pluralism but to polarization. The mechanism is 
similar to that identified by Axelrod. The more opportunities for neighborhoods to be linked via 
overlapping positions, the higher the probability they will find a way to coalesce. 
The key variable here is the density of the population distribution across the state space. 
When there are many agents but few dimensions, then, from a random start, every possible 
combination of states (corresponding to ﬁideologiesﬂ if the states are variable and to ﬁidentitiesﬂ 
if the states are fixed) will find multiple incumbents. The presence of identical neighbors (as well 
as dissimilar antipodes who serve as negative referents) creates strong pressures to remain loyal 
to a shared set of states. This resistance to change can then support a pluriform equilibrium. 
Increasing the number of dimensions expands the set of possible combinations, allowing groups 
to mobilize around a variety of configurations of states. Accordingly, polarization initially 
declines with increasing multiplexity. However, if population density in the state space falls 
below a critical level (either due to low population or high multiplexity), it becomes impossible 
for every distinct vector of states to find an incumbent. The sparseness of the population relative 
to the number of unique positions in state space requires that some agents begin with neither 
allies (who overlap perfectly) nor enemies (who overlap not at all). These agents lack sufficient 
pressure to stick to their guns and will thus be pulled into coalitions with agents who overlap 
partially with their positions. As the multiplexity of the state space increases, equ
ilibria 
increasingly depend on a delicate balance, where a distribution of agents on ideologies and 
identities needs to be found that corresponds to the distances between positions, such that they 
are not so close to each other that they are pulled together and not so far apart that they are 
pushed toward the opposite pole. In this higher range, increasing multiplexity makes it more 
difficult for pluriform configurations to persist, such that collapse into a simple bifurcation 
becomes the most likely alternative. 
Flexibility promotes polarization by the same process. Network self-organization can 
become trapped in high-energy pluriform equilibria that are nevertheless a local minimum of the 
energy landscape, as depicted in Figure 3. Agents who express ambivalence by ﬁwafflingﬂ on the 
issues can disturb these local solutions, allowing the system to continue searching for the global 
attractors. Thus, increased flexibility washes out the non-monotonic effect of multiplexity 
evident in Figure 1. Flexibility leads to polarization even when agents attend to multiple 
dimensions of differentiation that would otherwise produce the cross-cutting cleavages 
characteristic of a pluriform society. 
  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  9Figure 3. How agent volatility allows the network to find a lower energy minimum Œ hence 
greater polarization. 
 Homogeneity is also a stable equilibrium of the model, but this equilibrium cannot obtain 
unless we preclude negative weights and negative influence (as in the earlier models of cultural 
convergence and differentiation discussed above). If we initialize the model at homogeneity, it 
will remain there indefinitely. However, from a random start, the system cannot find the single-
group solution without falling into an inescapable trap of in-group/out-group hostility. Further, a 
sufficient exogenous perturbation will disturb the unitary equilibrium and yield a two-group 
solution, but the reverse shift is much more difficult to obtain and is extremely unlikely.  
To explore this interpretation further, we measured the energy level of equilibria by 
summing over the product of agreement and tie strength across all dyads in the weight graph. As 
expected, we found that networks with perfect polarization in two opposing camps had an energy 
level of zero, while energy levels increased with the number of different positions in the state 
space that co-existed at equ
ilibrium. That analysis examined tension in dyads for the variety of 
converged configurations. A continuous index of graph balance (35), assessing balance in triads 
and cycles of any higher length, yielded the same conclusion. Equilibria with either one or two 
internally cohesive groups represent maximum balance, while convergence at any higher number 
of groups implies imbalanced relations in the social network. 
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS 
This study has explored polarizing tendencies of a self-organizing network, using a 
Hopfield model of dynamic attraction. The project integrates Axelrod™s positive feedback model 
of influence-interaction with a bivalent model of social relations and cognitive balance. The 
Hopfield model emulates well-known processes of homophily, xenophobia, and influence from 
positive and negative referents. Thus, we may account for emergent social phenomena with a 
rigorous and parsimonious model, including only basic behavioral principles that have been 
broadly supported in experimental work.  
 The results have interesting implications for the notion of ﬁstructural balanceﬂ in social 
relations. Although the agents in this model are clearly designed to maintain balance in their 
behaviors with both positive and negative referents, this assumption is not ﬁwired inﬂ to the 
relations themselves, as it is in Structural Balance Theory. That is, two agents 
A and 
B feel no 
direct need for consistency in their relations with a third agent 
C. Indeed, 
A has no knowledge of 
the 
B-C relationship and thus no ability to adjust the 
A-B or A-C
 relations so as to balance the 
triad. Notably, the results show that triads (or cycles of any length) do tend to become balanced 
over time as agents seek balance in their dyadic relations. However, there is no guarantee in this 
model that they will achieve a globally optimal state in structural balance, and we also observe 
equilibrium outcomes where more than two subgroups persist indefinitely. This outcome cannot 
be reconciled with Structural Balance Theory, which predicts that system-level stability can only 
occur when the group either has become uniform or has polarized into two internally cohesive 
and mutually antipathetic cliques. 
The model also has interesting implications for Social Identity Theory (36), which posits 
an in-group bias toward those who share a salient trait, prejudice against the out-group, and a 
tendency to ignore or change discrepant traits. The Hopfield model produces dynamic networks 
that self-organize into a similar pattern, but without a higher-order cognitive framework of social 
categories. In fact, these agents are not even aware that they belong to ﬁgroupsﬂ at all. This 
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  10demonstrates the possibility that in-group/out-group differentiation and antagonism are emergent 
properties of network self-organization and are not inscribed in agents™ cognitive architectures as 
assumed by identity theorists. In effect, the model demonstrates a 
distributed
 representation of 
the formation of social identities, which are not reducible to 
local
 representations in the minds of 
individual agents. 
Finally, the model offers an important methodological demonstration. The results show 
how analytical methods focusing on equilibria may be misleading for prediction of opinion 
distributions that are likely to obtain. An analysis of possible equilibria clearly shows that more 
multiplexity and larger population size increase the number of possible pluriform equilibria, i.e. 
opinion configurations in which for all agents and all issues the aggregated pressures to stick to 
one™s opinion exceed the aggregated pressures to change. However, our computational model 
showed that despite a larger number of theoretically possible equilibria, these conditions 
decreased the number of equilibria that were actually reached by the opinion dynamics. The 
reason is that equilibrium analysis fails to take into account the structural learning process 
through which outcomes are selected. In structural learning, equilibria become increasingly 
unlikely as the complexity of the coordination process increases. As a consequence, the 
computational model identifies polarization as the global attractor in a multiplex opinion space, 
an important substantive result that is overlooked by static equilibrium analysis. 
Previous theoretical work has emphasized the global stability of social homogeneity, 
where convergence to unanimity is an almost irresistible force in closely interacting populations. 
If it is possible for some ties to be negative, our model suggests instead that a social structure is 
most stable when the network self-organizes along a single dimension of differentiation which 
thus determines a clear ﬁrightﬂ and ﬁwrongﬂ choice on all behavioral dimensions. In comparison, 
social homogeneity is highly brittle. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The research was supported by a grant to the first author from the U.S. National Science 
Foundation (SES-0079381). The research of the third author was made possible by a fellowship 
of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences. 
REFERENCES 
1. Axelrod, Robert. 1997. ﬁThe Dissemination of Culture: A Model with Local Convergence 
and Global Polarization.ﬂ 
Journal of Conflict Resolution
 41: 2023-226. 
2. Mark, N. 1998. ﬁBeyond individual differences: Social differentiation from first principles.ﬂ 
Am Soc Rev
 63:309-330. 
3. Carley, K. 1991. ﬁA theory of group stability.ﬂ 
Am Soc Rev
 56:331-54. 
4. Latane, B. 2000. "Pressures to uniformity and the evolution of cultural norms." Pp. 189-215 
in Computational Modeling of Behavior in
 Organizations: The Third Scientific 
Discipline
, edited by D. R. Ilgen and C. L. Hulin. 
5. Cohen, J. M. 1977. ﬁSources of Peer Group Homogeneity.ﬂ 
Soc Ed 
50:227-41. 
6. Kandel, D.B. 1978. ﬁHomophily, Selection, and Socialization in Adolescent Friendships.ﬂ 
Am Jour Soc
 84:427-36. 
7. Verbrugge, L.M. 1977. ﬁThe structure of adult friendship choices.ﬂ 
Social Forces 
56:576-97. 
8. Byrne, D. E. 1971. 
The Attraction Paradigm
. New York: Academic Press. 
9. Newcomb, T.M. 1961. 
The Acquaintance Process
. New York: Holt, Rhinehart & Winston. 
10. Hoffman, I.R. & Maier, N.R.F. 1966. ﬁAn experimental reexamination of the similarity-
attraction hypothesis.ﬂ 
Jour of Pers & Soc Psy
 3:145-152. 
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  1111. Homans, G.C. 1950. 
The Human Group
. New York: Harcourt Brace. 
12. Lott, A.J. & Lott, B.E. 1965. ﬁGroup cohesiveness as interpersonal attraction: A review of 
relationships with antecedent and consequent variables.ﬂ 
Psy Bul
 64:259-309. 
13. Fararo, T.J. & Skvoretz, J. 1987. ﬁUnification research programs: Integrating two structural 
theories.ﬂ 
Am Jour Soc
 92: 1183-1209. 
14. Mayhew, Bruce H., J. Miller McPherson, Thomas Rotolo, and Lynn Smith-Lovin. 1995. 
"Sex and Race Homogeneity in Naturally Occurring Groups." 
Social Forces
 74:15-52. 
15. Rosenbaum, M.E. 1986. ﬁThe repulsion hypothesis: On the non-development of 
relationships.ﬂ 
Jour of Pers & Soc Psy
 51: 1156-1166. 
16. Cartwright, D. & Zander, A. (1968) ﬁPressures to uniformity in groups: An introduction.ﬂ Pp. 
139-151 in 
Group Dynamics: Research and Theory
, edited by Dorwin Cartwright and 
Alvin Zander. New York, NY: Harper & Row. 
17. Festinger, L. 1950. ﬁInformal social communication.ﬂ 
Psy Rev
 57:271-282. 
18. Schachter, S. 1951. ﬁDeviation, rejection, and communication.ﬂ 
Jour Abnormal Soc Psy
 46:190-207. 
19. Friedkin, N.E. 1984. ﬁStructural cohesion and equivalence explanations of social 
homogeneity.ﬂ 
Soc Meth & Res
 12:235-261. 
20. Marsden, P.V. & Friedkin, N.E. 1993. ﬁNetwork studies of social influence.ﬂ 
Soc Meth & 
Res 
22:127-151. 
21. Abelson, R.P. 1964. Mathematical Models of the Distribution of Attitudes Under 
Controversy. Pp. 142-160 in: Frederiksen, N. & Gulliken, H. (eds.): 
Contributions to 
mathematical psychology.
 Holt, Rinehart & Winston, New York. 
22. Harary, F. 1959. ﬁA criterion for unanimity in French™s theory of social power.ﬂ In 
Studies in 
social power
, edited by D. Cartwright, 168-82. Ann Arbor: Institute for Social Research.  
23. French, J. R. P. Jr. 1956. ﬁThe formal theory of social power
.ﬂ Psy Rev
 63: 181-94. 
24. Heider, F. 1958. 
The Psychology of Interpersonal Relations
. New York: Wiley. 
25. Hopfield, John J. 1982. "Neural networks and physical systems with emergent collective 
computational abilities." 
Proc Nat Acad Sci
 79:2554-8. 
26. Hopfield, J. J. and D. W. Tank. 1985. ""Neural" Computation of Decisions in Optimization 
Problems." 
Bio Cybernetics 
52:141-152.  
27. Hebb, D. O. (1949), The Organisation of Behavior: A Neuropsychological Approach. John 
Wiley and Sons, New York, NY. 
28. Nowak, A., Lewenstein, M, & Tarkowski, W. 1993. ﬁRepeller neural networks.ﬂ 
Phys Rev
 48:1491-8. 
29. Nowak, A. & Vallacher, R. 1997 ﬁComputational social psychology: Cellular automata and 
neural network models of interpersonal dynamics.ﬂ in S. Read and L Miller, eds. 
Connectionist Models of Social Reasoning and Social Behavior
. Mahwah, NJ: Larence 
Erlbaum. 
30. Kitts, J.A., M.W. Macy, & Flache, A. 2000. ﬁStructural learning: Attraction and conformity 
in task-oriented groups.ﬂ 
Comp Math Org Theory,
5:129-145. 
31.  Harsanyi, J. 1973. Games with randomly disturbed payoffs. 
International Journal of Game 
Theory 
2:1-23. 
32. Cartwright, D. & Harary, F. 1966. ﬁStructural balance: A generalization of Heider's theory.ﬂ 
Psy Rev
 63:277-93. 
33. Davis, J.A. 1967. ﬁClustering and structural balance in graphs.ﬂ 
Human Rel
 20:181-187. 
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  1234. Wasserman, S. & Faust, K. 1994. 
Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications
. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
35. Cartwright, D. & Gleason, T.C. 1966. ﬁThe number of paths and cycles in a digraph.ﬂ 
Psychometrika. 
31: 179-199. 
36. Tajfel, H.& Turner, J.C. 1986. ﬁThe social identity theory of intergroup relations.ﬂ in 
Psychology of Intergroup Relations
, edited by S. Worchel and W. G. Austin. Chicago, 
IL: Nelson-Hill 
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1    Local Rules and Global Properties: Modeling the Emergence of Network Structure  
 Martina Morris1 University of Washington Departments of Sociology and Statistics  
Abstract  
This paper reviews the interaction between theory and methods in the field of network analysis. Network theory has traditionally sought to use social relations to bridge what social scientists refer to as the micro-macro gap:  understanding how social structures are formed by the accumulation of simple rules operating on local relations.  While early network methods reflected this goal, the bulk of the methods developed later and popularized in computer packages were more descriptive and static.  That is beginning to change again with recent developments in statistical methods for network analysis.  One particularly promising approach is based on exponential random graph models (ERGM).  ERGM were first applied in the context of spatial statistics, and they provide a general framework for modeling dependent data where the dependence can be thought of as a neighborhood effect. The models can be used to decompose overall network structural properties into the effects of localized interaction rules; the traditional concern of the field.  An example is given using an HIV transmission network.     
Where do networks come from?  There are really two questions implied in this simple query.  The first is about the underlying process that gives rise to the patterns of links among nodes in the population Œ this requires us to think about a dynamic model that links local processes to a global outcome.  The second is the inverse question:  how to infer the underlying process from the patterns we observe Œ this requires statistical methods for sampling, estimation and inference.   Network theory was explicitly focused on the first question.  The current developments in the field are making progress on the second.  And the most well developed and commonly used methods in the field, while not particularly well suited to answering either question, have provided some important intermediate tools.   Modern (post 1940) social network theory explicitly focused on the link between local dynamics and global structures.  One root can be traced back to social anthropology and exchange theory.  In this research, the focus is on how rules governing permissible                                                  1 This work was supported in part by NIH grants R01 HD41877-01 and  R01 DA12831-02. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 exchange partners (for, e.g., gift giving, or marriage) cumulate up to determine the overall structure and stability of an exchange system (White 1963; Levi-Strauss 1969; Yamagishi and Cook 1993; Bearman 1996).  Another root can be traced back to the social psychology and balance theory.  In this research, the focus is on the how the requirement of balance for positive and negative affect among three actors Œ e.g., my enemy™s friend is my enemy Œ cumulates up (Heider 1946; Granovetter 1979; Chase 1982).  In both cases, the key findings have been that some simple local rules may lead to overall network structures that display striking regularities, like linear hierarchies, stable cliques, or stable cycles of exchange.  Other rules do not have these systemically stable impacts, and this distinction leads to an evolutionary hypothesis about the differential survival of rules over time, i.e., to links with game theory. Given this early focus, one might have expected the field to develop a methodology for systematically exploring such dynamics, but this did not happen.  Nor did the inverse statistical problem, of inferring the rules from the patterns, receive much attention.  It is tempting to attribute this to inadequate computing and statistical tools available at the time (from the 1940s to the 1980s).  And to the impact of the progress made in the (less demanding) linear model framework.  Whatever the reason, however, the methodology that did develop in the field of network analysis focused on static descriptive measures, rather than the dynamic model. The descriptive approach drew inspiration from mathematical graph theory, using tools from linear algebra to manipulate the adjacency matrix, and focusing on issues of clustering and connectivity.  These tools have become the heart of the field, providing a rich framework for thinking about networks and a wide range of summary measures to represent both the network position occupied by specific nodes, and the overall network structure.  Almost all of the classic network measures Œ paths, cycles, density, centrality, structural equivalence, cliques, blockmodels, role algebras and bicomponents -- owe their development to researchers working with these descriptive tools.  Textbooks and computer packages for network analysis typically have these measures at their core.  They have become the common language for network analysis, defining the basic features of networks and helping to develop our intuitions about the complex relational structures we seek to understand. The statistical issues Œ developing principled methods for estimation from samples, and quantifying the uncertainty in the estimates Œ have been addressed in a limited way in this descriptive context by eschewing traditional model-based statistical methods.   Model-based methods rely on the assumption of independent observations to obtain tractable likelihood-based estimation and inference.  In network analysis, independence is not something one would want to assume, since understanding the dependence among observations is actually the primary task.  The growth in computing power has given rise to statistical methods that rely on resampling rather than likelihood inference, e.g., the bootstrap, jackknife, and permutation tests.  These have been readily adopted by network analysts, finding their way into tests like quadratic assignment procedures (QUAP) for sociomatrix regression.  In recent years, Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms have been developed for complex estimation problems, and these are now providing the tools needed to return to a model-based framework. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3 Statistical Models for Networks  Progress in model-based statistical methods for network analysis has picked up momentum in recent years, due to a combination of theoretical developments, advances in statistical computing, and innovations in data collection.  Model-based statistical estimation and inference would seem to offer exactly the right tools to answer the original inverse question raised above, because it is based on an underlying stochastic model of the population process.  To be useful, however, two things are needed: (1) an appropriate model for the process and the dependencies in it, and (2) a method of estimation that works with dependent observations.2   This would seem to be fairly straightforward, but the history of the field makes it clear it is not. There is general agreement that the exponential family of distributions provides a good framework for modeling the probability that a random graph (or sociomatrix) X takes the observed value x.   Holland and Leinhardt (1981) were the first to propose using this model for networks, noting that it was a natural form because the sufficient statistics were explicitly tied to parameters of interest, like indegree, outdegree, mutuality and etc.  The general form of the model is given by:  ©1()exp()/()IJijijiPXxfxcxq=== (1)  where the sufficient statistics, ()ijfx, are typically counts of links and of products of links, the ijqare the parameters of interest, and ()cxis a normalizing constant.  This model had been proposed 20 years earlier by Bahadur (1961) as a general representation for multivariate binomial distributions.   It is a completely general model, and can fit any graph perfectly by using all 21n-possible parameters (where n is the number of nodes).  One can think of the sufficient statistics as defining the neighborhood of dependence.  Conditional on the rest of the graph, the dependence between observations is restricted to the other points in this neighborhood.  The heart of the modeling effort is to specify (and test) parsimonious representations of the neighborhood.  To focus on this, we will strip equation (1) down to its modeling core:  ©1()IJijijifxq= (2) and work through the models that have been proposed in various contexts. Much of the statistical theory for ERGM was developed and applied in the context of spatial statistics by Besag (1974).  The simplest spatial models represent observations as points on a lattice, and assume that only the nearest neighbors have an influence on the status of a site.   For example, imagine an agricultural plot, divided into a grid along two orthogonal axes (see Figure 1).                                                    2 It is important to keep in mind that the unit of analysis here is the link, not the node, and the dependence is between links, not between nodes. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 Figure 1.  A lattice model for a ﬁnearest neighborﬂ spatial process.  The dark site in the center is the site whose status is of interest; the grey sites indicate the neighborhood of dependence.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
Each square in the grid has 4 adjacent sites in its neighborhood.  Nearest neighbor ERGM models mimic the classic Ising model from statistical mechanics, representing the status of a site (say, infected with a fungus) as a function of:  ,,,,,{1,1}ijijikjkijijxxxkar+++=- (3) The spatial dependence among sites is captured by , which is considered a nuisance parameter, and the parameter of interest is , which represents the spatially adjusted propensity for infection. When applying these spatial models to networks, both similarities and differences in the nature of the data should be kept in mind.  In both cases, the data are often represented in matrix form Œ the lattice and the adjacency (or socio-) matrix.  But the meaning of the indices that order the matrix are quite different.  The ﬁsiteﬂ in the spatial context is a dyad (not a person) in the network context.  The Cartesian coordinates that define the grid in the spatial context become persons in the network context.  This latter difference has important implications.  In the spatial context, the spatial metric is exogeneous, and the lattice is fixed.  In the network context, the rows and columns of the adjacency matrix have no intrinisic ordering, and may be permuted at will without changing the pattern of ties among persons, or the neighborhoods that define dependence.  While physical space may influence the pattern of ties, it is not the only factor.  As a result, the notion of ﬁspaceﬂ in network models is largely endogeneous and neighborhoods are typically not defined in terms of proximity in the matrix.  Because the nature of the ﬁspatialﬂ dependence is the primary focus of interest in network analysis, the parameters that define this dependence are not nuisance parameters, but the parameters of most interest.   This also changes the kinds of models that are appropriate                                                                            Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5 for networks.  The models can be based on exogeneous non-spatial attributes of the nodes (e.g., age, race, sex, etc.), or on the propensity for certain kinds of configurations in the network (e.g., triad effects, cycles and paths).  Alternatively, the models may seek to represent neighborhoods in terms of a completely endogeneously defined latent space (with methods similar in spirit to earlier blockmodeling (White, Boorman et al. 1976)).   Each of these approaches can be found in the literature. The first application of ERGM like models to networks was Holland and Leinhardt™s p1 model for directed graphs.  The core of  this model takes the form:  11nniijjijjiijijxxxxabr++==<++ (4)  The model represents the process that gives rise to the graph as a function of the node-specific outdegree and indegree propensities, the jandiab parameters, and a uniform propensity, r, for ties to be reciprocated.  A number of key features of the ERGM framework are visible in this simple model.   First, the network statistics that drive the model are simple functions of links, and the neighborhood represented by the statistics is easy to read from functional forms.  In much the same way that a standard cross-tabulation can be decomposed into marginal and interaction effects, this model uses marginal and interaction-type terms to distinguish between dyad-independent and dyad-dependent effects.  Terms that are based on marginal sums represent effects that operate on each dyad independently.  In this model, the basic indegree and outdegree terms are of this sort.  Marginal effects can also be used to represent groups of nodes defined by exogeneously given attributes, and the patterns of selective mixing among the groups (this will be shown below).  Used in this way, the attributes define a social distance metric that establishes a generalized kind of neighborhood.  Terms that are based on products of links, on the other hand, represent dependence between the links. In this model, the only dependence between links is within-dyad Œ the tendency for mutual ties Œ so this model is still referred to as a dyadic independence model.  But products of non-reciprocal links are a fairly straightforward generalization, and models with these terms are referred to as dyadic dependence models.  Examples include products of triads of various kinds (a direct formalization of the balance theory hypotheses), and all manner of larger component sizes and structures.  In each case, the sufficient statistic will be the sum of the products of sets of links that are eligible for the specific configuration of interest, and the parameter will represent whether this configuration happens more or less likely than one would expect by chance.  The size and structure of the configuration indicates the nature of the neighborhood. Second, one can also catch a glimpse of the two key mechanisms for reducing the number of parameters in these models:  one is to limit the number of configurations represented as having an effect on the probability of the graph, the other is to impose ﬁhomogeneity constraintsﬂ on isomorphic configurations.  In this model the number of configurations is quite small Œ instars, outstars, and mutual dyads.  But the homogeneity constraints are only imposed on the mutuality parameter; indegree and outdegree parameters remain node-specific.  As the population grows large, the number of Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 parameters will also grow.  This is somewhat like a fixed-effect model in economics, where a term is fit to every respondent in a setting with repeated measures.  Here, as there, these are essentially nuisance parameters.  Homogeneity constraints are often imposed for parsimony, but they can also be used to represent exogenous covariates.  For example, one can specify group-specific, rather than individual-specific parameters for indegree and for outdegree (Fienberg, Meyer et al. 1985; Wang and Wong 1987):    ,1,...;1,...kiljklijijjiikjlikjlxxxxxkGlGabfr++ÎÎÎÎ+++== (5)  There are now G indegree and outdegree parameters, rather than N.  This can lead to a substantially more parsimonious model if the number of groups is much smaller than the number of persons.  The f parameters are used to specify the level of mixing within and between groups.  As in other log-linear modeling settings, the mixing can also be parsimoniously modeled to represent patterns of interest (Morris 1991).  The next extension of ERGM in networks took on the task of modeling dyadic dependence.  The ability to model dyadic dependence is the single most important feature of the ERGM framework, both because it is theoretically appealing, and because it is statistically innovative.  The range of possibilities it opens up, however, is daunting.  Without the physical space embedding, the notion of ﬁneighborhoodﬂ is pretty much unconstrained.  Frank and Strauss (Frank and Strauss 1986) were the first to exploit the more general form of the ERGM to represent dyadic dependence in the context of networks.  The approach they took was a natural, if somewhat mechanical, first step:  links are dependent if they share a node.  The neighborhood is Markovian in the sense that links must be directly adjacent to be dependent, so Frank and Strauss referred to the model as the Markov Graph.  Using the Hammersley-Clifford theorem, the sufficient statistics for this model can be shown to be products of links that represent the stars of various sizes in the graph, and triangles.  A ﬁstarﬂ is a cluster of links with a single central node.  For an undirected graph the general Markov model is:  11nkkijkijjkkiksxxxst-
=+ (6)  
where ksrepresents a star of size k, so a product of k links.  Frank and Strauss then investigate a simpler version of the Markov model, restricting the configurations to 12andss -- edges and 2-stars, and imposing an homogeneity constraint on the triangle parameter .  Wasserman and Pattison (Wasserman and Pattison 1996; Pattison and Wasserman 1999) returned to the more general form, which they christened p*, in honor of Holland and Leinhardt™s pioneering work. The models above are based on explicit measured covariates, though in some cases the covariates are themselves part of the process being modeled.  Another approach, with roots in classic multivariate analysis, seeks instead to represent the latent, unmeasured space implied by the pattern of network ties.  In this purely descriptive Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.7 model, the aim is to find a latent space in which the probability of a tie varies with the distance between the two nodes (Hoff, Raftery et al. 2002).  Conditional on this metric, the dyads are independent.  ijzza-- (7)  
The z parameters represent the latent spatial locations, and need to be estimated.  Without further dimensional reduction, the number of parameters required to map this latent space becomes quite large.  More parsimonious representations can be tested.  Explicit covariates can also be added.  
Despite the enormous flexibility the ERG framework has brought to the field, virtually all of the published applications of these models have either used a variant of the original p1 model, or the simplified Markov graph.  This is somewhat curious, as both are pretty mechanical renderings of what one might think of as the ﬁneighborhoodﬂ of influence, and neither is particularly well suited to representing the kinds of processes traditionally of interest to network modelers. The lack of model development is probably due to the extremely challenging technical problems that accompany the estimation of these models.3  Another problem is the lack of data, or at least of the type of data currently required.  None of the models has been specified in a way that missing data can be handled, so it is still necessary to have the equivalent of census data on a network Œ data on every node and every link.  Such data do exist, but they are not common, and this has been a major obstacle to all forms of network analysis.  Finally, it may also be that our ability to think, empirically, in terms of positions and network structure has atrophied as we have waited for the right tools to become available.  Whatever the reason, there has been remarkably little application of these modeling tools to data. Models are the bridge between theory and data.   And while there is a certain attraction to simple abstract forms, like Markov graphs, small world graphs, or scale free networks, the simplification we seek will be embedded in each substantive context.   In the rest of this paper, I will show how these models can be used to formalize the investigation of how a global network structure might cumulate up from simple local rules in a specific case.                                                   3 Other papers in this volume will be addressing these in detail, so they do not need to be covered here.   Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 From local rules to global structures:  Partnership networks and the spread of HIV  
Over the past two decades, the epidemic of HIV has challenged the epidemiological community to rethink its paradigms for understanding the risk of infectious disease transmission, both at the individual level, and at the level of population transmission dynamics.  Opinion has rapidly converged on the central importance of partnership networks.  Because people acquire infections from their partners, it is not only a person©s own behavior that puts them at risk, but the behavior of their partners, and more generally, the persons to whom they are indirectly connected by virtue being connected to their partner.  At the individual level the risk of infection is determined by position in the overall transmission network.  While individual behavior plays a primary role in establishing this position, it is not the exclusive determinant.  To some extent, even the notion of ﬁindividual behaviorﬂ itself is open to question here, since all behaviors can only be adopted with a willing partner, which has important implications for both modeling and behavioral intervention strategies.  At the aggregate level, too, transmission dynamics are strongly affected by networks.  The network of partnerships channels the spread of an infection through a population, amplifying or impeding the spread relative to a hypothetical randomly mixing population.  At both the individual and the population level then, our ability to quantify the risk of transmission for HIV or other sexually transmitted or blood-borne infections, depends on our ability to measure and summarize the transmission network. One of the greatest obstacles to using network analysis in this context is the complete data requirement.  In the context of the sexual and needle-sharing networks that matter for HIV, such data collection is impossible.  The question, then, is whether we can explain the overall network structure with a small number of partnership formation rules that operate at the local individual level.  If this is true, it will radically simplify data collection needs, and give network analysis a central place in the tools of sexually transmitted infection (STI) research and intervention. There is some reason to think that such local rules may govern the network structures of interest.  At the population level, the findings from recent mathematical modeling suggest that two general types of structures are important: selective mixing patterns among different groups (Hethcote and Van Ark 1987; Sattenspiel 1987; Garnett and Anderson 1993; Morris 1996), and the timing and sequence of partnership formation (Watts and May 1992; Morris and Kretzschmar 1997).  These general insights come from different types of mathematical simulations, including both simple deterministic differential equations (sometimes called compartmental models) and stochastic microsimulations of a population of interacting individuals (sometimes called ﬁagent based modelsﬂ). Mixing refers to assortative and disassortative biases in the joint distribution of partners™ attributes.  Examples include the degree of matching on race, age, sex, social status, sexual orientation or level of sexual activity.  Assortative biases can create patchy, clustered networks, which tends to increase the speed of spread within groups, and slow the spread between them.  If the groups also vary in activity level, the resulting Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.9 distribution of infection can be very uneven.  In the extreme, prevalence may rise to high endemic levels in some groups, while other groups remain infection free.  Disassortative biases typically have the opposite effect, ensuring rapid spread to all groups.  For example, preferential linking between highly active persons and less active persons ensures that the latter are reached more quickly in the epidemic.  An example of this is the traditional double standard, where men can have multiple partners, but women only one. The timing and sequence of partnership formation refers to the pattern of start and end dates for partnerships over an individual™s lifetime.  If the partnership intervals defined by these dates are strictly sequential, the pattern is called serial monogamy.  If the intervals overlap, the pattern is called concurrency.  Serial monogamy retards the spread of infection in two primary ways:  it locks the pathogen in a partnership for some time after transmission, and it ensures that only later partners are at indirect risk from earlier ones.  With concurrency, by contrast, one™s partner can have other partners, who in turn have other partners, and so on.  Instead of a monogamous population of dyads and isolates, concurrency creates a potentially large connected component for rapid pervasive spread.  In addition, because earlier partners need not be dropped as later partners are added, the infection can be spread both in both directions:  from earlier to later partners, and from later to earlier ones. Almost all of our understanding of the effects of these network patterns on HIV spread have been based on simulation.  And with few exceptions, the simulations have created network effects indirectly, by varying parameters of some convenient mathematical function to produce a change in the simulated networks.  Network patterns are thus outcomes of the model, rather than inputs.  This strategy has been enormously valuable for orienting research, and it laid the groundwork for future progress.  But it has also limited our ability to place this work on a firm empirical footing, and to quantify the risk in any specific network. Linking network data to network simulation requires a statistical bridge:  a modeling framework that enables the key structural parameters to be estimated from network data, so that these can be used to directly drive a simulation.  ERGMs have the potential to do this. The simplest network statistic is the total number of links, represented as {1,...,},ijinjix=<, which provides information on the density of the network Œ in this context, the level of partnership activity in the population.  The level of concurrency is represented by statistics for the ﬁnodal degree distributionﬂ Œ the number of persons with 0, 1, 2, or more partners (and one could test either parametric or non-parametric forms of these distributions).  A simple selective mixing on a discrete characteristic (e.g., race) would be represented by the count of dyads in which both partners have the same attribute.  One can also parameterize cycles of various sizes (e.g., triangles, 4-cycles, etc.), and with parameters that make the temporal dependence explicit.  This enables one to model how in the network evolves over time.  These parameters and others can be fit simultaneously, which provides a uniform metric for establishing their relative strength, and examining their correlation.  What this statistical model provides, then, is a Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 systematic method for summarizing the key structural features of an empirical network, with a framework for comparison and testing. While estimation techniques are often of little interest to non-statisticians, this case is an exception.  The constant in equation (1) requires a calculation that makes simple maximum likelihood estimation impossible for graphs larger than about 20 nodes.  To avoid this, early applications of these models used an approximation called maximum pseudolikelihood estimation (MPLE).  The problem was that the estimates produced by MPLE were of unknown quality.  In the last few years, researchers have turned instead to computationally intensive Monte-Carlo Markov Chain (MCMC) estimation methods, which allow the true likelihood function to be maximized.  In addition to providing more accurate estimates, this approach is particularly interesting for our purposes because the MCMC method effectively simulates the network in order to maximize the likelihood.  We can, however, just as easily use the MCMC algorithm to simulate the network given the parameter estimates, and this provides the ideal solution to the problem of linking network data to the network simulation.  One can estimate the network parameters from data, and then use the same model, with the empirically based parameter estimates, to drive a simulation of the network with an infection spreading through it.  The MCMC algorithm provides the engine for both tasks.  This makes it possible for the first time to directly control the network structures in a simulation so that they ﬁlook likeﬂ the networks we observe in different data sets. A Model-Based Hypothesis  
We are now in a position to test a different kind of hypothesis about the role of networks on disease spread.  The research of the previous decade has suggested that attribute-based mixing and levels of concurrency have a large impact on network structure and transmission dynamics.  Now we can ask whether these are the only features that matter. One the one hand, there is a good theoretical basis for this hypothesis.  For the type of partnerships that spread STI it seems reasonable to presume that people make decisions about which partners to choose based on preferences and norms that operate at the local level.  That is, we choose partners because they are the right sex, age, race and status, and we often care if they have other partners.  It is unlikely that people form partnerships thinking ﬁIf I choose this partner I can shorten the number of steps between me and a randomly chosen person on the west coastﬂ or ﬁI™d like to complete as many 5-cycles as possible with a single partnershipﬂ.  This may seem obvious at one level, but the implications may not be as obvious, and they are quite striking.  If simple local rules govern partner selection, then these also determine the aggregate structure in the network:  what looks like an unfathomably complicated system is, in fact, produced by a few key local organizing principles.  By extension, these simple local rules are also, therefore, the key behavioral determinants of disease transmission dynamics on the network. There are also important practical implications of this hypothesis.  Both mixing and concurrency are network properties that can be measured with local network sampling strategies.  If it turns out that these two local rules explain most of the variation Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11 in network structure that is relevant to disease spread, then we have a simple inexpensive way to measure network vulnerability routinely in public health surveillance.  And they describe simple behavioral rules that people can be taught to recognize and change. So the last piece of the puzzle is to determine how to test the hypothesis that mixing and concurrency contain all of the information we need to know to evaluate the spread potential in a network.    We seek a ﬁgoodness of fitﬂ test, but one that is tailored to what we want to fit. Transmission potential in a network is determined by the network connectivity.  Connectivity can be measured in a number of ways, but two simple measures are the properties of reachability (is person i connected to person j by a path of some length?) and distance (what is the length of that path?).   Reachability and distance represent epidemiologically relevant ﬁhigher orderﬂ network properties that simple models should be able to reproduce. We can develop fit statistics based on these higher order network statistics to test the models that include parameters only for mixing and concurrency. This makes it possible to test whether the local organizing features represented in the model reproduce the larger structural features of the network.  We can therefore develop formal tests for the hypothesis that mixing and concurrency capture the epidemiologically relevant variation in network structure.  We can also use the MCMC simulation engine to verify whether these features are sufficient for establishing the epidemic potential in a network.   
Conclusion The new tools for network modeling provide us with the ability to empirically test a question that has both important practical implications, and deep theoretical roots.  The generalizable findings from this work will not necessarily be monolithic.  There is no reason to think that attribute mixing and concurrency are the local rules that drive all network structure.  What is generalizable, though, is that the models for networks should be rooted in the scientific context that they seek to explain.  For this, one does not need a one size fits all approach, one needs a flexible class of models that can be tested against data in principled ways.  ERGMs provide the basis for this kind of empirically-based network analysis, and should become widely used in the years to come. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12 References  Bahadur, R. R. (1961). A representation of the joint distribution of responses to n dichotomous items. Studies in Item Analysis and Prediction. H. Solomon. Stanford, California, Stanford University Press: 158-168. Bearman, P. S. (1996). "Generalized Exchange." Amer J Soc 102(5): 1383-1415. Besag, J. (1974). "Spatial interaction and the statistical anaylsis of lattice systems." Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B 36: 192-236. Chase, I. D. (1982). "Dynamics of hierarchy formation:  the sequential development of dominance relationships." Behaviour 80: 218-40. Fienberg, S. E., M. M. Meyer, et al. (1985). "Statistical analysis of multiple sociometric relations." Journal of the American Statistical Association 80: 51-67. Frank, O. and D. Strauss (1986). "Markov Graphs." JASA 81: 832-842. Garnett, G. and R. Anderson (1993). "Contact tracing and the estimation of sexual mixing patterns: the epidemiology of gonococcal infections." Sex Transm Dis 20(4): 181-91. Granovetter, M. (1979). The theory gap in social network analysis. Perspectives in Social Network Analysis. P. Holland and S. Leinhardt. New York, Academic. Heider, F. (1946). "Attitudes and Cognitive Organzation." Journal of Psychology 21(January): 107-112. Hethcote, H. and J. Van Ark (1987). "Epidemiological Models for Heterogeneous Populations: Proportionate Mixing, Parameter Estimation, and Immunization Programs." Math. Biosc. 84: 85-118. Hoff, P. D., A. E. Raftery, et al. (2002). "Latent space approaches to social network analysis." Journal of the American Statistical Association 97( 460): 1090-1098. Holland, P. and S. Leinhardt (1981). "An exponential family of probability distributions for directed graphs." JASA 77: 33-50. Levi-Strauss, C. (1969). The Elementary Structures of Kinship (orig. 1949). Boston, Beacon Press. Morris, M. (1991). "A log-linear modeling framework for selective mixing." Math Biosc 107: 349-77. Morris, M. (1996). Behavior change and non-homogeneous mixing. Models for Infectious Human Diseases:  Their Structure and Relation to Data. V. Isham and G. Medley. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press. 6: 236-49. Morris, M. and M. Kretzschmar (1997). "Concurrent partnerships and the spread of HIV." AIDS 11: 641-8. Pattison, P. E. and S. Wasserman (1999). "Logit models and logistic regressions for social networks, II.  Multivariate relations." British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology 52: 169-194. Sattenspiel, L. (1987). "Epidemics in nonrandomly mixing populations:  A simulation." Amer. J. Phys. Anthro. 73: 251-265. Wang, Y. J. and G. Y. Wong (1987). "Stochastic blockmodels for directed graphs." JASA 82: 8-19. Wasserman, S. and P. Pattison (1996). "Logit models and logistic regressions for social networks:  I.  An introduction to Markov graphs and p*." Psychometrika 60(401-426). Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.13 Watts, C. H. and R. M. May (1992). "The Influence of Concurrent Partnerships on the Dynamics of HIV/AIDS." Math Biosc 108: 89-104. White, H. C. (1963). An Anatomy of Kinship. Englewood Cliffs, Prentice Hall. White, H. C., S. A. Boorman, et al. (1976). "Social structure from multiple networks, I:  Blockmodels of roles and positions." American Journal of Sociology 81: 730-80. Yamagishi, T. and K. Cook (1993). "Generalized exchange and social dilemmas." Soc Psych Quarterly 56(4): 235-48.  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.w\xmyVX\:TLzˆTekl{xS?YXmqkcV|bW}w‹wł©ÏNÐÐ>D9È3292E•7^¼?58¼?H83292E»¼?7:µg7^¼?M8H8OI¼x¶6<gH"3692E67^¼UµX<U>D92E•OI965Ç<gF67K967^<X·−He¼g½"¾ÉHe¼gJL>W<?OAHe9¹JK7:¸UF2>896O]µ‚JÐ>D9~EÇOI9=<g7:9e<?OAHe92>D@r>D<‚<U>8¸U½•µfËlÍNåÐJ›7^<gF6H•E6µ−º2>eµ‚7xE˜He9K<gF67¤´~7:¼?¸^H8@]>W<?OAHe9K>8´6´6¼?He>e¸UF˛ËAÍ:æÐDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.—,£t±t«−¬ß¯#®4«$±ˆ®$±Ł²Ł¬ ˜#%$“µg32¸UF'&à2¶å6¶AÍ)(Ð+*<gF67Ì¾É36@I@¤¼U>D965e7å•¶IÍÏWÐÐ0ËlÍ˘,ÐËlÍxæÐÐÐ0šÝ636¼g<gF67:¼:¶µX<?32E•OI7:µ$µgF6HW·.-)/Ð0Á0$“>1&2$“º+&4<gF67œ´6¼?H8´6À43gµgJL>D¼g<65Kµ‚<g¼U>W<g7:58OI7:µ:¶6OA<7.8¹>8@I>8¼gO]>L¼?7:¿=36OI¼g7xµäH8¾[<gF27(~¶ÏWÐ0šÑ¤9Ì<gF27=9;9><M9Ð0Nt±t«−¬ß¯#®4«POä±‚®²‚«Ł¬ ˜˘-M9;9 (~¶Tå8áÐ"TtÁ=U§<?¼?> -M8V3gº636¼UµX<UµW5Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.YX\:dÄh8S8i=n:aˆS?V”¡*\:YX¢DmH89292E6OA965=µÇµgF6HW·$ÉH8¼−OA9296OA<g7)@AOIJKOl<ˆHD¾Ł<gF27M&å•ÍÐU$“ÖÈÁ -¸^>8µg780@U,7^·7^JK´6OI¼gO]¸^>8@292E•OI965eµL¸UF~>D@I@A7:96587Ç<gF67»MW>8@AO]E•OA<XB#HD¾¤<gF67˛<?¼?>eE•Ol<?OAHe92>D@$¿=367:36OA925J›H•E•7:@Iµ:¶4>892EÔ967^·åeåxÎ•å (ÐF2>NM87"JK7:>eµ‚36¼?7:EÜ>ÔÍß´~HW·ˆ7^¼Lµg´~7x¸⁄<g¼?36JÕ2HW·˘-3gµg´2>D¼Uµ‚7M53‚>DJ%5 -˘-F6OI¸^36@]>D¼ˆ<g¼U>˘-åÏWÐ$“Ã)Ý•Á=&58¼?H836´ÈËåDàÐ780520I¶*<gHÆÃ=U¤Áµ‚7x¿=367^92¸^7:µ˛Ëå1,G¶cå /Ðå 96¶æ8áÐ¶*F67x>D¼g<¼?>D<g7$MW>D¼?OI>8º6OI@AOA<XBÇË (ÐæÏNÐæ8àÐ0GÑ¤967$HD¾`<gF27e¬6²‚±ˆˇÊ®ˆ˙Ł¬ ˜˝˚˛ ˜,Ð0ŁãˆB¹µX<?32E•BGOI965">Ç·$O]E•7K¼?>896587˜HD¾FE$”>1&$“º+&>›´~HW·ˆ7^¼gÀ|@]>N·8$”¸)&"µ‚OI965e@A7^Àyµ?¸^>8@A7»967^<X·−He¼g½•µ:¶4¸UF2>8¼?>e¸⁄<g7:¼gOIÅ^7xEÔº=Bß>#¸^H896927:¸⁄<?OAMGOA<XBÔE6OIµ‚<g¼?OAº23•<gOIH89·$OA<gF>¾“>8µ‚<‚ÀqE•7:¸:>NBGOA965˜<?>8OA@|0˝˚˛HGIJ8K@L,K1A" $0/() 1A2Ð¼?>892E•H8J520I¶Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.,£æ>,:Î•æ;9Ð0˝˚˛C/F@&I@L18:@*/*)%8&1A5(eáÐ.-(~Í8¶(=åÐ¶G·$F6O]¸UF¹¿=32>D9=<gO27xµ(eæÐ.-L¸^OA7:9=<−O]µ−µgOA5e96O~¸^>89e<?@AB›@]>D¼?587^¼4<gF2>89=$“ºGBLJ›7x>8µg36¼gÀ6&2UJK>89ÆË(1(Ð0¾É¼gHeJ(ÏWÐ´6¼gHe´~7:¼‚<?OA7xµfHD¾$E6>D<?>"Õ2HW·>D92>8@AB•µgOIµf>892E(eàÐ˝˚˛˝/*)).)%28C/($ˆˇ1A5˚@L8$0/(828Ð¾“>DOI@A32¼g7xµ)>892E¹OI9=<g7:9e<?OAHe92>D@=$6&.-˝˚˛˜˚2).$0/*)%132$(~¶ÏWÐ8%<gF27˛µ?>DJK7"OIµ˜<?¼g367"¾ÉHe¼Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.YX\:dÄh8S8i=n:aˆS?V”¡*\:YX¢Dmƒ(,Ð017µg´6¼?7:>8E6OA965Æ7:´6O]E•7^JKO]¸^µÈËAÍ:æÐ$ÉOG&4$ÉOIO&OA92E6OAMGO]E•32>D@]µ:02M87ÊËAÍ)9ÐE•¼?>8JL>W<gO]¸)´6¼U>8¸⁄<?OI¸:>D@`OIJ›´2@AO]¸^>D<gOIH892µ:0Ñ¤36¼š>892>D@IB=<gO]¸^>D@G>D´2´6¼gH=>8¸UFfO]µt7:92>Dº2@AOI965,3~µt<?H¤µ‚<g32E6Bf7-˛®G²Ê®ˆ˙Ł¬ ˜ˇ!$”>1&ÏNÐÐ0$“º+&$”¸)&ÇÖÌ7Ì>D¼?7˛E67^M87:@AHe´6OI965Ê967^·-$”ED&ÇÖÌ7¹>8¼g7»E•7xµ‚OI5892OA965˝7-D5<?F6¼?7:>W<?7^967xE967^<X·−He¼g½•µX×Ô<?F67Ìµ?>DJK7ÌJK>D<gF67:JL>W<gO]¸^µ3‚MGOI¼g3~µ‚7xµW5²G±Ł°G²X®4«*Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.,£Ð¶8<?F67œ7-)92¶AÍxæÐ¶å8àÐ)(Ð,Ð0,*BC21>" 882/(&ÖÌ7¤<gF2>896½˜0Á,º~7:¼g5~¶>TU¤0G1−E•@IOA965~¶TrOI@X7:¼gH=µ[¾ÉHe¼$U¤á8áeá6Í.(»á=å˝Í˚˙t«,±,£‰t£wn^mqk¥}−S?V|¡%\:YX¢DmU}2}%$˘&('˘&N—“—:‡:‡x‡%*g£‰r£wn^mqk¥}−S?V|¡%\:YX¢DmU}132(4“—^‡x‡N—˘*g£8£,h•£e££ˆS?V”¡*\^YX¢8mU}4}~–U‡%$9=H'G–:–(&I$E)“—^‡x‡N—˘*g£22łDZI\:Y‚j$zˆTekl{xS?YXmqkcV|b_ŁYXSUmqmU}ł8ZI\:Y‚j6}2–<=I=D–H*g£r£ˆ\⁄¡ZY[D–'G–D–H$@)“—:‡:‡8–H*g££,£a`cbRšYXkcVXkvu⁄n^a`_rs=SUTe\xdfSUT=n8}T;G}•hNƒ9&H'Dh)y–(=˘=I=%*g£$‰r£wn^Y‚n:€n:mqk¥}4Wh i[M:Al˛/C"MK˛22˙Ng98-)˘*g£&8£,£[£=hDV‚n^T=avS?bW}e£Gh6£e†−T=j8Y‚n:jeSx}eh•£ˆn⁄{8avkvT›SgV4n:a¥£v}˝b=†wYX\xnxj8‰w~kqpWi=kljTr˛n^VXS?Y⁄}2}•ƒ<'G–)y–<=I=˘=%*g£=wi=T=jeS˜n:T=j˝h•£42˙4˛/˙N˛4[−S?¡y\:YX¢•}6–(=˘=*g£–U‡8£$o¤£⁄€•SUTe‰”†4{DY‚n^sGn^dÔn^TGj¤h6£IOzA24242˙4˛/˙˚˛4[%*g£˝}œ£ŁYXS<`x}8o)£D€•SUT8‰”†−{WY‚n:s=n:dK}Wn^TGj˜h6£‘−n:T=je\:dwYXS⁄n^¢ej8\⁄¡[T~}2S?VqV⁄£"~F}—)“—^‡x‡:‡%*g£"}œ£rYXS:`w)_tsWb8mU£=‘4SU{•£~S?VqV⁄£_~_#2}&N—“—^‡x‡8–(*g£–qhWVqYXi=u?VXi8Y‚n:aš_rYX\:p•S?YqVXkvSUm)\^Zˆh8u⁄n^alSg‰YXSUS−S?V|¡%\:YX¢Dm4klT4%†˚2(2g242˙Ng98h222¥}SUjekcVXS⁄j˜€Wb›h6£w\^YXT=se\xalj8V−n:T=j¤£=’¤£Gh8u‚sDi=myVXS?Yj)DrÆkvavS?bD‰\Y−R¤}wS?YXavkvT~}=klT›peYXSUmqmU}G—:‡:‡N—I*g£–££~kva–r£W†,£,£y£>ƒ|¦*s=S˛SU€\^Z8i=n:a~R%\xTWV‚n:ugVXmU}ˆn^VXieYXST˜G_G}_=x‡%$<'˝=:‡I&@)“—:‡:‡8–H*/⁄:‡8–U‡ƒ:‡%$W£–⁄ƒD££2kla–|S?YX\xmU}rn^TGj,£VXseS|r"SU€›\^Zth8S¥p8YXSUpeYXkvTWV/*g£–££~kva–yS?YX\:mU}r£6†,£,£\^ZfYt\xavi=TWV‚n^Yqbła`rieYX\xpesWbemU£2S?VqV⁄£X)¥mqie€=dfkcVqVXS⁄jg£Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.YX\:dÄh8S8i=n:aˆS?V”¡*\:YX¢Dm$–($D£wn^YqVXsSUaSUd¤bW}:n^TGj,£yR%aAn^mqmqSUm*\^ZwSUsGn⁄{Dkv\:Ylr˛\^YXaAj−S?V|¡%\:YX¢DmU}ˆn^VXkv\xT=n:aŁ†4u⁄nxj8SUd¤b˜\:Z%hDuUkvSUT=uUS?m6}Ł–:–x–=H')“—^‡x‡:‡%*g£–<&8£wqhDS⁄n^YXu‚s¹kvT_`\⁄¡%S?Y−S?V|¡%\:YX¢DmU}f_rsDb8mU£8‘4SU{•£#n˜–xƒ@)“—^‡x‡D–H*g£–<=uUkvSUTWVt„|dfd¤i=T=ka`n^TGj›R%\xdfp=i8VXS?YXmU}/⁄:‡N—^‡%$“—^‡x‡x—I*g£—^‡8£zrÔ£[£˘p˝pDi2}%r…£%r˝Y,£%rÆkvavmq\xT~}łˆn^VXi8YXS˜\^ZŁVXs=S?YXTeS?Vf¦2Y‚nu)DVXSUT=jeS⁄jYtS?YXmqkv\xT_*g}¦2Y‚n:T=mU£−S?V|¡$£B])y–<=I=*g£—W–x£,£`_Łn8mq\xTÈn:T=j»h6£al\⁄bej2}uIb„B⁄ˆSgV|¡$£2}•—:—)y–<=I=Nƒ˘*g£—:—D£œ£i=¢Di=j=n8}wSUsGn⁄{Dkv\:Yœ\^Zux}Y‚n^u?V‚n:avmz;6}•—y–(=˘=I=I*g£—,£8¦`n:¢:nUbDn:mqi2}8n:TGj-}œ£ie¢8i=j=nD}|oˆb8T=n:dfkvuˆ_rsGn^mqS$¦~Y‚n^T=mqkcVXkv\xTł€emqS?YX{NS⁄jkvT˜„|TWVXS?YXT=SgV4¦~Y‚nuav\⁄¡$}s]_;_;6}G—“—^‡x‡:‡%*g£—œ£i=¢DiGjen8}u:}s]";˝˜‡y–(=˘=I=I*g£—:ƒD£2S?VqV⁄£_~n˜I&N—“—^‡x‡:‡%*g£—£,R−£P}ˆn⁄{8avkvT~}¤£ˆiGn^TWVXkvž=u⁄n^VXkv\:TÈ\^ZhDS?YXkvSUm5 ˙2i2C(L<˛/˙˚˛/C"MK˛É}ŁS⁄j8kcVXS⁄j"€Wbt£`’ˆaAn^mqmU}tR%sGn^\xmF}_&x—y–(=˘=NƒI*g£—˘$D£,R−£‰\}˝Y¤£wiealj8bDYXSU{•}eh6£¤£r£=’ˆ\xalj8‰łła`(pWi=S?T=uUSUmU}y–(=I=*–=D–/'G–=xƒD£—9&8£,h•£¤£wieaAjDbDYXSU{•}2†,£‰}¤£h8S(pWi=S?T=uUSUm<b%’ˆSUTwn:Te¢˝†4TGn^avb8mqkvm»_rsWbemU£t‘4SU{•£FeG}ƒ^‡I&'8ƒ^‡I=D–y–<=I=Nƒ˘*g£—9=wieTGj8Sx},£e£^hDugseSUavavT=sDi=€•S?Y⁄}Un:T=je£(}i[M:A\˛/C"MK˛2hSv24w1\YwS?YXavkvT~}•—:‡:‡N—I*g£w9Y−b8i=mqseklT2}^†,£wieTGjeS:}Nh•£wYXSUT=TeS?Y⁄}xh6£¤£e£xhDugseSUavalTesDie‰€•SgY⁄}mYł|Yšn^YXkc‰n^€=kvavkcV|bW}f_rsDb8mU£8‘4SU{•£2S?VqV⁄£2}•‡x—˘&xƒ:‡8–“—^‡x‡N—˘*g£wieTGjeS:}šh6£e£Sr…£P}n`USUa¥}e£¤£t_`S?VXSgY⁄}tn:TGj}œ£fY_rsWb8mU£e‘4SU{•£~S?VqV⁄£_~F}%$'%$I=E)“—:‡x‡:‡%*g£x—D£8£erÔ£c}[£e}$\:mquUkvSUavTDbD‰wieTGjeS:}¤£¤£wi=T=jeSx}_rsWb8mqkluUnœ†–-)“—^‡x‡8–(*g£8£œ£−i~}¤£6S?u?Vt\:Z2¦~YXSUT=jemŁ\:ToˆS?VqYXSUTGj8S⁄jL_rsDb8mU£2‘4SU{•£#n˜‰X–‰‚–<=)“—:‡x‡D–H*pesWbemqkvuUmK⁄^‡8–U‡x‡D–(&D££˝}œ£−i~}en:T=j¤£6S?u?V4\:ZoˆS?VqYXSUTGj8S⁄jf_rsWbemU£8‘4SU{•£#F}e‡–x–U‡%$–:–⁄‡I$“—:‡:‡N—˘*g£pesWbemqkvuUmK⁄^‡8–:–x–x–U‡D£xƒD£y£~kvi~}t_`£%’ˆ\xpekv¢DYXkvmqseTGn:T2}t_`£*R%ka`‰\},£=i=u?VXi=n^VXkv\xTem~}–I=:‡^‰X–‡x‡@)y–(=˘=I=%*g£Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.&,£˝}¤£ˆiedœ‰€•SgYXm¥peYXSUp8YXkvTDV/*g£I$£W‘4\I`yh8u⁄n^avS?‰YXSUS−S?V|¡%\:YX¢Dm\:T~n^VqVXkvuUSUmU}2S?VqV⁄£r}W'E)“—:‡:‡%*/⁄:‡N—^‡Nƒ–D£˘&"rYXSUSˆSgV|¡*\^YX¢DmU}œ_tsWb8mU£8‘−SU{•£2S?VqV⁄£r}W'@)“—^‡x‡I*/⁄:‡x—:‡xƒ$)“—:‡:‡N—I*g£˘=8£$o¤£6€•SUTe‰”†−{WY‚n^sGn:dK}G†,££2‘4\I`rdœ‰YXSUSˆS?V”¡*\^YX¢8mU}/⁄:‡x‡8–⁄ƒ:‡)“—:‡x‡%*g£‡8£§uU\xT=j8‰/⁄:‡x—:‡‡“—^‡x‡N—˘*g£–x£$o¤£e£Ir»n^VqVXmšn:T=jfh6£˚`x}qR%\:alavSUugVXkl{xSˆoˆb8TGn^dfkvuUmr\:Zlr˛\^YXalj−S?V|¡%\:YX¢DmU}ˆn^VXi8YXS_^2}‡H'—y–(=˘=I&I*g£—D£$o¤£e£cr˛n^VqVXmU}[2˙/v48hTi22˙Ng98†˙444I2UwC"˛/8K8V)<=I=I=I*g£8£,£H}f]n˜('8ƒ:—m)“—:‡:‡N—˘*g£e£ˆS?V”¡*\:YX¢DmU}/⁄:‡N—^‡Nƒ‡Nƒ“—^‡x‡x—I*g£X}łył=D}ˆSU€8YXS?¡z−T=kv{NS?YXmqkcV”bW}D„|myY‚n:S?aÉ£n`,£ˆn^VXi8YXS_^_^2}–y–(=˘=I=%*g£$˝YkvTKR%\xdfp•SˆSgV|¡*\^YX¢DmU}#6}G‡–:–“—:‡:‡8–(*g£Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SESSION IIIMetrics and ModelsDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SensitivityAnalysisofSocialNetworkDataandMethods:Some
PreliminaryResults
StanleyWassermanandDouglasSteinley
UniversityofIllinoisatChampaign-Urbana
Abstract
Foursocialnetworkindicesareexaminedindepth{degreecentraliza-
tion,betweennesscentralization,transitivity,ande±ciency.Thisstudyuses
MonteCarlotechniquesandstandardrandomgraphdistributionstogen-
erategraphs.Weseektoestablishthegroundworkforageneraltheoryof
resistanceofnetworkstatistics.
Socialnetworkanalysishasbeenusedforthepastseventyyearstoadvanceresearchinthe
socialandbehavioralsciences.Majorbreakthroughsoverthepasttenyears,bothsubstantiveand
methodological,haveallowedthisparadigmtogreatlyexpanditsusefulness,especiallyincommuni-
cation,broadlyde¯ned(includinginternetresearch),organizationalscience,andepidemiology.The
focusofthisresearchisontheapplicationoftheparadigmtopolicyissues,especiallythosearising
governmentally,andthestudyandexpansionofstandardmethodologytotheseveryimportant
researchquestions.Thereareseveralmajormethodologicalquestionsunderstudy:
²
Whatarethee®ects,andmoreimportantly,theimplications,ofmeasurementerroron
socialnetworks?
²
Whatcanbedonetocontrolforthelackofindependenceofinteractionmeasurements
takenontherespondents(acommonproblemwithegocenterednetworks)?
²
Aretherebettermethodsforanalyzinglongitudinalnetworks,theircompositionandstruc-
ture,thangeneralizedlinearmodels?
SocialnetworkanalysisisdiscussedindetailinWassermanandFaust(1994);further,theo-
reticalconcernsarehighlightedinMongeandContractor(2003).Applicationsoftheparadigmto
manysubstantivedisciplines,aswellasdiscussionofhownetworkshaveadvancedthesedisciplines,
canbefoundinWassermanandGalaskiewicz(1994).
Recent
methodologicaldevelopmentsare
describedinCarrington,Scott,andWasserman(2003),writtentoupdateWassermanandFaust
(1994)bypresentingadvancesmadeduringthe1990'safterthepublicationofWassermanand
Faust(1994).WewillassumethatmostofthematerialpresentedinWassermanandFaust(1994)
isknowntothereader.
Ourresearchprogramhasavarietyofcomponents.We¯rstfocusattentionontwoareas:
ThisresearchwassupportedbygrantsfromtheNationalScienceFoundation(#ITS99-80189),andtheO±ce
ofNavalResearch(#N00014-02-1-0877).
email
addresses:
stanwass@uiuc.edu
;
steinley@s.psych.uiuc.edu
.A±l-
iations:DepartmentofPsychology,DepartmentofStatistics,andTheBeckmanInstituteforAdvancedScienceand
Technology.
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SENSITIVITYANALYSIS
2
²
Robustnessandresistanceofnetworkstatisticsandmeasures
²
Studyofthee®ectsofmeasurementerror(inavarietyofdi®erentforms)onstandard
analyses
Fourimportantstatisticsare:measuresofconnectivity(quantifyinghowmuchactorsare
\tiedtogether"),actorcentrality,countsofbridges,numbersandfrequenciesofcohesivesubgroups,
andthee±ciencyofanetwork..Wewilllookcarefullyathowthesedescriptivenetworkstatistics
canbeusedinsubstantivecontext,andcommentontheirmathematicalde¯nitions,theirstatistical
properties,theirerror-proneness,andtheirgeneralresistancetosamplingdesigns.
Thispresentationusesstandarddistributiontheoryforgraphsanddirectedgraphs(thereby
allowingforparameterestimation,unlikenonconventionalcomputationalmodelswithprobabilistic
assumptions).Wesamplefromthesedistributions,andstudythee®ectsofmodi¯cationsofdistri-
butionassumptionsonthevariabilityofstandardstatistics.Suchstudiesarebuta¯rststepina
completerobustnessandresistancetheoryforsocialnetworks.
Introduction
Webeginwithagraph,singlesetofnodes
N
,andasetoflines.Here,wewillonlybe
interestedingraphs,notdigraphs.Itiscommontousethismathematicalconcepttorepresenta
socialnetwork
,asetof
n
actorsandacollectionof
r
socialrelationsthatspecifyhowtheseactors
arerelatedtooneanother.
Here,welet
r
=1,focusingjustonnetworkswithsingle,nondirectedrelations,andassuming
thatrelationaltiestakeonjusttwovalues.
Welet
N
=
f
1
;
2
;:::;g
g
denotethesetofactors,and
X
denoteaparticularrelationde¯ned
ontheactors.Speci¯cally,
X
isasetoforderedpairsrecordingthepresenceorabsenceofrelational
tiesbetweenpairsofactors.Thissocialrelationcanberepresentedbya
g
£
g
matrix
X
,with
elements
X
ij
=
(
1if(
i;j
)
2X
;
0otherwise.
Wewilluseavarietyofgraphcharacteristicsandstatisticsthroughoutthispresentation
Distributiontheory
The¯rststepforanyprobabilisticmodelofanetworkistoconstructadependencegraph.
Suchadeviceallowsustodistinguishamongthemanypossiblegraphprobabilitydistributions,
whichcanoftenbecharacterizedbyconsideringwhichrelationaltiesareassumedtobestatistically
independent.
Wede¯neadependencegraph(asitappliestonetworkrelationalvariables)andthenshow
howitcandistinguishamongbasicgraphdistributions(suchasthosedescribedinWassermanand
Faust,1994,chapter13).ThisdependencegraphisalsothestartingpointfortheHammersley{
Cli®ordTheorem(Besag,1974),whichpositsaverygeneralprobabilitydistributionforthese
networkrandomvariablesusingthepostulateddependencegraph.Theexactformofthedepen-
dencegraphdependsonthenatureofthesubstantivehypothesesaboutthesocialnetworkunder
study;webrie°ydiscussseveralsuchhypotheses.
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SENSITIVITYANALYSIS
3
Theory
Anyobservedsinglerelationalnetworkmayberegardedasarealization
x
=[
x
ij
]ofarandom
two-waybinaryarray
X
=[
X
ij
].Ingeneral,theentriesofthearray
X
cannotbeassumedtobe
independent;consequently,itishelpfultospecifyadependencestructurefortherandomvariables
f
X
ij
g
asoriginallysuggestedbyFrankandStrauss(1986).
Thedependencestructurefortheserandomvariablesisdeterminedbythe
dependencegraph
D
oftherandomarray
X
.
D
isitselfagraphwhosenodesareelementsoftheindexset
f
(
i;j
);
i;j
2
N
;i
6
=
j
g
fortherandomvariablesin
X
,andwhoseedgessignifypairsoftherandomvariables
thatareassumedtobeconditionallydependent(giventhevaluesofallotherrandomvariables).
Moreformally,adependencegraphforaunivariatesocialnetworkhasnodeset
N
D
=
f
(
i;j
);
i;j
2N
;i
6
=
j
g
:
Theedgesof
D
aregivenby
E
D
=
f
((
i;j
)
;
(
k;l
))
;
where
X
ij
and
X
kl
arenotconditionallyindependent
g
:
Thisspeci¯cdependencegraphisaversionofan
independence
graph,asitistermedinthegraphical
modellingliterature(forexample,Lauritzen,1996;Robins,1997);seeRobins(1998)foranextended
discussionoftheapplicationofgraphicalmodellingtechniquestosocialnetworkmodels.
Wealsonotethatalloftheseconceptsandde¯nitionscanbeextendedtomultirelational
networks(RobinsandPattison,2002)withouttoomuchdi±culty.Arecent,thoroughreviewof
theseideascanbefoundinthetrioofpapers(WassermanandRobins,2002;RobinsandPattison,
2002;andKoehlyandPattison,2002)writtenfortheCarrington,Scott,andWasserman(2003)
volume.
Distributions
AsFrankandStrauss(1986)observedforunivariategraphsandassociatedtwo{waybinary
arrays,severalwell{knownclassesofdistributionsforrandomgraphsmaybespeci¯edinterms
ofthestructureofthedependencegraph.PattisonandWasserman(2001)andWassermanand
Pattison(2000)notethattherearethreemajorclasses|Bernoulligraphsandconditionaluniform
graphdistributions,Dyadicdependencedistributions,and
p
¤
.Otherprobabilisticgraphmodels
aredescribedbyBollobas(1985),althoughtheprimaryfocusinthemathematicsliteratureis
onasymptoticbehaviorofvariousgraphstatisticsasthesizeofthenodesetincreases(whereas
typicallyinsocialnetworkanalysiswewishtoanalyzesocialnetworksona¯xednodeset).
Theassumptionofconditionalindependenceforallpairsofrandomvariablesrepresenting
distinctrelationalties(thatis,
X
ij
and
X
kl
areindependentwhenever
i
6
=
k
and
j
6
=
l
)leadstothe
classofBernoulligraphs(FrankandNowicki,1993).Thedependencegraphforsuchadistribution
hasnoedges;itisempty.ABernoulligraphassumescompleteindependenceofrelationalties;the
probabilitythatthetie
i
!
j
ispresentis
P
ij
.If
P
ij
=0
:
5forallties,thedistributionisoften
referredtoastheuniformrandom(di)graphdistribution,
U
.All(di)graphsareequallylikelyto
occur;hencetheuniformprobabilityaspectofthedistribution.AmoregeneralBernoulligraph
distribution¯xesthe
P
ij
at
P
;eachedgecanbeviewedastheoutcomeofabiasedcointoss,with
probability
P
ofa\success".
Theuniformdistribution
U
conditionsonnographproperties,whiletheuniformdistribution
U
j
L
,statisticallyconditionsonthenumber
L
ofedgesinthegraph.All(di)graphswith
L
=
l
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SENSITIVITYANALYSIS
4
lines(arcs)areequallylikely;(di)graphswith
L
6
=
l
lines(arcs)haveprobability0.Thereare
manyotherconditionaluniformdistributions,includingtheclassic
U
j
MAN
distributionwhich
¯xesthecountsofthedyadstatesandassumesthatalldigraphswiththespeci¯eddyadcensusare
equallylikely,and
U
jf
X
i
+
g
;
f
X
+
j
g
which¯xestheoutdegreesandindegrees.Manysuchconditional
uniformdistributionsaredescribedinChapter13ofWassermanandFaust(1994).Someofthese
distributionshavesimpledependencegraphs;forexample,the
U
jf
X
i
+
g
distribution,which¯xes
onlytheoutdegrees,hasadependencegraphwithedgeset
E
D
=
f
((
i;j
)
;
(
i;k
)),forall
j
6
=
k
for
every
i
g
.
Theassumptionofconditionaldependenceof
X
ij
and
X
kl
ifandonlyif
f
k;l
g
=
f
j;i
g
leads
totheclassofdyaddependencemodels(seeWasserman,1987;WassermanandPattison,2000),
thesecondfamilyofgraphdistributionsmentionedabove.These\multinomialdyad"distributions
assumealldyadsarestatisticallyindependent,butthestatesofanyspeci¯cdyadarenot.It
postulatessubstantivelyinterestingparameterizationsfortheprobabilitiesofthevariousdyad
states.Thedependencegraphforsuchdistributionshasanedgesetwithedgesconnectingonlythe
tworandomvariableswithingeachdyad:
E
D
=
f
((
i;j
)
;
(
j;i
)),forall
i
6
=
j
g
.Thisclassofmodels
wastermed
p
1
byHollandandLeinhardt(1977,1981),andhasalonghistory(seeChapters15
and16ofWassermanandFaust1994).Althoughforsomeparameterizationsitiseasyto¯t,its
assumptionofindependenceacrossdyadsisnotterriblyrealistic.
p
¤
Foranobservednetwork,whichweconsidertobearealization
x
ofarandomarray
X
,we
assumetheexistenceofadependencegraph
D
fortherandomarray
X
.
Thereare,ofcourse,generaldependencegraphs,witharbitraryedgesets.Suchdependence
graphsyieldaverygeneralprobabilitydistributionfora(di)graph,whichwehavetermed
p
¤
.Such
distributionsbelongtoaverygeneralexponentialfamily;theyareoftenreferredtoas
exponential
randomgraphmodels
(perhapsamisnomer,sincenearlyalldistributionscanberearrangedinto
anexponentialform).
Oneverygeneraldependencegraph,forwhichthisdistributionwas¯rstdeveloped,assumes
conditionalindependenceof
X
ij
and
X
kl
ifandonlyif
f
i;j
g\f
k;l
g
=
;
.Thistypeofdependency
resemblesaMarkovspatialprocess,sothesedependencieswerede¯nedasaMarkovgraphbyFrank
andStrauss(1986).This
p
¤
familyofdistributionshasbeenextendedinmanyways,andestimates
ofitsparametersscrutinized.
TheHammersley{Cli®ordtheorem(Besag,1974)establishesthataprobabilitymodelfor
X
dependsonlyonthecliquesofthedependencegraph
D
.Asmentioned,applicationofthe
Hammersley{Cli®ordtheoremyieldsacharacterizationof
Pr
(
X
=
x
)intheformofanexponential
familyofdistributions,asdiscussedindetail,inforexample,WassermanandRobins(2002).
Foroursensitivityanalyses,wewillpostulatevarious,albeitsimple,dependencegraphs,and
adopttheassociatedprobabilitydistribution,inordertostudythee®ectsofnodeandlineremovals
ongraphstatistics.
Networkstatistics
Animportantconcerninsocialnetworkstudiesisthe
connectivity
ofanetwork.Connec-
tivitymeasureshowmuchactorsaretiedtogetherwithinanetwork.Forexample,usingsexual
networksanddiseasesimplyforillustrativepurposes,actorsareunlikelytocontractHIVviasexual
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SENSITIVITYANALYSIS
5
intercourseiftheyarenottiedtoothers(i.e.,theyareisolates).Theseisolatescan,infact,help
todeterthespreadofthedisease.Conversely,networkswithgreaterconnectivityaremorelikely
toincludeactorswhowillcontractthediseaseduetomoreprevalentsexualinteractions.Con-
nectivityisalsoimportanttoterroristnetworksbecauseitdetermineshowmuchinformationcan
be`transmitted'throughoutanetwork.Lackofconnectivity(i.e.,isolation)canharmindividuals.
Althoughconnectivityingeneralisaveryimportantconsideration,connectivityisdependenton
time.Inotherwords,relationshipsarecontinuallybeginningandending,inapersistentstateof
°ux.Suchcontinualchangein°uencesthespreadofinformationamongasetofactors.Thereare
manydi®erentconnectivitymeasures;here,wefocusonbalance(frequencyoftransitivetriads).
Centralityisalsoanimportantnetworkmeasurementformostnetworkrelations.Trotter,
Rothenberg,andCoyle(1995)suggestthatthecentralityofnetworkmemberstodeterminethe
`gatekeepers'ofthenetwork{thosewhofunctionasimportantlinkswithinthenetwork,linking
togetherotherwiseunconnectednodes(Freeman,1980).Laumann,Gagnon,Michael,andMichaels
(1994)de¯nethesecentralmembersasthe`coregroup'ofanetwork.Thenumberofcoremembers
withinanetworkcansubstantiallya®ectthespreadofinformationthroughoutanetwork.Asimple
measureofactordegree(thenumberactorsadjacenttoa`focal'actor)candeterminewhichactors
serveascoremembers.Structuralcharacteristicsofactorsarealsoveryimportant.Instudieson
terrorism,degreecentralityandprestigeindiceswouldaidin¯ndingindividualswho`determine'
thesendingandreceivingofinformation.Theyalsocanhelp`locate'importantsubgroupssuchas
coreandperipherynetworks,whichhaveimportantconsequencesforindividualsinthesesubgroups.
Measuresofcentralizationcombineactor{levelindices,andarestraightforwardtoinvestigate.
Trotter,etal.(1995)andLaumann,etal.(1994)alsodiscusstheimportanceofbridges
totheconnectivityofanetwork.Abridgeisanindividual(orgroupofindividuals)thatspans
twodisconnectedsubgroups.Suchnetworkmeasurescanhelptoidentifythosepeoplewhoare
crucialtotheconnectednessofaterroristnetwork(usuallyreferredtoascutpoints,seeWasserman
andFaust,1994,Ch.4).Forexample,actorbetweennesscentralityindicescouldhelptoidentify
thosenetworkmemberswholinkactorstosometypeofin°uentialsub-network.Inthissituation,
thebridgememberfunctionsto'monitor'the°owofsupport/information/resourceswithinthe
network.
BienenstockandBonacich(2002)andBorgatti(2002)recentlyintroducedanewmeasureto
describethee±ciencyofanetwork.E±ciencymeasurestheaveragedistancebetweenallpairsof
nodesinanetwork.Whenallpossiblepairsofnodesareconnected,thee±ciencyofthenetwork
isequaltounity;whenallofthenodesareisolatesthee±ciencyofthenetworkisequaltozero.
Borgatti(2002)indicatesthate±ciencymaybethekeymeasuretoconsiderwhendecidingwhich
nodestodeletefromthenetworkinordertomaximizetheimpactofthedeletion.Thisespecially
seemstobethecasewhentheresourcesusedfornodedeletionarelimited.
Sensitivityanalyses
Manyanalysesofstandardsocialnetworkdatasetsinvolvesummarizingtherelationaldata
withasubstantively-meaningful,carefullychosensetofnetworkstatistics.Manyresearchersdonot
gothe\modelroute",andsimplyfocusattentiononthissmallsetofstatistics,perhapsincluding
thesestatisticsasexplanatoryvariablesinlinearmodelswithactormeasurementsasresponses.
Onehopeinsuchstudiesisthatthechosenstatisticsarenotonlymeaningful,butare\good"
statistically.Butthishopebegsustoaskthequestion:\Howrobustandresistantaretypical,
network(multirelational)statistics"?
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SENSITIVITYANALYSIS
6
Thus,ourconcernhereistherobustnessofnetworkstatistics,suchasthosetheoretically
relevanttothesubstantiveapplicationsofinteresthere,andtothepresenceorabsenceofparticular
relationaltiesoractors.Instatistics,robustnessisde¯nedashowwellaparameterestimate
behaveswhenbasicassumptions(particularlydistributionalassumptions)areviolated.Resistance
isusuallyde¯nedashowwellstatisticsbehavewhendatabecome\messy",fullofoutliersand
\ugly"observations.Sincemostsocialnetworkstudiesarenotparametric,resistanceisperhaps
themoreimportantconcern.Shouldn'tanetworkanalystknowhowwellhisorheranalysisis
goingto\holdup"or\behave"ifsomemodelingassumptionschange,orifsomeofthedataare
\ugly"orremoved?
Wetermthestudyofresistanceofnetworkstatistics
sensitivityanalysis
,asitisoftencalled
inthestatisticalmodellingliterature.Itshouldbeobviousthatsensitivityanalysesofstandard
networkstatisticsaredesparatelyneeded.Forexample,focusoncentralityasoneofthesenetwork
statistics{oneofthemethodologicaltoolsusedbythemajorityofnetworkanalysts,and,as
mentionedearlier,asubstantively-meaningfulwayoflookingatmosttypesofnetworks.Itis
straightforwardtostudyhowvariouscentralitymeasurementschangewhencertaintiesinarelation
arealtered.Thisstudycanbedonesystematicallyandscienti¯callyandshouldyieldvaluable
informationintotheresistanceofcentralityindices.Statisticianshavebeendesigningstudiessuch
asthese(toinvestigatetheresistanceandrobustnessof,say,parameterestimates)formanyyears.
Isitnottimetodothesamefornetworkanalysis?Allofthealterationstotherelationwillbe
madeinthecontextofpolicynetworks(especiallythosethatareegocentered,longitudinal,and
multirelational)sothatthe¯ndingswillindeedre°ectwhatcouldoccurintherealworld.
MonteCarloTechnique
Inordertostudytheresistanceofvariousstatistics,\arti¯cial"sociomatricesforanondi-
rectedrelationweregenerated.Wewereconcernedwiththreekeyaspectsofthesociomatrix.
1.
First,thenumberofactors(nodes)isconsidered.Forthispreliminarystudy,twonetwork
sizes,10and25,wereconsidered.
2.
Second,thedensityofthesociomatriceswasvaried.Thevaluesofthedensityweredeter-
minedbythemaximumnumberofdyads(
g
£
(
g
¡
1)
2
)possibleforeachsociomatrix.Startingatzero,
thesevalueswereallowedtovaryinstepsof.1(max(dyads)).Forexample,foranetworkwith10
actors,max(dyads)=45.Therefore,thestepsizeis5(.1(45),afterrounding).So,foranetwork
with10actors,thenumberoftiesconsideredwere0,5,10,15,20,25,30,35,40,and45.
3.
Allmatricesweregeneratedrandomlyfrom
U
j
L
.Fora¯xed
g
,theappropriatenumber
oftieswererandomlyassignedtothelowertriangles.Followingthelowertriangularassignment,
thesociomatricesweresymmetrized.
4.
Finally,1,000randomsociomatricesweregeneratedforeachcondition.
Results
DegreeCentralization
Thecharacteristicsofdegreecentralizationdonotdependonthesizeofthenetwork,but
ratherthedensityofthenetwork.Furthermore,degreecentralizationisnotmonotonicallyrelated
tothedensityofthenetwork.Inaddition,whendensityis¯xed,theobservedvalueofdegree
centralizationis
extremely
discrete.Forexample,with10actorsandadensityof0.44,only¯ve
di®erentvaluesofdegreecentralizationwereobserved.Table1providestheresultsfordegree
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SENSITIVITYANALYSIS
7
centralizationwhen10actorsareconsidered(thepatternofresultsfor25actorswasverysimilar).
Extremediscretenessofofdegreecentralizationisobserved;speci¯cally,itisseenthatnomore
Table1:MeanandVariancesofDistributions{DegreeCentralization
#ofActors#ofLinesMeanDegreeCentralizationVariance#Masspoints
1050.20370.00583
100.26150.00915
150.28740.01015
200.30220.01005
250.29260.00864
300.26680.00723
350.22430.00462
400.13860.00001
than¯veprobabilitymasspointsareobservedforanygivendensity(eightwerethemostobserved
when25actorswereconsidered).Bothnetworksizesindicatethesamenonmonotonicrelationship
betweendensityanddegreecentralization(Figure1indicatesthattheunderlyingdistribution
governingthisrelationshipmaybeapproximatedbyabinomialdistribution).Inanycase,thismay
indicatethatthedensityofthenetwork,notthesize,hasthegreateste®ectondegreecentralization.
Figure1
.Degreecentralitybydensityfor10actors(1,000sociomatrices)
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SENSITIVITYANALYSIS
8
Table2:MeanandVariancesofDistributions{BetweennessCentralization
#ofActors#ofLinesMeanBetweennessCentralizationVariance#Masspoints
1050.07080.002033
100.22800.0077833
150.21090.0072960
200.16660.0049911
250.11430.0024661
300.06400.0007545
350.03020.0001581
400.00840.000066
BetweennessCentralization
Likedegreecentralization,betweennesscentralizationisnotdependentuponthesizeofthe
networkbutthedensityofthenetwork.Forbothnetworksizes,thebetweennessmeasurehasa
peakatadensitybetween0.1and0.2andthenproceedstosharplydeclineasdensityincreases.
Table2indicatestheresultswhen10actorswereexamined(thesamepatternwasobservedwhen
the25actorsociomatriceswereexamined).Akeydi®erencebetweendegreecentralizationand
betweennesscentralizationisthatthelatterisnotnearlyasdiscrete.Eventhoughseveralvalues
ofbetweennesswereobserved,thesmallvarianceindicatesthatthevalueswerenotextremely
di®erent.Figure2indicatesaskewedrelationshipbetweendensityandbetweenness.Althoughthe
sameskewnessispresentatbothsizesofsociomatricesexamined,thepeaktendstomovetowards
they-axisassizeincreases.Figure2indicatesthatthisrelationshipmightbeapproximatedbyan
F-distribution.
Balance
Balanceisunliketheothertwonetworkstatistics.Aswouldbeguessed,balanceincreasesas
densityincreases.Apeculiartraitofbalanceisthatforseveralsmallvaluesofdensityitiscloseto
zero.Theexponentialincreasedoesnottendtooccuruntildensityisabout0.3(thisisobservable
inTable3).Figure3furtherindicatestheexponentialrelationshipbetweenbalanceanddensity
withinthesociomatrices(thisrelationshipisthesameforbothnetworksizes)Thisphenomenon
wasobservedforbothnetworksizesstudied.
E±ciency
E±ciencybehavesinasimiliarsamemannerasbalance.Asthedensityofthenetwork
increases,e±ciencyincreasesaswell(thispatternofbehaviorwasobservedforbothnetworksizes
studied).Thistypeofbehaviorisclearfromthede¯nitionofe±ciency.However,whatisstriking
istherapid,inverseexponentialincrease.Thisincreasebeginsalmostimmediatelyasdensity
increasesfromzero.Figure4indicatestheinitialinverseexponentialrelationshipthateventually
becomesalinearrelationshipwhendensityisapproximately0.40.Theonlydi®erencebetweenthe
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SENSITIVITYANALYSIS
9
Figure2
.Groupbetweennessbydensityfor10actors(1,000sociomatrices)
Table3:MeanandVariancesofDistributions{Balance
#ofActors#ofLinesMeanBalanceVariance#Masspoints
1050.00060.00002
100.00850.00014
150.03190.000210
200.08080.000315
250.16190.000418
300.28470.000416
350.46080.000315
400.69650.00019
networksof10actorsandthenetworksof25actorsistheinitialinverseexponentialrelationshipis
smootherinthelargersociomatrices.
Discussion
Thispaperbeginsbuildingtheframeworkfortheanalysisofresistanceandsensitivityinsocial
networks.Thisisaccomplishedthroughthegenerationofseveralthousandrandomsociomatrices
withknowndistributions.Calculatinggraphstatisticsforthenetworkswithknownstructure
revealsseveralkeyfeaturesinherentinsocialnetworks.
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SENSITIVITYANALYSIS
10
Figure3
.Balancebydensityfor10actors(1,000sociomatrices)
First,regardlessofthenetworkstatistic,themeasurementisnotlinearlyrelatedtothe
centralityofthenetwork.Second,noneofthemeasurementsarerelatedtocentralityinthesame
mannerortothesamedegree.Thesetwocharacteristicsposeseveralinterestingquestionsfor
futureresearch.
Primarily,theinteractionbetweenthedi®erentgraphstatisticsiscrucialindetermining
overallsensitivityofanetwork.Theseinteractionswillalsohaveanimpactondeterminingthe
con¯gurationthatwillleadtotheoptimumamountofresistanceorvulnerabilityofanetwork.In
addition,byestablishingregularfeaturestobeexpectedinnetworksofvarioussizeanddensity,it
willbepossibletodetermineifagivenobservednetworkisabnormal.Thisobservedabnormality
Table4:MeanandVariancesofDistributions{E±ciency
#ofActors#ofLinesMeanE±ciencyVariance#Masspoints
1050.16210.00002
100.44130.00014
150.61150.000210
200.70870.000315
250.77570.000418
300.83320.000416
350.88890.000315
400.94440.00019
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SENSITIVITYANALYSIS
11
Figure4
.E±ciencybydensityfor10actors(1,000sociomatrices)
mayindicatedi®erentpossibilitiessuchas:non-observedactors,non-observedlinks,ornetworks
basedondi®erentunderlyingdistributions.
Furthermore,thenon-uniformityofthenetworkstatistics,asrelatedtocentrality,indicates
theneedtostudyothergraphstatisticsinmoredetail.Finally,alloftheworkpresentedherewill
begeneralizedtodirectedgraphsandadditionalstatisticswillbeexamined(instars,outstars,etc.).
Inadditiontothisgeneralization,analyticalderivationsofthesimulationresultswillbepursued.
Thisapproachwillpossiblyleadtoapproximatingphenomenainthe¯eldofsocialnetworkswith
underlyingstatisticaldistributionsinthesamemannerthatisusedinseveralother¯elds.
References
Besag,J.E.(1974).Spatialinteractionandthestatisticalanalysisoflatticesystems(with
discussion).
JournaloftheRoyalStatisticalSociety,SeriesB.36
,192{236.
Bienenstock,E.J.,andBonacich,P.(2002).Balancinge±ciencyandvulnerabilityinsocial
networks.
PaperpresentedattheNationalAcademyofScienceWorkshoponSocialNetwork
Analysis,Washington,D.C.(November,2002).
Bollobas,B.(1985).
RandomGraphs
.London:AcademicPress.
Borgati,S.P.(2002).Thekeyplayerproblem.
PaperpresentedattheNationalAcademyof
ScienceWorkshoponSocialNetworkAnalysis,Washington,D.C.(November,2002).
Carrington,P.J.,Scott,J.,andWasserman,S.(eds.)(2003).
ModelsandMethodsinSocial
NetworkAnalysis
.NewYork:CambridgeUniversityPress.
Frank,O.,andNowicki,K.(1993):Exploratorystatisticalanalysisofnetworks.InJ.
Gimbel,J.W.Kennedy,andL.V.Quintas(eds.),
QuoVadisGraphTheory?ASourceBookfor
ChallengesandDirections
.Amsterdam:North-Holland.(also
AnnalsofDiscreteMathematics.
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SENSITIVITYANALYSIS
12
55
,349{366.)
Frank,O.,andStrauss,D.(1986).Markovgraphs.
JournaloftheAmericanStatistical
Association.81
,832{842.
Freeman,L.(1980).Thegatekeeper,pair-dependency,andstructuralcentrality.
Quality
andQuantity.14
,585{592.
Holland,P.W.,andLeinhardt,S.(1977).Notesonthestatisticalanalysisofsocialnetwork
data.
Holland,P.W.,andLeinhardt,S.(1981).Anexponentialfamilyofprobabilitydistributions
fordirectedgraphs.
JournaloftheAmericanStatisticalAssociation.76
,33{65(withdiscussion).
Koehly,L.M.,andPattison,P.(2002).Randomgraphmodelsforsocialnetworks:Multiple
relationsormultipleraters.InCarrington,P.J.,Scott,J.,andWasserman,S.(eds.)
Modelsand
MethodsinSocialNetworkAnalysis
.NewYork:CambridgeUniversityPress.
Laumann,E.O.,Gagnon,J.H.,Michael,R.T.,andMichaels,S.(1994).
TheSocialOrgani-
zationofSexuality
.Chicago:UniversityofChicagoPress.
Lauritzen,S.(1996).
GraphicalModels
.Oxford:OxfordUniversityPress.
Monge,P.,andContractor,N.(2003).
TheoriesofCommunicationNetworks
.NewYork:
OxfordUniversityPress.
Pattison,P.,andWasserman,S.(2001).Socialnetworkmodels,statistical.InSmelser,N.J.,
andBaltes,P.B.(eds.)
InternationalEncyclopediaoftheSocialandBehavioralSciences
.London:
ElsevierScience.
Robins,G.L.(1997).Graphicalmodelling.
Chance.10
,37{40.
Robins,G.L.(1998).
PersonalAttributesinInter-personalContexts:StatisticalModels
forIndividualCharacteristicsandSocialRelationships
.Unpublisheddoctoraldissertation,
DepartmentofPsychology,UniversityofMelbourne.
Robins,G.L.,andPattison,P.(2002).Interdependenciesandsocialprocesses:Dependence
graphsandgeneralizeddependencestructures.InCarrington,P.J.,Scott,J.,andWasserman,S.
(eds.),
ModelsandMethodsinSocialNetworkAnalysis
.NewYork:CambridgeUniversityPress.
TrotterII,R.T.,Rothenberg,R.B.,andCoyle,S.(1995).DrugabuseandHIVprevention
research:Expandingparadigmsandnetworkcontributionstoriskreduction.
Connections.18
,
29{45.
Wasserman,S.(1987).Conformityoftwosociometricrelations.
Psychometrika.52
,3-18.
Wasserman,S.,andFaust,K.(1994).
SocialNetworkAnalysis:MethodsandApplications
.
NewYork:CambridgeUniversityPress.
Wasserman,S.,andGalaskiewicz,J.(1994)(eds).
AdvancesinSocialNetworkAnalysis:
ResearchfromtheSocialandBehavioralSciences
.NewburyPark,CA:SagePublications.
Wasserman,S.,andPattison,P.(2000).Statisticalmodelsforsocialnetworks.InKiers,
H.,Rasson,J.,Groenen,P.,andSchader,M.(eds).
StudiesinClassi¯cation,DataAnalysis,and
KnowledgeOrganization.
.Heidelberg:Springer{Verlag.
Wasserman,S.,andPattison,P.(2002).
MultivariateRandomGraphDistributions
.Springer
LectureNoteSeriesinStatistics.
Wasserman,S.,andRobins,G.L.(2002).Introductiontorandomgraphs,dependence
graphs,and
p
¤
.InCarrington,P.J.,Scott,J.,andWasserman,S.(eds.),
ModelsandMethodsin
SocialNetworkAnalysis
.NewYork:CambridgeUniversityPress.
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.-1-
Spectral  methods for analyzing and visualizing networks: an introduction
Andrew J. Seary and William .D. Richards
School of Communication

Simon Fraser University

Burnaby BC Canada V5A-1S6

seary@sfu.ca   richards@sfu.ca
Abstract
Network analysis begins with data that describes the set of relationships among the members of
a system. The goal of analysis is to obtain from the low-level relational data a higher-level description

of the structure of the system which identifies various kinds of patterns in the set of relationships.

These patterns will be based on the way individuals are related to other individuals in the network.

Some approaches to network analysis look for clusters of individuals who are tightly connected to

one another; some look for sets of individuals who have similar patterns of relations to the rest of the

network. Other methods don™t ﬁlook forﬂ anything in particular Š instead, they construct a

continuous multidimensional representation of the network in which the coordinates of the individuals

can be further analyzed to obtain a variety of kinds of information about them and their relation to

the rest of the network.
One approach to this is to choose a set of axes in the multidimensional space occupied by the
network and 
rotate 
them so that the first axis points in the direction of the greatest variability in the
data; the second axis, orthogonal to the first, points in the direction of greatest remaining variability,

and so on. This set of axes is a coordinate system that can be used to describe the relative positions

of the set of points in the data. Most of the variability in the locations of points will be 
accounted for
by the first few dimensions of this coordinate system. The coordinates of the points along each axis

will be an 
eigenvector
, and the length of the projection will be an 
eigenvalue. The set of all
eigenvalues is the 
spectrum 
of the network.
Spectral methods (eigendecomposition) have been a part of graph theory for over a century.
Network researchers have used spectral methods either implicitly or explicitly since the late 1960's,

when computers became generally accessible in most universities. The eigenvalues of a network are

intimately connected to important topological features such as maximum distance across the network

(diameter), presence of cohesive clusters, long paths and bottlenecks, and how random the network

is. The associated eigenvectors can be used as a natural coordinate system for graph visualization;

they also provide methods for discovering clusters and other local features. When combined with

other, easily obtained network statistics (e.g., node degree), they can be used to describe a variety

of network properties, such as degree of robustness (i.e., tolerance to removal of selected nodes or

links), and other structural properties, and the re
lationship of these properties to node or link
attributes in large, complex, multivariate networks.
We introduce three types of spectral analysis for graphs and describe some of their mathematical
properties. We discuss the strengths and weaknesses of each type and show how they can be used

to understand network structure. These discussions are accompanied by interactive graphical displays

of small (n=50) and moderately large (n=5000) networks. Throughout, we give special attention to

sparse matrix methods which allow rapid, efficient storage and analysis of large networks. We briefly

describe algorithms and analytic strategies that allow spectral analysis and identification of clusters

in very large networks (n>1,000,000).
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.-2-
1 We have introduced some notation which will be followed thr
oughout:
matrices are represented by bold capitals: 
D(column-)vectors are represented by bold lower case: 
e inner products of vectors are represented as  
eTe = n (a scalar) where 
eT is the transpose of 
e.outer products of vectors are represented as 
eeT = M 
(a matrix)
eigenvalues are represented by greek letters, usually with some relationship to the latin letters representing a
matrix and an eigenvector. E.g.,( 
i , ai ) is an eigenpair of adjacency matrix 
A.Introduction
A standard method in statistics for handling multivariate data is to find the directions of maximum
variability, usually of variance-covariance or correlation matrices. These directions are called Principal

Coordinates or 
eigenvectors, 
while the relative importance of each direction is represented by
numbers called 
eigenvalues. (Jolliffe, 1986) Finding this coordinate system may be accomplished by
a series of 
rotations
 (although this is not the most efficient method) that end up pointing along the
direction of maximum variability, with the second largest maximum variability at right angles, and so

on. As a result, the data matrix is reduced to a diagonal matrix, with diagonal entries corresponding

to the 
importance
 (eigenvalue) of each direction (
eigenvector
). The collection of 
all eigenvalues is
called the 
spectrum
. One goal is to reduce the problem so that only the most important dimensions
(those with the largest eigenvalues) contain most of the variability. Implicit in these methods

(variance-covariance or correlation) is that some kind of ﬁexpectedﬂ or ﬁbackgroundﬂ signal has been

subtracted: in the case of variances, these would be the means of each variable in the original data

matrix. To find these 
eigenvectors
 and 
eigenvalues we need to solve the 
eigenvalue equation
:E e = 
 e(we will derive this equation below) which states that along the direction represented by vector 
e,multiplication by data matrix 
E does not change the direction, but only the length (where 
 may be
any  number, including 0).
1 The related pair (
,e) is called an 
eigenpair of matrix 
E.A network
 or 
graph
 G(V,E) is a set of 
nodes 
V (points, vertices) connected by a set of 
links
 E(lines, edges). We will consider networks that are 
binary
 (edges have logical value 1 if an edge exists,
0 if not), 
symmetric
 (an edge from node 
i to 
j implies an edge from node
 j to 
i), connected 
(there is
a set of edges connecting any two nodes, consequently only one 
component), and 
without self-loops
(no edges between i and i). We may represent such a network as the 
adjacency
 matrix
 A = 
A(G)
with: 
1  in row 
i, column
 j if 
i is connected to
 j, 0  otherwise.
We will not directly discuss 
weighted 
networks, where the entries for an edge may be a number other
than 1, although most of the results that follow generalize to such networks. For many ﬁreal worldﬂ
networks, 
A consists mostly of 0's: it is 
sparse
. We will discuss efficient ways of storing and
manipulating
 A using 
sparse methods
.Associated with 
A is the 
degree distribution
 D, a diagonal matrix with row-sums of 
A along the
diagonal, and 0's elsewhere. 
D describes how many connections each node has. We call the number
of nodes, m, the 
order
 of G and it is equal to the number of rows or columns of 
A. We represent the
number of edges by |E|. We will also introduce two other matrices related to 
A:he 
Laplacian:    L = D - A
he 
Normal:
   N = 
D-1 Aand will discuss the properties of the spectrum and associated eigenvectors of 
A, L, and 
N.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.-3-
Distances and diameter:
One important property of a network is the set of
 distances
 between any pair of nodes 
i and 
j; that
is, the least number of links between any pairs 
i and 
j. One way of calculating this is to take 
powers
of the matrix 
A as follows:
1st power 
A = 
A by definition gives a matrix of all pairs of nodes linked to each other.
2nd power = 
AA has a non-zero in row 
i column
 j if 
j is two steps away from 
i. Since 
i is 2
steps away from itself, the diagonal 
i,i entry counts the number of these 2-steps.
3rd power = 
AAA has a non-zero entry in row 
i column 
j if 
j is 3 steps away from 
i.Eventually, some power of 
A, say 
AN, will consist of entirely non-zero entries, meaning every node
has been reached from every other node. We call N the 
diameter of the graph: the longest possible
path between any pair of nodes.
This is a very inefficient way of calculating the diameter of a graph for two reasons:
1) calculating each power of 
A requires m
3 calculations
2) as more nodes are reached, the powers of 
A become less sparse until eventually no 0's
remain: the amount of storage required approaches m
2 .If we continue taking powers of 
A, an interesting thing happens: all the columns become multiples
of each other. Taking higher powers of 
A corresponds to taking longer ﬁwalksﬂ along the edges and
we can interpret this as a ﬁloss of memoryﬂ about where we started from (Lovasz, 1995). We w
ill see
why this happens soon, as well as ot
her examples of this phenomenon.
We can approach this problem another way by the properties of the
 spectral decomposiiton
 of
A (Parlett, 1980). Let 
i be the eigenvalues of 
A and 
a i the corresponding eigenvectors, with 
0 12 ...  
m-1
 and  
||ai || = 1 (
the eigenvectors are  
normalized
 to length 1). Then the spectral
decomposition of 
A is:
(1)A
 =  i (i)ai aiT  where 
ai aiT is an  m×m  matrix defining a 1-dimension subspace and 
(ai aiT)N = ai aiT  if  
i=j;  ai ajT = 
0  if   
ijtherefore 
AN = i (i)Nai aiT for any power N, and this allows an easy way of calculating powers of
A, assuming we have already calculated all the eigenpairs
i , a i 
).Another important property of the spectral decomposition is the 
approximation 
property. If we
take the first k of the eigenpairs 
i , ai ), then 
Ak =i ai aiT  is the 
best least-squares approx-
ik=0imation to 
A, meaning that we have captured most of the variability of 
A in the important eigenpairs.
For example, we can 
estimate
 an 
upper bound
 for the diameter using the second-largest eigenvalue
1  (Chung, 1989):  
      Diam(G) 
  ln(m-1)/ln(k/
1) Unfortunately, this bound applies only to k-
regular
 networks (all degrees = k = 
0). We will get
better bounds for general networks using different spectra. Nevertheless, this bound does show one

relationship between the spectrum and an important property like diameter. In particular, when k/
1is 
large
 (there is a large 
gap between  the first two eigenvalues), the upper bound on diameter is
small
, so all distances are short.
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.-4-
The Power Method and Sparse methods:
Using 
(1)
 and eigenpair 
0 , 
a 0 ) we can see why taking taking large enough powers of 
A results
in columns that are multiples of one another Œ in fact, multiples of eigenvector 
a 0. This is the basis
of the 
Power method 
(Hotelling, 
1933) for finding eigenpairs. We have mentioned that taking powers
of matrix 
A is not efficient, so we introduce a representation and methods that are far more efficient.
A very simple way of storing and manipulating a sparse matrix 
A is to use a 
link list 
representa-
tion, which stores only the non-zero entries of 
A as a list of pairs 
i,j for each link in 
A. We could then
calculate the diameter of 
A by starting at 
i=1 and following each link until we have reached every
node, repeat for 
i=2, and save the maximum number of steps. This requires about m|E| operations
(Aho, 
et  al.
, 1987) and a very moderate amount storage equal to 2|E|. We can now use 
(1)
 to devise
a very efficient version of the Power Method for finding the largest eigenpair:
Starting with some random vector 
p normalized to length 1:
            Repeat 
p'  Ap , q 
 p , p
  p' 
  until 
p is no longer changing in direction.
Then the largest eigenpair of 
A is (
p/q, p). There are some bookkeeping details: 
Ap uses the link
list representation, and the entries
 of  p'
 must be adjusted in size after each multiplication (for details
see Richards & Seary, 2000), but the method w
ill always work for any matrix 
without repeated
eigenvalues, which is generally the case for social networks.
If we want more eigenpairs, we can iterate with 
   p'  Mp -
0 a0  a0Tto get the second, and with
p'  Mp -
0 a0 a0T -1 a1 a1Tto get the third, and so on, without destroying sparsity. However, we must store the 
(i , a i) eigen-
pairs somewhere;  the procedure is subject to loss of precision on a computer; and the iterations may
converge slowly if 
i i-1
 is close to 1. There are better methods, such as Lanczos iteration (Parlett
et al.
,1982) which converge very rapidly and do not have problems with loss of precision.
Some network invariants:
Some properties of 
A remain unchanged (
invariant
) under the series of orthogonal rotations that
diagonalize 
A (eigendecomposition). We will relate these to some 
network invariants
 of 
A.The eigenvalues of any symmetric matrix
 M are the roots of the 
characteristic polynomial
:xm + c1 xm-1 
+ c2 xm-2 
+c3 xm-3
 ... + c 
m-1
 Therefore, c
1 = 
0 1 + ... +
m-1 (sum over all eigenvalues) of
 A;c2 = 
01 02 ... +
0m-1 ... +
m-3m-1
m-2m-1 (sum over all pairs);
c3 = 
0 1 2
013 + ... +
m-3m-2m-1 (sum over all triples)
The 
trace
 of a matrix is the sum of the entries on the diagonal, and this is invariant under
orthogonal rotations. Since 
A has trace of 0 (no self-loops), c
1 = 0. The sum of product pairs is equal
to minus the number of edges so that c
2 = -|E|. Most important is c
3 which is twice the number of
triangles in G. Higher coefficients are related to cycles of length 4, 5,... although they also contain
contributions for shorter cycles (Biggs, 1993). It appears that the eigenvalues of 
A encode
information about the cycles of a network as well as its diameter. We will see related results for the

other two spectra.
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.-5-
2 Similar results may be obtained from the 
moments
 of the eigenvalue distribution (Farkas. 
et al.,
 2001; Gho, 
et al
.,2001)A bipartite
 network is one that can be partitioned so that the nodes in one part have connections
only to nodes in the other part, and vice-versa. Such a network cannot have odd cycles (of any

length) and hence no triangles. This means 
all the odd coefficients c
2k-1
  must be 0. It can also be
shown (Biggs, 1993) that, in bipartite networks, the eigenvalues occur in pairs with opposite signs,
so that 
0 = 
m-1 
and so on. Bipartite networks can be used to represent 
two-mode
 networks
(Wasserman & Faust, 1994), for example the network relating people and the events they attend.
These results scratch the surface of the information contained in the spectrum of 
A for k-regular
graphs. For general graphs, we need to turn to other spectra.
2The Laplacian spectrum:
The Laplacian of a network was originally discovered by Kirchoff (1847). There are a number of
definitions and derivations, perhaps the most revealing due to Hall (1970), who was interested in

situating the nodes of any network so that total edge lengths are minimized.
He considers the problem of finding the 
minimum of the weighted sum
 (2)
    z = 1/2
i,j
(xi - xj)2 aijwhere a
 i j are the elements of the adjacency matrix 
A. The sum is over all pairs of squared distances
between nodes 
which are connected
, and so the solution should result in nodes with large numbers
of inter-connections being clustered together.
Equation 
(2)
 can be re-written as:
= 1/2i,j 
(xi2-2xi xj + xj 2) aij  = 1/2
i xi 2 aij  
-1/2
i,j
 2xi xj aij + 1/2
j xj 2 aij    =i xi2 aij 
+ i i,j
 xi xj  aij = 
XTLX      where 
L = 
D - 
A is the Laplacian. In addition to this, Hall supplies the condition that 
XTX = 1, i.e.,
the distances are normalized. Using Lagrange multipliers (a standard method for solving problems

with constraints), we have:
         z = X
TLX - 
XTX and to minimize this expression, we take derivatives with respect to X to give:
 (3)
    LX -
X = 0 or
 LX = 
X          which is the eigenvalue equation. It is not hard to show that  
0 =0 with 
l 0 = 
1, 
the constant (or
trivial
) eigenvector
, and that 
0=
0 1...
 m-1
. For 
L, the most ﬁimportantﬂ eigenvectors belong to
the smallest eigenvalues (Pothen, 
et al.
, 1990).
It turns out that the discrete network Laplacian shares many important properties with the well-
known continuous Laplacian 
operator
 2 of mathematical physics. This has led to an explosion of
research and results, mostly concerned with 
1 (Bein, 1991).
The definition of 
L shows that there is no loss of sparsity (except for the diagonal) and that the
sparse methods mentioned earlier can be applied to find all or some of the eigenpairs. The

requirement that we must find the 
smallest
 eigenpairs is easily overcome by subtracting a suitably
large constant from the diagonal of -
L (which subtracts that constant from the eigenvalues without
changing the eigenvectors).This guarantees that the first eigenpairs returned by the Power Method
or Lanczos iteration are associated with the smallest eigenvalues of 
L.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.-6-
Some of the coefficients of the characteristic polynomial of 
L have an easy interpretation:
c1 = Trace(
L) = 2|E| (i.e., twice the number of edges)
cm-1 
= 0 (since 0 is an eigenvalue)
| m c
m-1 
| = 0 1...m-1
 0 2 m-1
 + ... +
1 2 m-1
 = 1 2m-1
 = the number of 
spanning
trees
 of G  (this is the Matrix-tree theorem of Kirchoff, 1847).
In general, the eigenvalues of 
L encode information about the 
tree-structure
 of G (Cvetkovic, 
etal., 1995). The spectrum of 
L contains a 0 for every connected component. There is no such direct
way to find the number of components of a network from the spectrum of 
A. There is also a bound
on diameter related to 
m-1
 and
1 for general graphs from Chung, 
et al.,
 (1994):
Diam(G) 
  cosh
-1(m-1)/ cosh
-1 ((m-1 
+ 1)/(m-1 
- 1))Intuitively, if 
1 is close to 0, the graph is almost disconnected, while if 
1>> 0 (an eigenvalue gap)
the diameter is small. 
The Normal spectrum:
We can repeat the same argument as Hall to derive the Normal spectrum, with the normalization
constraint that 
XTDX = 1 (Seary & Richards, 1995) to give:
LX = 
µ DX,  or assuming that 
D can be inverted,
D-1 LX = 
 D-1 (D - A)X = 
(I - D-1 A)X =
 µ Xwhere 
I is an 
identity
 matrix of proper size. In fact, we usually take the defining equation to be
(4)
 D-1 AX = NX = 
 X   with   
D-1 A = N   and   
 = 1−µ
since adding an identity matrix shifts the eigenvalues by 1 without changing the eigenvectors. Note
that for connected networks
 D not only has an inverse, it also has an inverse 
square root
 D-1/2
.The 
Normal
 matrix 
N has a number of interesting properties:
1)It is a 
generalized
 Laplacian (with a different definition of orthonormality)
2)It therefore has a 
trivial
 eigenvector 
n0 with eigenvalue 
0 = 1
3)The spectrum of 
N is bounded by 1 = 
0 
1 
m-1 
  -14)The rows of 
N sum to 1 (it is a 
stochastic
 matrix)
5)The spectrum of 
N contains a 1 for every connected component
6)The eigenvalue -1 only occurs if G is bipartite, in which case all eigenvalues occur in pairs.
7)N has been rediscovered a number of times: generalized or combinatorial Laplacian (Dodziuk &
Kendall, 1985; Chung,1995); Q-spectrum (Cvetkovic, 
et al
.,1995).
The descriptive name Normal is suggested by points 2) - 5), although it is not standard terminology.
 It is easy to see that there is no loss of sparsity in the definition of 
N.  Each 1 in row 
i is simply
replaced by  1/
Dii  and the 0's are unchanged,  but 
N is no longer symmetric.  However, the matrix
D-1/2
A D-1/2
 is 
similar
 to 
N (has the same eigenvalues) and we can apply the sparse methods described
above to solve for the eigenpairs (
i, ei) and then calculate  D
-1/2
 ei = 
ni  to get the corresponding
eigenvectors without losing precision or sparsity.
For 
N, the coefficients of the characteristic equation are harder to interpret except in special
cases, but the eigenvalues encode information about 
both the cycle 
and tree structure of G
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.-7-
3 no external constraints need to be satisfied
(Cvetkovic, 
et al
., 1995). Some examples:
c1 = Trace(
N) = 0
c3 = c
2k-1 
= 0 (no triangles or other odd cycles) if G is bipartite
i deg(i)/
i deg(i) 
i=1
(1-
i) = number of spanning trees of G
In the last example we see how details of the degree distribution are 
also
 encoded in the spectrum.
Fan Chung uses this to derive two remarkable bounds (see Chung, 1995 for details):
         where vol X is the total number of edges in a subset of nodes X
V and  is V-X. Chung™s first
Xbound applies to 
any graph (regular or not) and is much tighter than the previous bound (for the
Laplacian). Intuitively, if 
1 is close to 1, the network has a long path or is almost disconnected, and
if 1 <<1, the diameter is small.
Chung™s second bound describes the distance between subsets for any number k of subsets, based
on the k
th eigenvalue. The result suggests that we can use the eigenvalues to estimate how many
subsets we should look for in a network without forcing distances that are too short (and hence too

many subsets).
Interpreting the Spectra:
Many important properties of the spectrum of 
A(G) where G is k-regular are true for 
L(G) and
N(G), even when G is not regular. Another way of looking at this is that these properties of 
A are true
because the spectrum of 
A is simply related to those of 
L and 
N for regular graphs: (
i = k-
i = 
i /kfor k-regular graphs, with the corresponding eigenvectors being identical).  In other words, both
 Land 
N are more natural function of graphs. This point of view is shared by the authors of recent
papers on the Laplacian (Grone, 
et al
., 1990, 1994). Mohar (1991) presents a collection of  important
results relating to the spectrum and eigenvectors of 
L. Chung (1995) has written several papers and
a book about 
N. We return to the goal expressed in the opening paragraph. We would like to find the most
important global features of a network, after accounting for what could be considered ﬁexpectedﬂ for

a random network with the same number of nodes and edges. The biggest problem with interpreting
the spectrum of 
A is the lack of an ﬁexpectedﬂ eigenvector (again, except for k-regular graphs). There
is a lot of literature on the so-called ﬁmain eigenvectorsﬂ of 
A: those which have a 
projection
 on the
ﬁall-onesﬂ vector (e.g., Harary & Schwenk, 1979) , but the results remain hard to interpret (Cvetkovic
and Rowlinson,1990). Both 
L and 
N have an ﬁexpectedﬂ all-ones eigenvector for which the
interpretation is clear (though different in each case).
To interpret 
L, we turn to physical analogy and the relation to 
2 as discussed by Friedman
(1993). He considers a graph G as a discrete 
manifold
 (surface) subject to ﬁfreeﬂ boundary
conditions.
3 For illustration, consider 
2 as the spatial part of the wave equation (Fisher, 1966,
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.-8-
4 This interpretation of the eigenvectors may be even more useful when considering 
2 as the spatial part of the
Diffusion 
equation (for example, when considering diffusion of innovation or disease).
5A problem can arise with bipartite graphs: 
p0 does not exist since the chain oscillates between the two sets of
vertices (period = 2). Probabilists deal with this by a simple trick: divide 
N by 2 and add a self-loop of probab
ility1/2 to every vertex:  
N' = I/2 + 
N/2   The eigenvalues of 
N' are then:  1 = 
'0  '1 ...  'm-1
    0  so that 
' = (1+ )/2 and again the eigenvectors are not affected.  In effect, this suppresses 
all
 negative eigenvalues.
However, negative eigenvalues are useful for directed and bipartite networks.
6 As we saw, 
AK shows a similar phenomenon, but there is no simple relation to 
D, due to ﬁleakageﬂ from all the
ﬁmain eigenvectorsﬂ (Cvetkovic, 
et al
., 1988)Chavel, 1984). Think of a fishing net subject to no forces. It just lies there at 0 energy with nothing
happening. As we subject it to regular oscillations, the net vibrates with the most highly-connected

regions moving together. Friedman shows how the Hilbert Nodal theorem (Courant & Hilbert, 1965)

can be applied to a discrete network, which generalizes Fiedler™s result (described below): the k
theigenvector divides the network into no more than k+1 
disconnected
 components.
4To interpret 
N, we have a number of choices:
1) 
N is the Laplacian for a network of nodes, each 
weighted
 by its degree
2) 
N is the transition matrix of a Markov Chain for a simple random walk on the nodes
3) 
N2 is similar to the 
2 matrix, thus treating 
A as a 
contingency tableThe first leads to a physical analogy similar to that for 
L, so we consider 2) and 3):
The Normal spectrum and Random walks:
Specifically, we consider nearest-neighbour random walks on a network (Lawler & Sokal, 1988).
Define the probability-transition matrix for such a walk as        
         N = 
D-1 AThen the probability of moving from vertex 
i to any vertex adjacent to 
i is uniform.
 N is a row-
stochastic matrix, and the random walk is a Markov chain. In this case 
1 (the trivial all-ones
eigenvector) is related  to the 
stationary state
 of the Markov Chain:  the probability is 1 = 
0 that such
a probability distribution is eventually r
eached.
5 The vector 
p0 = 1T  N = N T 1 is the stationary state,
and it is 
proportional
 to the degree distribution. The second eigenpair (
1, n1 ) has become important
in the analysis of 
rapidly mixing 
Markov chains Œ those that reach the stationary state quickly
(Sinclair, 1995). From the previous discussion it should not be surprising that these are associated
with 
1 <<1 (a large eigenvalue gap), which means that the walk quickly ﬁforgetsﬂ where it started.
6Moreover, when 
1 is close to 1, there must be parts of the network that are hard to reach in a
random walk, implying long paths or a nearly disconnected network. 
Normal spectrum and 
2:The 
2 matrix is defined in terms of the row and column 
marginals
 (sums). A typical element is
(Observed
 ij
 - Expected
 ij
)2 Expected
 ij
  which is not sparse. For a sparse network 
A, consider 
 which
has a typical element (Observed
 ij
 - Expected
 ij
)  Expected
 ij
 where 
Expected
 i j =
    
deg (i) deg (
j)___________      deg(i)Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.-9-
7 While PCA results tell how much of the variance each dimension accounts for, the Normal eigenvalues tell how
much of the network™s chi-squared each eigenvector (dimension) accounts for.
We can write 
  as:   so that non-zero elements of 
A become   A
ij Eij  while the 0 terms
OEE−are unaffected, maintaining sparsity. The second term corresponds to the trivial eigenvector which
can be dealt with separately. In matrix notation 
 = 
D-1/2
A D-1/2
  which has eigenpairs (
i, D1/2
ni) Thus
we have 
(5)
 2 = 
j=1
 i2 / 
i aij (omitting the 
0 =1 expected term for
 ni = 
1)This equation shows how much each dimension contributes to 
2  which is a measure of 
dependencebetween rows and columns. In this interpretation, if 
1 is small (
1 << 
0 = 1), then 
2 is also small:
there is no relation between rows and columns of 
A, and so there is no ﬁsignalﬂ above the expected
ﬁbackgroundﬂ. If 
1 is close to 1, then 
2 will be large and there is a relation between rows and
columns of 
A, with the first eigenvector pointing in the direction of the maximum variability in 
2.If 
2, 
3 ,...
k  are also large, we need  k+1  eigenvectors to describe the patterns in the 
2 matrix.
With 
(5)
 we can tell how many eigenvectors we need to explain most of the 
2 of the network.
7Compositions
The 
Kronecker product
 of two binary matrices 
A1 and 
A2 makes a 
copy of 
A1 for each 1 in 
A2.It is well-know that for two matrices 
A1 and 
A2 of order m
1 and m
2 the eigenpairs of the Kronecker
product 
A1A2 behave well
 (West, 1996): 
If 
A1 has eigenpairs (
i , 
ai ) and 
A2 has eigenpairs (
j ,bj ), then 
A1A2 has eigenpairs ({
i × 
j} ,{ 
ai  bj })
It is also well-known that 
A1 and 
A2 behave well under 
Cartesian sum
:A1A2 = 
A1I2 + 
A2I1(where 
I1 and 
I1 are identity matrices of appropriate size)
has eigenpairs ({
i + 
j} ,{ 
ai  bj }).
The Laplacian 
L also behaves well under Cartesian sum. For 
L1L2 the eigenpairs are
({i + 
j} ,{ 
li  kj })
This fact is used by Pothen, 
et al
., (1990) to study the Laplacian of grids, which are Cartesian
sums of paths. Further, the eigenvalues of 
L1 and 
L2 always contain a 
0 = 0 with corresponding
constant eigenvector, so that the corresponding eigenpairs of 
L1L2 are (
i+0, 
li  1). The term 
li 1means that the components of 
li are 
replicated
 m2 times. Since the Cartesian sum of two paths is a
grid, this produces a perfectly rectangular representation (Fig. 1b). The Laplacian is therefore a useful
tool in problems involving regular grids (or hypergrids). However, 
N does 
not behave well under
Cartesian sum (Fig. 1c).
The Laplacian does 
not behave well under Kronecker product. However, the Normal spectrum
does (Chow, 1997), so that 
N1N2 has eigenpairs
 ({
i × 
j} ,{ 
ni  mj })
Further, the eigenvalues of 
N1 and 
N2 always contain a 
0 = 1 with corresponding constant
eigenvector, so that the corresponding eigenpairs of 
N1N2 are (
i × 1, 
ni 1). The term 
ni 1 means
that the components of 
ni are 
replicated
 m2 times. Because all the coordinates are the same within
each copy, this produces 
clustering
 of the components of  
N1N2 for these eigenvectors.
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.-10-
8 Hagen also uses deviations from median
It appears that the behaviour under Kronecker product explains why both the Adjacency and
Normal eigenvectors are good at detecting both on- and off-diagonal 
blocks (clusters of edges).
Visualization
The Laplacian can 
L provide good visual representations of graphs which are Cartesian products
(such as grids and hypercubes); while 
N can provide good visual representations of graphs which are
Kronecker products (such as graphs consisting of blocks). The reasons for this are suggested above

and have mostly to do with the behaviour of eigenpairs which are sums and products with 0 and 1,
respectively. For graphs that are not k-regular, eigenpairs of 
A do not provide such good
representations since, in general, there is no constant (expected, trivial) eigenvector to combine with.
Another way of describing these results is to consider the relationship between the eigenvector
components for a node and those it is connected to (Seary & Richards, 1999). It is evident from the

definition of eigendecomposition that (where  ﬁu~vﬂ  means  ﬁu is connected to vﬂ)
(6)
      ai (u) = 
u~v ai (v)/
i    for eigenpair i of 
A(7)     l
i (u) = 
u~vli (v)/(
i-deg(u))for eigenpair i of 
L(8)     n
i (u) = 
u~vni (v)/(
i×deg(u))for eigenpair i of 
NNote that 
A has no control for node degree.  Consider the effect for "important" eigenpairs:
( k 
 1, 
 0 and 
v  1) when deg(u) is small, 
a(u) will be folded toward the origin, while 
l(u)
and 
n(u) will sit further 
away 
from the origin than its neighbours. This effect makes it difficult to
interpret visual representations based on 
A, except for k-regular graphs where all three spectra are
essentially the same (Fig. 1)
The equation for 
ni shows that for 
i near 1, each node is approximately 
at the centroid
 of those
it is connected to. The exact difference from the centroid for node 
u of eigenvector 
ni is:
ni (u)- 
u~v
ni (v)/deg(u)) = (1-
i)niFor important eigenvalues 
i  near 1, this produces very good visualization properties. In addition,
the eigenvector representation may be combined with derived properties such as 
betweenness
(Freeman, 1979)  to produce very helpful displays of large networks (Brandes 
et al.
, 2001)
Interpreting the eigenvectors
1. Partitions
Powers (1988) and others have shown how eigenvectors of 
A can be used to find  partitions of
highly connected subsets (clusters) of nodes, but these methods are not as general or as clear as those
derived from 
L or 
N.The first non-trivial eigenvector 
l1  of 
L is the subject of extensive literature (Lubotzky, 1994;
Alon & Millman,
1985). Fiedler (1975) first suggested that the eigenvector 
l1 associated with the
second-smallest
 eigenvalue 
1 could be used to solve the 
min-cut
 problem: separate the network into
two approximately equal sets of nodes with the fewest number of connections between them, based
on the 
signs
 of the components of  
l1.8 In fact, more recent derivations of 
L use the min-cut property
as a starting point (Walshaw, 
et al
., 1995) and the results are used to partition compute-intensive
problems into sub-processes with minimal inter-process communication (Pothen, 
et al
., 1990). This
technique is called 
Recursive Spectral Bisection
 (Simon, 1991). Other researchers have used
 l2 , l3Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.-11-
9 see Dhillon (2001) for a formal derivation and proof
and higher eigenvectors to produce multi-way partitions of networks (Hendrickson & Leland, 1995)
.The graph bisection problem (Mohar & Poljak.,1991) is to find
 two nearly equal-sized
 subsets
V1,V2 V such that cut(V
1,V2) = 
ij aij 
  is minimized, where i
V1, j 
V2.  (i.e. nodes in V
1 and V
2have few connections to each other).
This problem is known to be NP-hard  (Garey & Johnson, 1979), but a good approximation is
given by the 
signs
 of 
l1  (Walshaw & Berzins,1995). This gives two sets of nodes of roughly the same
size, but has no control for the number of 
edges in each part, and so any clustering of nodes is a 
side-
effect 
of the partition.
However, we can add an additional constraint that the number of edges in each part also be
roughly equal by 
weighting
 the node sets by their total degrees. This is exactly what a partition based
on 
n1 from 
N gives us, since it 
n1 points in the direction of
 maximum variability
 in
 2 (Greenacre,
1984).
9 Similarly, further partitions based on 
n2, n3, ...will also produce sets of nodes with a large
number of edges in common (as long as 
2, 3, 
...make significant contributions to 
2).  Partitions
based on 
positive
 eigenvalues will produce blocks 
on the diagonal of 
A of edges associated with each
set of nodes, while those based on 
negative eigenvalues produce nearly bipartite 
off-diagonal
 blocks
(which occur in pairs if the network is symmetric) (Seary & Richards,1995).
2. Clustering
Ideally, the important eigenvectors should be at least 
bimodal to induce clustering based on sign-
partitions, and often they are 
multi-modal
 (Hagen ,1992), suggesting that standard clustering methods
can be used on the coordinates of these vectors.  Equations (7) and (8) show that 
L and 
N place
nodes approximately at the centroids of their neighbours. For 
N, the distances are actually measured
in 
2 space, meaning that nodes with very s
imilar 
patterns
 of connections will be close together
(Benzecri, 1992). This clustering happens with either positive or negative eigenvalues (on- or off-

diagonal). The latter are important in 
nearly bipartite 
networks with few triangles (Fig. 3).
3. Problems
Farkas, 
et al
., (2001) and Goh, 
et al
., (2001) report that the important eigenvectors of 
A are very
localized
 on nodes of high degree, and suggest that this effect may be used to distinguish certain
types of networks. This effect does not occur for 
L or 
N (fig. 2), since each include some control for
degree, and so far no similar results for distinguishing network types have been reported for these
spectra.  The biggest problem for 
L and 
N is their sensitivity to ﬁlong pathsﬂ, especially to pendant
trees attached to the main body of the network (Seary & Richards, 2000). For 
N, these may be
interpreted as nodes that are hard to reach (distant) in a random walk. For long paths 
internal
 to a
network, this effect is actually an advantage, since these cycles are detected as ﬁlocally bipartiteﬂ and

emphasized in important eigenvectors. Nodes on such paths can have a large effect on global

properties such as diameter (Fig. 3-4).
Two-mode networks
Two-mode networks mix two different kinds of nodes and connections. A simple example is an
affiliation network such as people and the events they attend. We could be interested in finding sets of

people with events in common (or, equivalently, sets of events attended by the same people): this is an
example of 
co-clustering
. Affiliation networks can be represented by bipartite graphs for which 
A and 
NDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.-12-
are most suited, since they have symmetric spectra for these (the eigenvalues occur in pairs with opposite
sign). Because of this we don™t need the entire bipartite matrix: we can work with the rectangular

representation, and infer the missing parts of the eigendecomposition. If we assume m
1 people and m
2events, the resulting eigenvectors consist of m
1 components for people followed by m
2  components for
events. The resulting blocks will be strictly off-diagonal and once again the eigenvectors of 
N provide a
superior solution by maximizing 
2. In fact, this solution is identical to that provided by Correspondence
Analysis, a statistical technique for finding patterns in 2-mode data (Benzecri, 1992).
Partial Iteration
For large networks, it is not necessary or desirable to calculate the entire eigendecomposition.
For 
very large networks, it may not be possible in terms of time and space to calculate even a 
few
eigenpairs
. Nevertheless, it is possible to get at a large amount of the global and local network
structure by partially iterating using the Power Method. A few iterations of 
N = 
D-1 A 
, with each
iteration placing nodes at the means of their neighbours, will produce a 
mixture
 of the most important
eigenvectors. Consider the spectral representation
N K = i(i)KniDniT We know that 
(niDniT) K =niDniT for all K, so the contributions of eigenvectors with small
 i quickly
drop out as these (
i)K approach 0. This means that 
N K is dominated by the dimensions with 
i near
1. We start with a random vector, and quickly (6-10 iterations) produce such a mixture. Moody

(2001) describes a procedure in which this process is repeated a number of times, each producing a

slightly different mixture of the important eigenvectors (Fig 5). The results are then passed to a

standard cluster analysis routine (such as k-means, Ward™s method) to find any clusters of nodes.
 Further analysis
The method of partial iteration
 of 
N has been used for years in the program NEGOPY (Richards
and Rice, 1981; Richards, 1995), as the first step in a more complex analysis. A key concept in

NEGOPY is that of 
liaisons
. These are nodes which do not have most of their connections with
members of a cohesive cluster of nodes, but rather act as connections 
between
 clusters (Fig 3-4).
Often it is the liaisons that provide the connections that hold the whole network together. Finding the

liaisons requires detailed knowledge about the members of (potential) clusters and 
their
 connections,
and is not an immediate result of a partition based on eigenvectors or clustering methods. Neverthe-

less, eigendecomposition methods Œ full or partial Œ are an excellent strategy to begin such analysis.
Future prospects
More work needs to be done on the
 categorization of networks based on important eigenpairs of
L and 
N. Recent reports (Koren, 
et al
., 2002; Walshaw, 2000) suggest we might not need to resort
to partial methods after all; we can find important eigenpairs exactly for enormous networks (m>10
5)using ﬁsmallﬂ amounts of time and memory by first 
reducing
 the network in some way by sampling,
solving the reduced eigenproblem, then interpolating back up with a very good ﬁfirst guessﬂ for the

Power Method. Preliminary tests show that this should work equally well for Lanczos iteration.
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.-13-
References
Aho, A., Hopcroft, J., & Ullman, J. (1997). 
Data structures and algorithms
 Addison-Wesley.
Alon, N. and Millman, V. (
1985).  
1, Isoperimetric Inequalities for Graphs, and Superconcentrators. 
J. Comb. Theory B. 
38: 73-88.
Barnard S. and Simon, H. (1994). Fast Implementation of Recursive Spectral Bisection for Partitioning
Unstructured Problems. 
Concurrency: Practice and Experience
 6(2): 101-117.
Benzecri, J-P. (1992). 
Correspondence Analysis Handbook
, Marcel Dekker Inc.
Bien, F. (1989). Constructions of Telep
hone Networks by Group Representations. 
Notices of the Am. Math. Soc. 
36: 5-22.
Biggs, N. (1993). 
Algebraic Graph Theory
.  Cambridge University Press.
Brandes, U., Cornelsen, S. (2001). Visual Ranking of Link Structures, 
Lecture notes in Computer Science
,2125, Springer-Verlag.
Chavel, I. (1984). 
Eigenvalues in Riemannian Geometry
,  Academic Press.
Chow, T.Y. (1997). The Q-spectrum and spanning trees of tensor products of bipartite graphs", 
Proc. Am.
Math. Soc.
, 125(11): 3155-3161.
Courant, R. and Hilbert, D. (1966). 
Methods of Mathematical Physics
. Interscience Publishers.
Cvetkovic , D., Doob, M., and Sachs, H. (
1995). 
Spectra of Graphs
. Academic Press.
Cvetkovic, D., Rowlinson, P. (
1990). The largest eigenvalue of a graph: a survey. 
Linear and Multilinear
Algebra
. 28: 3-33.
Cvetkovic, D., Doob, M. Guttman, I, Torgasev, A. (
1988). 
Recent results in the theory of graph spectra
,North Holland.
Chung, F.K.R.(1988). Diameters and Eigenvalues, 
J. Am. Math. Soc. 
2(2): 187-196.
Chung, F.K.R, Faber, V.& Manteuffel, T.A. (1994). An upper bound in the diameter of a graph from
eigenvalues associated with its Laplacian, 
SIAM J. Disc. Math.
 7(3):  443-457.
Chung, F.K.R. (1995). 
Spectral Graph Theory
, CBMS Lecture Notes, AMS Publication.
Dhillon, I.S. (2001). Co-clustering documents and words using bapartite spectral graph partitioning, 
UT CS Technical Report #TR 2001-05.
Diaconis, P. and Stroock, D. (1991). Geometric Bounds for Eigenvalues of Mar
kov Chains,
 Ann. Appl. Prob
. 1: 36-61.
Dodziuk, J. and Kendall, W. S. (1985). Combinatorial Laplacians and  Isoperimetric Inequality.
In K. D. Ellworthy (ed.). 
From Local Times to Global Geometry
, Pitman Research Notes in
Mathematics Series 150: 68-74
Farkas, I., Derenyi, I., Barabasi, A-L., Viscek, T. (2001). Spectra of ﬁReal-worldﬂ graphs: be
yond the
semi-circle law, 
cond-mat/100235
Fiedler, M. (1973). Algebraic C
onnectivity of Graphs, 
Czech. Math. J
. 23: 298-305.
Fisher, M. (1966). On hearing the shape of a drum, 
J. Combin. Theory,
 1: 105-125.
Freeman, L. (1979). Centrality in social networks: Conceptual clarification, 
Social Networks,
 1: 215-239.
Freidman, J. (1993). Some Geometrical Aspects of Graphs and their Eigenfunctions.  
Duke Mathematical
Journal,
 69: 487-525.
Garey, M., Johnson, D. (
1979). 
Computers and Intractability
. W. H. Freeman.
Goh, K-I., Kahng, B. Kim, D. (
2001). Spectra and eigenvectors of scale-free networks, 
cond-mat/0103337
.Greenacre, M., (1984). 
Theory and Application of Correspondence Analysis
.  Academic Press.
Grone, R., Merris, R. and Sunder, V. (1990). The Laplacian Spectrum of a Graph. 
SIAM J. Matrix Anal.
App. 11(2): 218-238.
Grone, R. and Merris, R. (1994). The Laplacian Spectrum of a Graph II. 
SIAM J. Discrete Math.
 7(2):
221-229.
Hagen, L. (1992). New Spectral Met
hods for Ratio Cut Partitioning and Clustering, 
IEEE Trans. CAD
,11(9): 1074-1085.
Hall, K. (1970). R-dimensional Quadratic Placement Algorithm, 
 Management Sci
. 17: 219-229.
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.-14-
Harary, F. & Schwenk, A. (1979). The spectral approach to determining the number of walks in a graph,
Paciific J. Math. 
 80: 443-449.
Hendrickson,B. and Leland, R. (1995). An improved spectral graph partitioning algorithm for mapping
parallel computations. 
SIAM J. Comput. Sci.
 16(2): 452-469.
Hotelling, H. (1933). Analysis of a complex of statistical variables into pricipal components, 
J. Educ.
Psychol.
 24: 417-441, 498-520.
Joliffe, I.T.. (1986). 
Principal Components Analysis
, Springer-Verlag, New York.
Kirchoff, G. (1847). Über die Auflösung der Gleichungen
.... Ann. Phys.Chem
, 72: 497-508.
Koren, Y. Carmel, L., Harel, D. (2002). ACE: a fast multiscale eigenvector computation for huge graphs,
IEEE Symposium On Information Visualization.
Lawler, G. F. and Sokal, A. D. (1988). Bounds on the L
2 Spectrum for Markov Chains and Markov
Processes: a Generalization of Cheeger's Inequality, 
Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.
 309: 557-580.
Lovasz, L. (1995). Ra
ndom Walks, Eigenvalues and Resistance, Handbook of Combinatorics, Elsevier,
1740-1745.
Lubotzky, A. (1994). 
Discrete Groups, Expanding Gr
aphs, and Invariant Measures
, Birkhauser.
Mohar, B. (1991). The Laplacian Spectrum of Graphs. In Alavi, Chartrand, Ollermann and Schwenk
(eds.). 
Graph Theory Combinatorics and Applications
, Wiley, 871-898.
Mohar, B., Poljak, S. (1991). Eigenvalues and the Max-cut Problem, 
Czech. Math. J
. 40: 343-352.
Moody, J. (
2001). Peer influence groups: identifying dense clusters in large networks, 
Soicla Networks
, 23:
261-283.
Parlett, B. (1980). 
The Symmetric Eigenvalue Problem
, Prentice-Hall.
Parlett, B., Simon, H. and Stringer, L. (1982). On Estimating the Largest Eigenvalue with the Lanczos
Algorithm. 
Mathematics of   Computation.
 38(157): 153-165.
Pothen, A., Simon, H, and Liou, K-P., (1990). Partitoning Sparse Matrices with Eigenvalues of Graphs.
SIAM J. Matrix Anal. App
. 11(3): 430-452.
Powers, D. (1988). Graph partitioning by eigenvectors. 
Linear Algebra Appl.
 101: 121-133.
Richards, W.D. & Seary, A.J. (2000). Eigen Analysis of Networks, 
J. Social Structure.
http://www.heinz.cmu.edu/projec
t/INSNA/joss/index1.html
Richards, W.D. and Rice, R. (1981). The NEGOPY Network Analysis Program, Social Networks, 3(3):215)224.Richards, W.D.(1995). NEGOPY 4.30 Manual and user's Guide. School of Communication, SFU.http://www.sfu.ca/~
richards/Pdf-ZipFiles/negman98.pdf
Seary, A.J. & Richards, W.D. (2000). Negative eigenvectors, l
ong paths and p*, Paper presented at
INSNA XX, Vancouver BC.  
http://www.sfu.ca/~ric
hards/Pages/longpaths.pdf
Seary, A.J. and Richards, W.D. (1998). Some Spectral Facts. Presented at INSNA XIX, Charleston.    
http://www.sfu.ca/~richards/Pages/specfact.pdf
Seary, A.J. and Richards, W.D. (1995). Partitioning Networks by Eigenvectors. Presented to European
Network Conference, London. Published in Everett, M.G. and Rennolls, K. (eds). (
1996).  
Proceedings
of the International Conference on Social Networks,
 Volume 1: Methodology. 47-58.
Simon,H. (1991). Partitoning of Unstructured Problems for Parallel Processing. 
Computing Systems in
Eng. 2(2/3): 135-148.
Sinclair, A. (1993). 
Algorithms for Random Generation and Counting
, Birkhauser
Walshaw, C. (2000). A multilevel algorithm for force-directed graph drawing,
 Proc. Graph Drawing 2000,
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 1984: 171-182.
Walshaw, C. and Berzins, M. (1995). Dynamic Load-balancing for PDE Solvers on Adaptive Unstructured
Meshes, 
Concurrency: Practice and Experience
. 7(1): 17-28.
Wasserman, S. & Faust, K. (1994). 
Social Network Analysis,
 Cambridge
West, D. B. (1996). 
Introduction to graph theory
, Prentice Hall, 1996.
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.-15-
Cartesian sumKronecker product
                      a)
 Using the eigenvectors of 
A. With no ﬁtrivialﬂ vector to combine with, the displays are distorted.
         
b) Eigenvectors of 
L behave well
 under
Cartesian sum. Coordinates of a 1-D
path are replicated as straight lines.
Eigenvectors of 
L do not behave well under Kronec-
ker product.
     
c) Using eigenvectors of 
N. Lines are slightly
curved, so the cube is slightly distorted.
Largest negative eigenvector of 
N captures
bipartiteness perfectly.
Figure 1.
 Six views of a 6 x 8 x 10 grid. Left: as the Cartesian sum of three paths producing a three-
dimensional grid. Right: as the Kronecker product producing a bipartite graph.
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.-16-
    a) The first 3 eigenvectors of 
N produce clusters of
nodes. These are labelled with the resulting

partition into 4 blocks, along with the liaisons. The

central liaison is of high degree and holds the

network together. The figure is slightly rotated to

show the clusters.
b) Adjacency matrix permuted by partition numbers. The

blocks have no interconnections, and the network is held

together by the liaisons (right and bottom).
Figure 2.
 Two views of a small social network with 145 
nodes. (Data Source: L. Koehly)
     a) 
The first 3 eigenvectors of 
N. The 3
rd eigenvalue
is negative, since there are very few triangles in the
rightmost cluster. The labelling is by ethnic group,

which shows a close relation to structure. There are

only two connections between the two main ethnic

groups.
b) 
Adjacency matrix permuted by partition numbers. In this
case the liasons are of 
low
 degree.
Figure 3.
 Two views of a small social network of drug users with 114 
nodes. (Data Source: Scott Clair)
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.-17-
         
a. 
This figure shows the close relation between the
first 3 eigenvectors of 
N and four needle exchange
sites, which are used to label the nodes. The figure is

rotated to make this clear.
b. 
This figure is like an Adjacency matrix, except
links are located by the 
coordinates
 of the first
eigenvector of 
N. The network is dominated by
exchanges 
within
 sites E and W.
Figure 4
. Two views of a needle exchange network. (Data Source: T. Valente and R. Foreman). This
network is moderately large (N=2736) and roughly 
scale-free
 (k
.7). 
The eigenvectors of 
A are dominated
by nodes of high degree (>
100). 
     
a) Close-up of clusters formed by the first 3
eigenvectors of 
N, labelled by construction.
b) 
Clusters formed by placing each node at the centroid of its
neighbours, iterating 8 times with 3 random starts (multiple
partial iteration). Labelled by construction.
Figure 5. 
A moderately large (N=20,000) artificial network (Data Source: J. M
oody) constructed for
testing purposes. The network was constructed from tightly connected groups of 50 nodes, each group then

loosely connected in sets of 8, with 
400 of these even more loosely c
onnected into a single component.
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.-18-
APPENDIX (
Glossary, examples, facts and definitions
)adjacency matrix
: A network (graph) may be represented by a matrix of  zeros and ones, with a one
indicating that two nodes are connected (adjacent), and a zero otherwise. In a weighted graph, the ones may

be replaced by other positive numbers (e.g.,  a distance or cost).

A sample adjacency matrix is shown below. See 
link list
                      a b c d e f g h                  a  0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0      a has connections to b,c,d
            b  1 0 1 1 0 0 0 0       b has connections to a,c,d
            c  1 1 0 1 0 0 0 0       ...etc...
            d  1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0            e  0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1
            f  0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1
            g  0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 
            h  0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 Adjacency spectrum
: The adjacency matrix of a graph, like any matrix, may be subject to an eigen
decomposition. In graph theory, the resulting set of eigenvalues is referred to as 
the
 graph spectrum, in
analogy to the  continuous spectrum from continuous spectral analysis methods such as Fourier analysis. In

Fourier analysis, the spectrum is understood to refer to the weighting of  sines and cosines, whereas the

discrete graph spectrum (eigenvalues) are weights of eigenvectors with unknown functional form. We

sometimes use the term eigenpair refer to both eigenvalues and eigenvectors. Since there are other spectra

associated with graphs, we refer to this one as the Adjacency or Standard spectrum.
block
: A block may be contrasted with a clique in the sense that the former are defined as sets of nodes that
have similar patterns of links to nodes in other sets, while the latter is a set of nodes that have most of their

links to other nodes in their set. All cliques are blocs, but some blocks are not cliques.  One of the aims of

blockmodelling is to identify roles by clustering the nodes so that those with similar patterns of connections

are next to one another in the matrix. The members of each block perform similar roles in  the network.
block model: 
a higher-level description of a network, where roles (or blocks) are represented by a
simplified graph. For the matrix above, a block model would be:1 0 0
0 0 1
0 1 0Cartesian sum
: A form of graph composition, which forms more complex graphs from simpler ones.
Cartesian sum may be expressed in terms of Kronecker product as: 
A1A2 = 
A1I2 + 
A2I1  (where 
I1 and 
I1 are identity matrices of appropriate size) 
As an example, the Cartesian sum of two paths is a rectangular grid.
clique
: In graph theory, a clique is a sub-graph in which all nodes are  connected to each other. In social
networks, a clique is a set of nodes with most of their connections with other members of the clique. This

would generally correspond to an informal role (e.g, friendship). In the above matrix {a,b,c,d} form a

clique.
cluster: 
A collection of points that are ﬁcloseﬂ to each other in some sense. Many definitions (and related
techniques) are available. For networks, we should also insist that the points share connections, either

within the cluster (clique) or with another cluster (see block model).
component:
 If a graph is connected, it consists of a single component. A disconnected graph does not have
a path between any pair of nodes, and may consist of several components.
connected:
 If there is a path between every pair of nodes in a graph, the graph is said to be connected. A
disconnected graph does not have a path between any pair of nodes, and so distances (and diameters)

cannot be defined, except within each component.
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.-19-
distance
: For graphs, the distance between nodes is defined as the smallest number of links connecting
them. Also called geodesic distance.
diameter:
 the largest geodesic distance between any pair of nodes in a graph
gap
: The term gap or spectral gap refers to large distances in the spectrum of eigenvalues, particularly
between 0 and the second-smallest (Laplacian) or between 1 and the second-largest in absolute value

(Normal). A small gap means that a graph can be disconnected with few edge-cuts; a large gap means there

are many paths between sets of nodes.
global vs local methods
: In graph theory, a local method is one that examines only a few neighbours of a
node. A global method is one which examines the entire graph, such as an eigendecomposition.
Kronecker product
: A form of graph composition, which forms more complex graphs from simpler ones.
An example of the Kronecker product is:
  1 11 0
1 0 1 0            =0 1 0 1
  1 00 1
1 0 0 0                  0 1 0 0where every 1 in the first matrix has been replaced by a complete copy of the second matrix. In this
example the first matrix is a block model, not a graph.
Lanczos iteration
: a generalization of the power method
 which allows calculation of a specified number of
eigenpairs
 without loss of precision or orthogonality
. Currently one of the best methods for
eigendecomposition of large systems.
Laplacian spectrum
: The eigenvalues (and eigenvectors) of a matrix formed by subtracting the adjacency
matrix from a diagonal matrix of node degrees. The eigenvalues are non-negative, with a "trivial" (constant)

eigenvector of eigenvalue 0.  This discrete analogue of the continuous Laplacian shares a great many of its

important properties. For this reason, it has become the focus of much research in the last decade.
liaisons:
 according to NEGOPY, these come in two types. 
Direct 
liaisons are individuals who have most of
their interaction with members of groups, but not wi
th members of any one group. They provide direct
connections between the groups they are connected to. 
Indirect
 liaisons are individuals who do not have
most of their interaction with members of groups. They
 provide indirect or ™multi-step™ connections between
groups by connecting Direct Liaisons, who have direct connections with members of groups (Richards,

1995). 
link
: A pair of nodes with some connection between them. In graph theory, links are also called edges or
lines. In social networks, links are often called ties.
link list: 
A sparse format for storing information in a network. Only the pairs of nodes that are connected
are in the link list. For symmetric graphs, only one pair is needed for each link. For weighted graphs, a third

column may be used to hold the weights. For the symmetric adjacency matrix shown above, the link list is:
12
13
14
23
...and so on...
localized
: As applied to an eigenvector means that most of the coordinates are near zero, and only a few
have large values. Coordinates may be either positive or negative
, and the eigenvectors are normalized
 toDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.-20-
make the sum of squares of components 1
, so the sum of 4
th powers is generally used as a measure of
localization. If this sum is near 1 only a small number of coordinates are important. If it is near 1/m, then

all nodes contribute to the eigenvector.
neigbourhood
: all the nodes which are connected to a given
  node. May be extended to all nodes connected
to a 
set
 of nodes, but not including the original set.
NEGOPY
: (NEGative entrOPY) (Richards and Rice, 1981, Richards, 1995) is a computer program
designed to find clique structures. It uses a random starting vector, and multiplies it by the row-normalised

adjacency matrix, subtracting off row means. Usually 6-8 such iterations are performed, resulting in a

vector which is a mixture of the the important Normal eigenvectors (Richards and Seary, 1997). This

vector is then scanned for potential clique structures, which are tested against the original network and for

some statistical properties (e.g., variance in the node degrees). Sparse matrix methods are used throughout,

allowing large networks to be analysed rapidly.
node
: An object that may have some kind of connection (link) to another object. In some cases, nodes are
people, organizations, companies, countries, etc. In graph theory nodes are also called vertices and points.

In social networks, nodes are often called actors.
normal spectrum
: The eigenvalues (and eigenvectors) of a row-normalised adjacency matrix. This matrix
is row-stochastic, and similar to a symmetric matrix, so its eigenvalues are real and less than or equal to 1

in absolute value. It is closely related to the Laplacian (indeed, it may be defined to be the Laplacian in the
2 metric defined by the node degrees).
partition
: A partition of a graph is a division of the nodes into a collection of non-empty mutually exclusive
sets. A partition of the adjacency matrix shown above could be:  {a,b,c,d}, {e,f,g,h}, so that there are no

links between the nodes in each part of the partition.
sparse matrix techniques
:  In analysis of networks with more than 50 or 60 members, it is usually the case
that each node is connected to only a fraction of the others. The adjacency matrix for such networks contain

mostly zeroes, which indicates the absence of links. In these situations, it far is easier to work with a list of

the links (link list) that are present, rather than the whole matrix which contains many times more numbers.

Any array (such as an adjacency matrix)  which consists mostly of some default number (usually zero) may

be treated as a sparse matrix. Since this value is known, it does not need to be stored as  part of the array.

This allows the array to be stored in a much more efficient manner, e.g., for an adjacency matrix, we only

need to store the links (pairs of nodes) when they exist. For a weighted adjacency matrix, we also need to

store the values of the weights, one for each link. Many matrix operations (e.g., multiplying a matrix by a

vector) can utilize this more efficient storage to run much faster as well.  Sparse matrix techniques are

those which avoid any manipulation of the matrix that would affect the sparseness property (e.g., taking the

inverse will generally do this, as will correlating each row or column with all the others). It is  quite

possible to find eigenvalues and eigenvectors using sparse techniques.
spectral analysis or methods
: Loosely speaking, another term for eigendecomposition. Mathematically
speaking, a general term referring to any re-statement of some function in terms of a set of basis functions

(e.g. sines and cosines for Fourier analysis). The spectrum is the weights of these basis functions. The 

Fourier transform is especially useful in mathematical physics since the sines  and cosines (or e
z for
complex z) are eigenfunctions of the ubiquitous derivative and integral operators. The terms function,

operator and  eigenfunction have the discrete analogues of vector, matrix and eigenvector. 
Standard spectrum: 
see Adjacency spectrum
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1 Statistical Models for Social Networks: Inference and Degeneracy    Mark S. Handcock  Department of Statistics Center for Statistics and the Social Sciences  University of Washington Box 354322 Seattle, WA 98195-4322, USA January 18, 2003 Abstract This paper presents recent advances in the statistical modeling of random graphs that have an impact on the representation of social networks. We also consider issues related to the estimation of random graph models. For concreteness the focus is cross-sectional social networks.  Statistical exponential family models (Wasserman and Pattison, 1996) are a generalization of the Markov random graph models introduced by Frank and Strauss (1986), which in turn derived from developments in spatial statistics (Besag, 1974). These models recognize the complex dependencies within relational data structures.  To date, the use of stochastic graph models for networks has been limited by three interrelated factors: the complexity of realistic models, lack of use of simulation studies, and a poor understanding of the properties of inferential methods.  We discuss these factors and related issues of the degeneracy of inference for commonly promoted models. As a cornerstone of this development we present a Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm for general random graph models. We also review the role of these MCMC algorithms in simulation, likelihood-based inference, identifying degeneracy of inference, and Bayesian formulations.   
KEYWORDS: Random graph models; Markov Chain Monte Carlo; Bayesian statistics.  1. Introduction    Networks are a form of ﬁrelational dataﬂ. Relational data arise in many social science fields and graph models are a natural approach to representing the structure of these relations. In these applications, the nodes usually represent people, and the edges represent a specified relationship between the people. This framework has many applications including, for example, the structure of social networks, the behavior of epidemics, the interconnectedness of the WWW, and long-distance telephone calling patterns.   
We consider stochastic models for such graphs that form a statistical exponential family. This class has been referred to as the ﬁp*ﬂ class of models in the psychology and sociology literatures (Wasserman and Pattison, 1996). Given their general nature and applicability, we shall refer to them simply as random graph models. A much studied sub-class of models are the Markov random graph models introduced by Frank and Strauss (1986). These models Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 attempt to model the stochastic mechanism that produces the social ties and so represent the complex dependencies so induced.  There is a large social network literature on this area which we do not review here. See Wasserman and Faust (1994), and Pattison and Robins (2000) for detailed information. The topic has connections to a broad array of literatures and here we emphasize the links to spatial statistics, statistical exponential families, log-linear models and statistical physics.   
The exploration of the properties of graph models has been limited by three factors. First the complexity of realistic models has limited the insight that has been gained by analytical methods. Most analytical work has focused on simple one or two parameter models with independence between the dyads (Wasserman and Faust 1994, Frank 1997). Second statistical methods for the stochastic simulation from general random graph models have not existed. Because of this the properties of general models (e.g., range of graphs represented, dependence among the parameters) can not be explored though simulation studies. Third the properties of statistical methods for estimating the parameters based on observed networks are poorly understood (we consider inference in Section 3). Hence the range of parameter values relevant to real networks is largely unknown. In this paper we improve understanding of the nature and properties of graph models important to social networks by further considering methods for the stochastic simulation of, and inference for, random graphs.   
We address one aspect of modeling that has been a persistent obstacle in the work in this area: inferential degeneracy. Many previous attempts to develop MCMC based estimation for Markov models have found that the algorithms nearly always converge to degenerate graphs Œ graphs that are either empty or full, or the algorithms do not converge consistently. Using statistical exponential family theory, we show that this is a function of the form of the model and algorithm used.   
In the next section we review the statistical theory of social network models expressed in exponential form. We also consider MCMC algorithms to simulate graphs from these models. In Section 3 we consider forms of inference for the parameters of the models with focus on likelihood-based forms and Bayesian methods in particular. In Section we consider model degeneracy and some possible solutions to it. 2. Review of theory Let the random matrix X represent the incidence matrix of an undirected graph onn individuals. Thus X is an nn´ symmetric matrix, each of whose entries is a Bernoulli random variable; we assume further that the diagonal elements of X are 0, which is to say that self-partnerships are disallowed. Suppose that X denotes the set of all possible graphs on the given n individuals. The multivariate distribution of X can be parameterized in the form:   exp()()c()TtxPXxxqqq==ÎX (1) where qqÎQÍ¡ is the model parameter and ()tx is a q-vector of statistics based on the graph x. (Wasserman and Pattison, 1996). The denominator c()q is the constant that ensures the distribution sums to one: c()exp()TytyqqÎ=. Note that X contains at most (1)2Nnn=-/ graphs, and {}}()cqqQ=:<¥. The dimension of Q is at most 21N- (for the ﬁsaturatedﬂ model), although is typically much smaller than this. The parameter and Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3 statistics that correspond to a given model for X can be identified using the Hammersley-Clifford theorem (Frank and Strauss 1986). Conversely, each choice of parameter and graph statistics ()txspecifies a model for X. For example, if the dyads ijX are mutually independent the model can be written: log[()]()ijijijPXxxxqqkq<==-,ÎX where logit[()]ijijijPXxqq== and ()log[c()]log[1exp()]ijijkqqq<==+. Thus q=Nand the elements of ()tx are just ijx. This model is often called a Bernoulli graph. In the special case where the dyads have a common probability, log[()]()()PXxtxqqkq==- where 1q=, ()tx is the number of partnerships in the graph, and q can be interpreted as the common log-odds of partnership formation within a dyad. The mathematical properties of this homogeneous Bernoulli graph model has been extensively studied (see, e.g., Renyi and Erdos 1959), although its simplicity and homogeneity make it less useful as a realistic model for social phenomena.  An alternative specification of the model (1) clarifies the interpretation of the parameters. Let {}}cijklXXklijkl=:¹,<, {}}cijklxxklijkl=:¹,<, {}}and1cijijijxxx+==, and {}} and0cijijijxxx-==. Thus, cijX represents all elements in the graph excluding ijX, while ijx+ and ijx- represent the graph with the ijx equal to 1 and 0, respectively. The full conditional distributions of ijX are given by  logit[(1|)]()ccTcijijijijprXXxxxqd===ÎX (2) where ()()()cijijijxtxtxd+-=- (Strauss and Ikeda 1991). The statistic ()cijxd is the change in the graph statistics when ijx changes from 0 to 1. Hence q can be interpreted as the increase in the conditional log-odds of a partnership between individuals i and j induced by the formation of the partnership and conditional on all other ties remaining unchanged. In the homogeneous Bernoulli graph, for example,q is the common log-odds of individual partnership formation.  Holland and Leinhardt (1981) appear to be the first to propose log-linear models for social networks. Suppose that the dyads are independent with   if1Pr()if0if00ijijjiijijmxylXxXyaxylnxy=,==,===,=
=,= (3) Thus each dyad can have its own probability distribution. Thus the model can represent arbitrary attractiveness between individuals and degree of reciprocity within relationships. However the dyad independence implies specific transitivity and higher-order interactions. The model can be expressed in log linear form as:   []Pr()()ijijjiijijijijlogXxxxxxrqkq<¹==+-ÎX They called this the 1p model.  Based on developments in spatial statistics (Besag 1974), Frank and Strauss (1986) extended this work and introduced forms of dependence with Markov structure. Further extension were made by Wasserman and Pattison (1996) to incorporate actor attributes (Pattison and Wasserman 1999) and to allow explanatory and response variables (Robins, Pattison and Wasserman 1999), resulting in social influence (Robins, Pattison and Elliott 2000) and social selection models (Robins, Elliott and Pattison, 2000). These generalizations essentially allow Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 analysis of graphs with ﬁcolorsﬂ on the nodes, the coloring indicating the attribute. Recent developments have included new forms of dependency structures, to take into account social settings, and on the other hand a relaxation of Markovian dependence assumptions, allowing investigation of longer range configurations, such as longer paths in the network or larger cycles (Pattison and Robins, 2000). Models for bipartite (Faust and Skvoretz, 1999) and tripartite (Mische and Robins, 2000) graph structures have also been developed.   The incorporation of attribute information into the random graph model is straightforward. Suppose we wish to incorporate p exogenous covariates represented by a nnp´´ array of attributes W where the thijk element is the covariate for the thp attribute on the thij dyad. Note that this allows the covariates to be attributes of the pairs of individuals (e.g., age difference) as well as specific to the individual alone. The graph statistic ()tx in (1) is then replaced by ()txW,, indicating that the statistics depend on the attribute information in addition to the relationship information. In this sense, the statistic ()t× can be defined to reflect the attribute information.  We consider an implementation of this in the next section. 2.1. Cross-sectional models for random graphs   The most common form of random graph models exhibit Markov dependence in the sense of Frank and Strauss (1986). For these models, dyads that do not share an individual are conditional independent: an idea analogous to the nearest neighbor concept in spatial statistics. Typically a homogeneity condition is added: all isomorphic graphs have the same probability under the model. Frank and Strauss (1986) show that homogeneous Markov graphs are exactly those having the triangle parameterization: Nqnq=,ÎQ=¡ and   010011()11()6kkkiiiinijjkkliiijktxxxkntxxxxk,...,,,=...=,...,-=,! where ()ktx is called a stark- and ()ntxis a count of the complete triads. An equivalent form is the degree distribution parameterization:   ()the proportionofindividualswithexactlyrelationships11kdxkkn==,...,- 1()6nijjkklijktxxxx,,=,  in which ()kdx counts the proportion of individuals with degree k. The degree distribution parameterization has the advantage that it is directly interpretable in terms of concurrency of partnerships (i.e. ()for0mdxm> counts the number of individuals with m concurrent partners).  
A form of model that may realistically represent dependent social processes, reflect the impact of covariates is:  10exp()()()(4)()nTTkkkxZdxtxPXxxcbaqabq-
=++==Î,,X where x is the N-vector of the unique elements of X, {}ijNpZz´= is a matrix of (exogenous) covariates on the thij dyad, ()txa q-vector of additional network statistics, b p-vector of regression parameters, a g-vector of degree parameters, and q a q-vector of Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5 network structure parameters.  
This model is an extension of equation (1) and contains a number of special cases that have been considered in separate literatures. First the homogeneous Markov graphs of  Frank and Strauss (1986) correspond to the case where there are no covariates and the additional network statistic is the count of complete triads. Second, if there are no covariates and no additional network statistics the model corresponds to the random graphs with arbitrary degree distributions considered in Newman, Strogatz and Watts (2001). This model assumes that all graphs with the same degree distribution are equally likely. On particular interest are the various ﬁscale-free,ﬂ preferential attachment and power-law models popular in the physics literature (see, e.g.,  Newman 2002). Third, if there are no degree distribution parameters and no additional network statistics the model corresponds to the random graphs with independent dyads. The model still allows differential activity levels and assortative missing via the covariate parameters. Such models have been traditionally specified as log-linear models of mass action. See Morris, Goodreau  and Koehly (2003) for an examination of the connections between the two.  
As an example, consider a random graph model for a social network based on heterosexual partnerships. An example of a cross-sectional model that incorporates captures both concurrency and the assortative mixing based on race is: 4h1()exp()race()/(,),kkkPXxdxxcxqbbqaa===+ÎX h()0PXxxq==ÎX/X where race()x is the proportion of partnerships where both partners say they are of the same race, hXis the subset of graphs in X in which all ties are heterosexual, and 4aÎ¡. The parameter 1a represents the propensity to form monogamous relationships. The parameters 24aa,..., represent the propensity to form concurrent partnerships with 2, 3 and 4 partners, respectively. Hence positive values for the latter parameters indicate the propensity of the graph toward higher degrees of concurrency. The parameter b represents the propensity for partnerships to be formed between individuals of the same race. Note that the graph and model reflect the heterosexual nature of the graph (i.e., 0ijX= unless i and j are of opposite sex). If 14aa,..., are zero the dyads are independent and the model is simply assortative mixing by race. The model can then be re-written as a contingency table form (Morris, Goodreau  and Koehly 2003). If b is zero then there are no preferences for partnerships based on race. We consider alternative parameterizations for this model in Section 3.  
These models have a form that is flexible enough to capture the structure of many real networks.  However to be practically useful we need to be able to simulate graphs with these distributions, infer their parameters from real data and measure their overall and relative goodness-of-fit. We now turn to each of these topics.  2.2. Simulating random graph models The mathematical form of the models (1) and (4) allow graphs to be generated from them using Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms. Indeed MCMC algorithms have been much studied and are a nature way to simulate social networks (e.g. Gilks et. al. 1996, Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 Newman and Barkema 1999). The basic idea is to construct a Markov Chain onXwith ()PXx= as the equilibrium distribution. This is operationalized by starting from a graph in X, and making a large number of Markov transitions until approximate convergence to ()PXx=is reached. Subsequent transitions are sampled and form a (dependent) sample from the desired model. For details, see the extensive literature cited in the above books. Many chains are possible with vastly different statistical properties. However convergence is ﬁensuredﬂ under mild conditions on the Markov Chain (irreducibility and aperiodicity). For the social network representation (1) this process has been studied by Crouch, Wasserman and Trachtenberg (1998), Coriander et. al. (1998), and Snijders (2002).   
The full-conditional MCMC for the model (1) and (4) has a simple form and is motivated by the auto-logistic representation (2). In this algorithm each dyad is updated separately based on the conditional probabilities given in (2). This so-called  ﬁGibbs samplingﬂ or ﬁheat bathﬂ algorithm chooses the dyads randomly, sequentially, or using some mixture of the two. Each update requires the difference ()()()cijijijxtxtxd+-=-to be determined. The speed of the calculation of ()cijxdis an important factor in the computational quality of the algorithm (i.e., speed of convergence to ()PXx=, the relative frequency of producing each graph in X). Alternative Metropolis algorithms propose transitions from currentxto proposedx based on the unconditional probabilities require the determination of ()()proposedcurrenttxtx-. These tend to perform better for the same amount of computation. More general Metropolis-Hastings algorithms choose proposedx from an ancillary stochastic process dependent on currentx and aimed at either focusing the transitions or spreading them more broadly through X.  The behavior of these algorithms is very dependent on the choice of statistics ()tx.   
The papers that use MCMC algorithms to simulate social network models report difficulties in convergence to realistic distributions (Crouch, Wasserman and Trachtenberg 1998, Coriander et al 1998, and Snijders 2002). A typical occurrence is for the algorithm to produce graphs that are complete, empty, or else are extreme in related ways. Coriander et. al. 1998 consider algorithms that condition on the number of ties in the graph. This ensure that the realizations are not complete or empty graphs. However, in most circumstances the density of the graph is a product of the social process that produced it and can not be assumed to be known in advance. Snijders 2002 reports on a number of related odd properties. In some cases the sequences of realizations transition quickly between very different graphs after periods of minor variation. In Section 3 we indicate why these algorithms behave in this way, how it relates to the model and how it can be resolved. 3. Inference for random graph models  
Statistical methods for estimating the parameters in a random graph model are underdeveloped. Developing inference with a likelihood framework has the advantage of being able to draw upon a statistical theory for closely related models in statistical physics and spatial statistics (Besag 1975, Geyer 1999). This framework is also compatible with the Bayesian paradigm (Gelman, Carlin, Stern and Rubin 1995). The likelihood framework makes available exploratory graphical tools useful for inference about the underlying random field (Handcock, Meier and Nychka 1994). These tools, for example, can identify when a maximum likelihood approach is insufficient for inferential purposes.  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.7  
Major barrier to the application of random graph models to social networks has been the lack of a sound statistical theory to evaluate how closely the models capture the structure in the observed graphs. This has two dimensions to it: the degree to which the graph structure of the models matched that in the data, and second the degree to which disease propagation through the model matches that of the data. The likelihood-based approach allow one to measure the first dimension of ﬁgoodness-of-fitﬂ using Monte-Carlo p-value statistics and Bayes Factors under the Bayesian paradigm (Gelfand 1996).  3.1. Likelihood inference for random graph models   In principal, likelihood inference is straightforward for exponential random graph models. In this section we describe the most fundamental ideas and why direct computation is difficult.  The log-likelihood for model (1) is:   []()log()()()TLxPXxtxxXqqqkq;º==-Î (5)  where ()log[()]ckqq=. Likelihood inference is difficult as direct evaluation of ()Lxq;  requires calculating   {()exp[()]TxctxqqÎ=X   For even simple and modest models this can be problematic. Table 1 gives the number of elements in X (i.e., 2N) as the number of actors grows.   Table 1: Number of Graphs for Different Numbers of Actors   _  Number of Actors, n Number of Elements in X 3 8 6 32,728 10 2712410.´ 25 90230710.´  
3.2. Alternative inference for random graph models  
Clearly for realistic graphs direct enumeration is not feasible. Many alternatives have been proposed. Frank (1971) and Frank and Strauss (1986) consider (linear) approximations to the cumulant generating function:   ()()log()CEtXyy=  as a means to solve the likelihood equations   []()()observedEtXtxq= (6)  
This approach is generally difficult to apply to general multiparameter models unless supplemented by a means of simulation from the same network model (Coriander et al 1998).    
One commonly used method is pseudolikelihood originally motivated by, and developed for, spatial models by Besag (1975). The idea is to use an alternative local version of the Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 likelihood function  defined the pseudolikelihood. The pseudolikelihood for model (1) is algebraically identical to the likelihood for a logistic regression of the unique elements ofX on the design matrix with ith row ()cijxd. The value of the maximum pseudolikelihood estimator for social networks can then be expediently found by using logistic regression as a computational device. Explicitly, the value of the maximum likelihood estimator for the logistic regression will also be the maximum pseudolikelihood estimator. Note, however, that the other characteristics of the maximum likelihood estimator do not necessarily carry over. In particular the standard errors of the estimates of q from the logistic regression will not be appropriate for the maximum pseudolikelihood estimator. The statistical properties of pseudolikelihood estimators for social networks are only partially understood and are discussed in Handcock (2000). In the remainder of this paper we focus on likelihood based estimation. 3.3. Existence and uniqueness of MLE   The maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) for q is:   ‹()observedLxargmaxqqqÎQ=; (7)   Many properties of the MLE can be derived from statistical exponential family theory. Let C be the closed convex support of ()tX - the convex hull of the discrete support points. Denote the interior of C by ()intC and the boundary by C¶.   
Result:  
a) If Q is open, the MLE exists if, and only if, ()observedtx is inside the interior of C. b) If it exists, it is unique.  In addition, when it exists, it can be found as the unique solution of (6) or equivalently as (7), the unique local minima of (5). c) As the support of ()tX is discrete, and ()observedtx is in it, a necessary and sufficient condition for the MLE not to exist is that ()observedtx falls on the boundary of the support and that boundary be part of C.  
The result is a fundamental property of statistical exponential families (Barndorff-Nielsen 1978).  
In practice this means that attempt to numerically maximize the likelihood leads to unbounded estimates when the observed graph has statistics falling on the boundary of C. This typically means the optimization algorithm does not converge. Simulation studies in Handcock (2000) show that this is common for realistic models. If ()observedtx falls on the boundary of C it is still possible that subsets of q have MLEs that exist. Let ()(()())observedaobservedbobservedtxtxtx=, and ()abqqq=, be similar partitions of ()observedtx and q. Under mild conditions, if ()aobservedtx is on the boundary of C and ()bobservedtx is in the relative interior of the convex hull of {}()()()aaobservedtXtXtx:= then the MLE of bq exists and is the unique local minima of the conditional likelihood equation:   []()log(()())()(())TaaobservedbaobservedCLxPXxtXtxtxtxqqqkq;,º=|==-,     Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.9  ()()aaobservedxtXtxÎ:=X 3.4. Likelihood inference based on MCMC algorithms   
The difficulties in determining the normalizing function for the model (1) can be overcome using MCMC algorithms. The approach is based on the following idea: If a large number of simulations from a social network in the same ballpark as that of the observed network can be generated then these can be used to approximate the normalization function  to a desired accuracy. Estimate the ﬁpopulationﬂ value:   ()exp()TxXctxqqÎ=  by the weighted ﬁsampleﬂ mean:   }()exp()()TMsampledgraphsycXtywyqq=||  
where the sample weights }()wyare internally normalized to sum to unity. We can use the MCMC approach of Section 2.2 to simulate a sample of graphs from a model similar to the true, but unknown, model. The approximation to the likelihood using this approach is called the MCMC likelihood. The MLE for the data is them approximated by the maximum of the  of the MCMC likelihood (the MC-MLE). This idea has been made precise and studied by Geyer and Thompson (1992).  They show the MC-MLE converges to the true MLE as the number of simulations increases. The procedure also produces estimates of the asymptotic covariance matrix, the size of the MCMC induced error, and other related quantities.   
As the sampled graphs form the basis of a statistical exponential family with sample space the realized values and probabilities the empirical proportions, the existence and uniqueness of the MC-MLE can be understood:  
Result:  
Let CO be the convex hull of sampled sufficient statistics. In practice, there are two situations: 1)()()()observedtxintCOintCÎÍ: The MC-MLE exists and is unique. It is found as the unique maximum of the MCMC likelihood. 2)()()observedtxintCOÎ/ but is in ()intC: The MC-MLE does not exist, even though MLE does. 3)()()observedtxintCÎ/: Neither the MC-MLE nor the MLE exists.  
This result explains why attempts to calculate MC-MLE estimates for social network models fail. If the model used to simulate the graphs is not close enough to produce realizations that cover the observed values of the statistics, the MC-MLE will not exist even in cases where the MLE does.  This behavior is quite common. As we shall see in Section 3, it is magnified by properties of commonly used models that do not place probability mass broadly enough. In sum, the MC-MLE may not exist for at least two reasons. First, the MLE itself may not exist (in which case neither does the MC-MLE). Second, it is difficult to specify parameter values for commonly used models to produce realizations that cover the observed values of the network statistics. In particular, simulations in Handcock (2000) show that simulations based on the maximum pseudolikelihood estimates usually do not produce realizations Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 sufficiently similar to those of the true values to support MC-MLE estimation. These properties of the models are very similar to those for spatial point processes considered in Geyer (1999). 3.5.  Bayesian models and inference for random graph models  In random graph models of the form (1) the maximum likelihood estimator is not necessary optimal and, indeed, any point estimator of q can be very poor. As such we need to move away from point estimators of q and to frameworks for inference that naturally allow the uncertainty about the value of q to be expressed.  
We do this by supplementing likelihood-based inference with the Bayesian paradigm, mainly as it provides an elegant way of incorporating parameter uncertainty into the final inference and the incorporation of expert knowledge when it exists (Gelman, Carlin, Stern and Rubin 1995). Inference with the Bayesian paradigm, implemented via the now standard Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods can address, and even solve, many very difficult inferential problems, often making it the only realistic option.  
Bayesian approaches to random graph models for social networks have received little attention (Wang and Wong 1987). We are in the process of developing Bayesian methodology for random graphs paying particular attention to the specification of prior distributions for the parameters that are meaningful for social networks. Under a Bayesian formulation, let ()prp be an arbitrary prior distribution for q. The posterior distribution of q is then (;)()()()prXxprPXxmxqqq===/ where ()()()mxprPXxdqffQ== can be interpreted as the apriori probability that Xx=. (;)prXxq= captures our knowledge about q after the observed data (i.e., that is Xx= ) has been taken into account.  
Note that ()prq may be chosen to restrict the parameter space to a subset of Q by placing zero prior mass on the excluded values. Under these circumstances the posterior mass on these same values will always be zero regardless of their likelihood under the model and data.   Computationally, Bayesian inference for an arbitrary prior is straightforward if MCMC simulation of the process is available. Conceptually this can be achieved by sampling a value mq from the prior distribution for ()prqq,, and then sampling mX from the distribution ()mPXxq= using MCMC simulation. If this is repeated until mX equals the observed graph obsx then the corresponding value of mmqq, (say), is a random sample from the posterior (;)obsprXxq=. By repeating this process, a large sample of values of q from (;)obsprXxq= can be generated. The posterior mean of q can then be estimated by the mean of the sample. The posterior density corresponding to (;)obsprXxq= can be estimated by a non-parametric density estimate based on the sample. Note that this applies even when q is multivariate, and so the posterior dependence between the components of q can also be determined. There are alternative computational methods that are vastly superior in terms of computational efficiency to the above algorithm. These alternatives will almost always be used in practice. However, the above algorithm does show how Bayesian inference is achieved using MCMC simulation.   
The definition and properties of families of conjugate priors for exponential families has been addressed in Barndorff-Nielsen (1978), Diaconnis and Ylvisaker (1979) and, more recently, Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11 Gutiérrez-Peña and Smith (1997). Of the many possible families possible, one of the most richest classes is discussed by Gutiérrez-Peña and Smith (1997). Let ()gng, be the (1)q+ parameter exponential family with distributions:    exp()Pr()0()Tcnqgyqqngqggn+;,=ÎQ,³,            Thus ()gng, has canonical statistics q and ()yq- and is minimal unless ()y× is a linear function of q. Here ()y× is a prespecified function. The hyperparameters n and g specify, respectively, the location and scale of q. If qQ=¡ then this distribution is proper if, and only if, ng/ is in the interior of the convex hull of the sample space of ()tX and 0g>. Suppose the prior for q is chosen to be ()gng, then, formally, the posterior for q, having observed Xx=, is (()1)gtxng+,+. That is,   (())(1)()Pr(;)0(1())TtxXxctxnqgyqqngqggn+++=;,=ÎQ,³+,+             This family can be generalized to a p-variate .g Let ()gng, be the ()qp+ parameter exponential family with distributions:   1exp()Pr()00()TTp–cnqgyqqngqgggn+;,=ÎQ,³,,>,            Here ()y× is a prespecified p-variate function. Thus ()gng, has canonical statistics q and ()yq- and is minimal unless some component of the ()y× is a linear function of q. Suppose the prior for q is chosen to be ()gng, then, formally, the posterior for q, having observed Xx=, is (()1)gtxng+,+.  While inference for this family is quite tractable it is unclear under which circumstances the prior can be chosen to realistically represent knowledge about q. It is more natural to choose the prior to reflect knowledge we do have and which is often quite strong. Examples include selectivity of graphs, degeneracy and stability. For these cases the prior family is unlikely to be conjugate.  4. Identifiability, Degeneracy and Stability for social networks models The research reviews in the previous sections has allowed progress to be made in both the estimation and simulation of random graphs models. This work, and that of Besag (2000), has allowed provided insight into the properties of random graphs models. Two properties of random graph models that have a big impact on practice are degeneracy and stability. This builds on ideas of Ruelle (1969), Strauss (1986), Geyer (1999) and Baddeley (1999), Section 4.  This work is in statistical physics and spatial point process theory.   
The issue of what makes a useful model for a social network is a complex one. All models are representations of the manifestations of the social processes that produced the social network. Some models represent the proximate mechanisms of the formation of ties. This can be done by representation the temporal dynamics of the social process that produced the social network, or by direct representation of the network itself through appeal to concepts like structural balance and transitivity. Alternatively models may only aim at describing the probabilistic structure of the social ties. In all cases the models will be idealizations and simplification of the actual processes. Ultimately the answer to the question of what is a Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12 useful model is fundamentally dependent on the purpose for which the model is intended. Simple models are often adequate, and even desirable, if there is a simple objective (e.g., what is the density of ties in the network). For other purposes, such as understanding the dynamics of the spread of STDs over networks, more sophisticated models are necessary.   
Here we consider a basic property that a useful model should have. Broadly speaking, useful stochastic models place a significant proportion of their probability mass on graphs that have high probability of being produced by the underlying social process.  We define a random graph model to be degenerate if the model places almost all its probability mass on a small number of graph configurations inX. Hence degeneracy of a graph model occurs when the model places disproportionate probability mass on only a few of the possible graph configurations. A common case is where the distribution places almost all its mass on the empty graph (i.e.,0)ijXij=",, and/or the complete graph (i.e.,1)ijXij=",. Such models are not useful for modeling networks as almost all realizations from these models will be empty or full. In addition is such a model is used for simulation and MCMC likelihood inference the approximations to the true model will be very poor. 4. Discussion and future work   While estimation techniques are often of little interest to non-statisticians, this case is an exception. The complete enumeration of all graphs required by the denominator in (1) makes simple maximum likelihood estimation impossible for graphs larger than about 30 nodes. In early applications a form of pseudo-likelihood was used to solve this problem (Besag 1974, Wasserman and Pattison 1996). More recent approaches, however, employ Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods (Geyer and Thompson 1992). This is particularly interesting for our purposes because MCMC methods effectively simulate the network over the space of possible graphs in order to maximize the likelihood. One can, however, just as easily use the MCMC algorithm to simulate the network given the parameter estimates, and this provides the solution to the problem of linking network data to the network simulation.   
This paper address the question of what is a good model and in doing so helps resolve the dilemma lack of convergence when estimation or simulating using MCMC. Many of the models that are proposed in literature suffer from degeneracy. Further algorithms used for inferential purposes are often inadvertently based on degenerate forms resulting in inferential degeneracy. One implication of these results is that the effective parameter space of exponentially parameterized random graph models is bounded and a small subset of the theoretical parameter space. The Bayesian framework for inference promises to be very powerful in social network modeling. It facilitates the propagation of parameter uncertainty into the final inference and allowing the incorporation of expert prior knowledge when it exists. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Key Player Problem1 Stephen P. Borgatti2  
 
Introduction  
The key player problem (KPP) consists of two separate sub-problems, which can be described at a general level as follows:  1. (KPP-1) Given a social network, find a set of k nodes (called a kp-set of order k) which, if removed, would maximally disrupt communication among the remaining nodes.  2. (KPP-2) Given a social network, find a kp-set of order k that is maximally connected to all other nodes.   
Of course, these introductory definitions leave out what is meant precisely by ﬁmaximally disrupt communicationﬂ and ﬁmaximally connectedﬂ. Part of the process of solving these problems is providing definitions of these concepts that lead to feasible solutions and useful outcomes. However, it would seem clear that KPP-1 involves fragmenting a network into components, or, failing that, making distances between nodes so large as to be practically disconnected. In contrast, KPP-2 involves finding nodes that can reach as many remaining nodes as possible via direct links or perhaps short paths.  
The first problem, KPP-1, arises in a number of contexts. A prime example in the public health context is the immunization/quarantine problem. Given an infectious disease that is transmitted from person to person, and given that it is not feasible to immunize and/or quarantine an entire population, which subset of members should be immunized/quarantined so as to maximally hinder the spread of the infection? An example in the military context is target selection. Given a network of terrorists who must coordinate in order to mount effective attaches, and given that only a small number can be intervened with (e.g., by arresting or discrediting), which ones should be chosen in order to maximally disrupt the network?  
The second problem, KPP-2, arises in the public health context when a health agency needs to select a small set of population members to use as seeds for the diffusion of practices or attitudes that promote health, such as using bleach to clean needles. In the organizational management context, the problem occurs when management wants to implement a change initiative and needs to get a small set of informal leaders on-board first, perhaps by running a weekend intervention with them. In the military context, KPP-2 translates to locating an efficient set of enemies to surveil, turn (into double-agents), or feed misinformation to.   
At first glance, both KPP-1 and KPP-2 would appear to be easily solved by either employing some graph-theoretic concepts such as cutpoints and cutsets, or via the methods of social network analysis, such as measuring node centrality. It turns out, however, that none of the existing methods are adequate. This paper explains why and presents a new approach specifically designed for the key player problem.  
                                                 1 Acknowledgements: This research is supported by Office of Naval Research grant number N000140211032. Thanks to Scott Clair for leading me to this problem, Mark Newman for suggesting reciprocal distances, Kathleen Carley for useful discussions, and Valdis Krebs for providing illustrative data.  2 Dept. of Organization Studies, Carroll School of Management, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, MA 02467 Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 2Centrality Approach  
The centrality approach consists of measuring the centrality of each node in the network, then selecting the k most central nodes to comprise the kp-set. Since many measures of centrality exist, one question that arises is which measure to use. For KPP-1, we can expect the best measures to be those based on betweenness. For example, Freeman™s betweenness measure sums the proportion of shortest paths from one node to another that pass through a given node. Thus, a node with high betweenness is responsible for connecting many pairs of nodes via the best path, and deleting that node should cause many pairs of nodes to be more distantly (if not completely disconnected).   
For KPP-2, we can expect measures based on degree centrality and closeness centrality to be useful. Degree centrality is simply the number of nodes that a given node is adjacent to. Hence, depending on what the social relation represented by the graph is and assuming that adjacency implies potential for influence, a node with high degree can potentially directly influence many other nodes. Closeness centrality is defined as the sum of geodesic distances from a given node to all others, where geodesic distance refers to the length of the shortest path between two points.  Thus, a node with a low closeness score (very central) should be able to influence, directly and indirectly, many others.   
The centrality measures are plausible solutions for KPP. However, they are not optimal. There are two basic problems, which I refer to as the design issue and the group selection issue. Of the two, the group selection issue is the more serious.  
The Design Issue  
The design issue arises ultimately from the fact that centrality measures were not designed with KPP-1 and KPP-2 specifically in mind. Starting with KPP-1, consider the graph in Figure 1.    Figure 1.  
Node 1 has the highest centrality on all considered measures, including betweenness centrality. Yet deleting node 1 has relatively little effect on the network. Distances between certain pairs of nodes do increase, but it is clear that communication among all points remains possible as there is no fragmentation. In contrast, deleting node 8, which does not have the highest betweenness, is more effective. Removing 8 splits the graph into five unconnected fragments (components).  123456789101112Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 3 
For KPP-2, the picture is a little brighter. If we formulate KPP-2 in terms of reaching the most nodes directly, degree centrality is optimal. If we formulate it in terms of reaching the most nodes in up to m steps, then we can readily define a new measure of centrality (ﬁm-reach centralityﬂ) that counts the number of nodes within distance m of a given node.   
The Group Selection Issue  
The group selection issue, discussed as the group centrality problem in Everett and Borgatti (1999), refers to the fact that selecting a set of nodes which, as an ensemble, solves KPP-1 or KPP-2, is quite different from selecting an equal number of nodes that individually are optimal solutions for KPP. To start with, consider KPP-1. Figure 2 shows a graph in which nodes h and i are, individually, the best nodes to delete in order to fragment the network. Yet deleting i in addition to h yields no more fragmentation than deleting i alone. In contrast, deleting m with h does produce increased fragmentation, even though individually m is not nearly as effective as i. The reason i and h are not as good together as i and m is that i and h are redundant with respect to their liaising role Œ they connect the same third parties to each other. In a sense, the centrality of one is due to the centrality of the other, with the result being that the centrality of the ensemble ﬁcontrolﬂ is quite a bit less than the sum of the centralities of each.    Figure 2  The redundancy principle also applies to KPP-2. Consider the graph in Figure 3. Nodes a and b are individually the best connected. Each reaches five other nodes, more than any other by far. But together they reach no more than either does alone. In contrast, if b is paired with c (which individually reaches only three nodes), the set reaches every node in the network.  abc Figure 3.  
 
 
 Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 4 
Graph Theoretic Approaches  
In addition to basic concepts such as components and distance, a number of graph-theoretic concepts are relevant to KPP. For KPP-1, the most obvious are the notions of cutpoint and bridge, which are nodes and lines respectively whose deletion would increase the number of components in the graph. These concepts do not address the group-selection issue. However, both have set-level counterparts in the form of cutsets. A cutset is a set of nodes (or lines) whose removal would increase the number of components in the graph. Most work has focused on minimum weight cutsets, which are smallest sets that have the cutset property. There are three difficulties with cutsets in the KPP context. First, we cannot specify the number of nodes in the set and then seek the set of that size that does the best job (rather, the measure of success is fixed and we are able to find a smallest set that achieves that level of success). In this sense, the graph theoretic approaches solve the inverse of the problem we seek to solve. Second, no account is taken of distances among nodes. Third, all solutions that increase the number of components are equal, even if one solution creates just two components while another creates ten.   
For KPP-2, applicable concepts include vertex covers and dominating sets. A vertex cover is a set of nodes whose members are incident upon every edge in the graph. A dominating set is a set of nodes whose members are adjacent to all other nodes in the graph.3 For our purposes these are equivalent and fail for exactly the same reasons as cutsets.  
Measuring Success  
In order to optimally solve KPP, we must have a clear definition of success. I propose that for KPP-1 there are two network properties we want to maximize by removing the kp-set: fragmentation and distance. For KPP-2, we want to measure the distance-based reach of the kp-set into the network around it. Therefore, we need measures for each of these concepts.   
Fragmentation  
Perhaps the most obvious measure of network fragmentation is a count of the number of components. If the count is 1, there is no fragmentation. The maximum fragmentation occurs when every node is an isolate, creating as many components as nodes. For convenience, we normalize the count by dividing by the number of nodes.  nKC= Eq. 1  The problem with this measure is that it doesn™t take into account the sizes of the components. For example, in Figure 2, deleting node m would break the network into two components, but the vast majority of nodes remain connected. In contrast, deleting node i would also result in just two components, but more pairs of nodes would be disconnected from each other.   
This suggests another measure fragmentation that simply counts the number of pairs of nodes that are disconnected from each other. Given a matrix R in which rij = 1 if i can reach j and rij = 0 otherwise, we can define the new measure as follows:  
                                                 3 Graph theorists differ on whether these sets are understood to be minimal or not.  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 5)1(21--=<nnrFiijij Eq. 2.  
Since, by definition, nodes within a component are mutually reachable, the F measure can be rewritten more economically in terms of the sizes (sk) of each component (indexed by k):  )1()1(1---=nnssFkkk Eq. 3.  
The F measure is remarkably similar to a diversity measure known variously as heterogeneity, the concentration ratio, the Hirschman-Herfindahl index, or the Herfindahl index. Applied to the current context it is defined as follows:  21

-=kknsH Eq. 4.  One difference between F and H is that while both achieve minimum values of 0 when the network consists of a single component, when the network is maximally fragment (all isolates) the H measure can only achieve 1-1/n. If we normalize H by dividing by 1-1/n, we obtain the F measure (and seeing F as a normalization of H points us to a slightly faster computing formula).   
An alternative approach is information entropy. Applied to this context, the measure is defined as   

-=kkknsnsEln Eq. 5.  The measure is bounded from below at zero, but is unbounded from above. We can bound it by dividing it by its value when all nodes are isolates:  



=kkkkknsnsnsElnln Eq. 6.  
 
Distance  
While the fragmentation measure F is very satisfactory for what it does, it does not take into account the shape Œ the internal structure Œ of components. A network that is divided into two components of size 5 in which each component is a clique (Figure 4a) is seen as equally fragmented as a network divided into two Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 6components of size 5 in which each component is a line (Figure 4b). Yet distances and therefore transmission times are much higher in the latter network. Further, if we can delete only so many nodes, it may be that there is no possible selection of nodes whose removal would disconnect the graph. In such cases, we would still like some way of evaluating which sets are better than others.   
An obvious solution would be to measure the total distance between all pairs of nodes in the network. However, this only works in the case where the graph remains connected. Otherwise, we must sum infinite distances. A practical alternative is to base the measure on sum the reciprocals of distances, observing the convention that the reciprocal of infinity is zero. In that case we can create a version of F, based on Equation 2, that weights by reciprocal distance.   )1(121--=>
nndFjiijD Eq. 7.  
The DF measure is identical to F when all components are complete (i.e. each component is also a clique). However, when distances within components are greater than 1, the measure captures the relative cohesion of the components. For example, the graph in Figure 4a has two components of size 5 and the DF measure is 0.556. The graph in Figure 4b, which is less cohesive, also has two components of size 5, but the DF measure is 0.715, indicating much less cohesion . Like the F measure, DF achieves its maximum value of 1.0 when the graph consists entirely of isolates.  12345678910 12345678910 Figure 4a. DF = 0.556 Figure 4b. DF = 0.715  
 Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 7Distance-Based Reach  
The measures discussed for KPP-1 are graph-level measures that we apply to a kp-set by removing the set and measuring the fragmentation in the remaining graph. For KPP-2, we seek a set of nodes that, as a group, is maximally connected to all other nodes. Hence, we need a direct measure of the centrality of the kp-set as a group. The concept of group centrality has already been elaborated by Everett and Borgatti (1999), but only degree, closeness, betweenness and eigenvector group centrality measures have been discussed. As noted earlier, these measures are not optimal for the KPP-2 problem. Hence, we must develop new ones based on the concept of reach.  
The simplest group reach measure, termed m-reach, is a count of the number of unique nodes reached by any member of the kp-set in m links or less. The advantage of this measure is its face validity. The disadvantage is that it assumes that all paths of length m or less are equally important (when in fact a path of length 1 is likely to be more important than a path of length 2) and that all paths longer than m are wholly irrelevant.   
A more sensitive measure, called distance-weighted reach, can be defined as the sum of the reciprocals of distances from the kp-set S to all nodes (see Equation 8).  As described by Everett and Borgatti (1999), the distance from a set to a node outside the set can be usefully defined in a number of ways, such as taking the maximum distance from any member of the set to the outside node, taking the average distance, or taking the minimum distance. For KPP-2, the minimum distance is appropriate since the fact that the distance to an outside node might be large for a given member of the set will usually be irrelevant.  ndRjSjD=1 Eq. 8.  
In the equation, the distance from kp-set S to node j is indicated by dSj.  In addition, it should be noted that the summation is across all nodes and the distance from the set to a node within the set is defined to be 1. As before the reciprocal of an infinite distance is defined to be 0. Taking some interpretive license, we can view DR as the proportion of all nodes reached by the set, where nodes are weighted by their distance from the set and only nodes at distance 1 are given full weight. Hence, DR achieves a maximum value of 1 when every outside node is adjacent to at least one member of the kp-set (i.e., the kp-set is a dominating set). The minimum value of 0 is achieved when every node is an isolate.   
Selecting a KP-Set  
For KP-sets of size 1, the measures presented above can used straightforwardly to select key players by simply choosing the one with the highest score on any given measure.  Thus, they can be regarded as new measures of node centrality that are optimized for the key player problem.   
For kp-sets of size k > 1, however, there is no simple procedure for choosing an optimal set. Some heuristic procedures may be of value. For example, for KPP-2, we start by selecting the node with the highest DR score. Then, for each of the remaining k-1 selections, we choose the node with the highest score that is not adjacent to any of the nodes already selected. This algorithm, a variant of the first fit decreasing algorithm for the bin-packing problem, is fast and easy, but often yields solutions that are considerably less than optimal.   Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 8Other heuristic approaches specific to the KPP can be constructed, but the fact that we have clear measures of success that are easily computed recommends a generic combinatorial optimization algorithm, such as tabu-search (Glover, 1986), K-L (Kernighan and Lin, 1970), simulated annealing (Metropolis et al, 1953) or genetic algorithms (Holland, 1975). Initial experiments suggest that all of these do an excellent job on KPP, and so I present only a simple greedy algorithm. Figure 5 outlines the method, which is normally repeated using dozens of random starting sets.   Figure 5. Greedy optimization algorithm.  
 
Empirical Trials  
The operation of the algorithm is illustrated using two datasets drawn from the public health (AIDS) and military (terrorism) contexts. Both cases are approached from both KPP-1 and KPP-2 points of view.   1234567891011121314151617181920212223242728293031323435363738394042434546474849505254555657585961636465666768707172747577787981838485878889909192939596979899100101102104105106107108109113115116117118120122123124125126127128129130131134135136137139140141142143144145146147148149150151152153154155156157158159163165166167169171172173174175177178180182183184185187188189190191192193194196197199200202203204205206208209210211212213215216217219220222223224225226227228231232233234235236239240244245246251252254255256258260273275277280285287290295298 Figure 6.  Acquaintance network. Upward triangles indicate African-Americans, downward triangles indicate Puerto-Ricans, and squares identify all others.   1. Select k nodes at random to populate set S 2. Set F = fit using appropriate key player metric 3. For each node u in S and each node v not in S a. DELTAF = improvement in fit if u and v were swapped 4. Select pair with largest DELTAF a. If DELTAF <= then terminate b. Else, swap pair with greatest improvement in fit and set F = F + DELTAF 5. Go to step 3  
Figure 5. Greedy optimization algorithm.  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 9 
AIDS Example  
The AIDS dataset consists of an acquaintance network among 293 drug injectors on the streets of Hartford, CT. The data are described in Weeks et al (2002). The network consists of one large main component (193 nodes), and many very small components. As shown in Figure 6, the main component of the network has a very clear structure. It consists of two groups, one african-american (with higher HIV+ proportion), and the other largely puerto-rican (with lower HIV+ proportion). Connection between the two groups is limited by just a few acquaintances and this bottleneck helps maintain the lower HIV+ rate in the Puerto-Rican part of the network. Whether through immunization (should that become possible) or quarantining, it is clear that one thing we would want to do early on is to isolate the two groups from one another, both because we want to maintain the low HIV+ rates in Puerto-Rican cluster, and because risk is a function of the size of the component a node is part of. Thus, we have a case of KPP-1.   
The network provides a useful first test of the key player optimization algorithm for two reasons. First, the structure of the network makes it quite vulnerable to disconnection, and easy to check the results visually. If the algorithm fails this test, it is clearly not adequate. Second, the network is already fragmented, providing noise that could confuse some algorithms.   
Based on visual inspection, it is clear that immunizing or quarantining just two nodes would separate the main component into two nearly equal halves. So for the first run of the algorithm we seek a kp-set of size 2. The starting fragmentation index for the graph is 0.567. The algorithm selected two nodes, identified in black in Figure 6, which, if deleted, would increase fragmentation to 0.658 (a proportional increase in fragmentation of 16%).  The selected nodes match our intuition and divide the main component in two big chunks.   
Turning to KPP-2, we are also interested in selecting a small group of nodes to be subjects of an intervention Œ specifically, to be trained as peer educators (known as Peer Health Advocates or PHAs) to disseminate and demonstrate HIV prevention practices. Weeks et al (2002) did this by hand, laboriously selecting the smallest group that could reach more than 50% of the main component of the network. The winning set contained 14 nodes. Running Key Player on the same data, yields the same result, as shown in Table 1.   Group Size Number Reached Percent Reached 1 16 8.3 2 27 14.0 3 36 18.7 4 43 22.3 5 49 25.4 6 55 28.5 7 61 31.6 8 67 34.7 9 72 37.3 10 77 39.9 11 82 42.5 12 87 45.1 13 92 47.7 14 97 50.3 Table 1. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 10 
As might be expected, the number of people reached increases as a fractional power of the group size, but fuller consideration of this phenomenon is outside the scope of this paper.  
Terrorist Example  
The terrorist dataset, compiled by Krebs (2001), consists of a presumed acquaintance network among 74 suspected terrorists. For the purposes of this analysis, only the main component is used, consisting of 63 individuals.   Figure 7. Terrorist network compiled by Krebs (2002).  The first question we ask is which persons should be isolated in order to maximally disrupt the network. Let us assume that we can only isolate three people. A run of the KeyPlayer program selects the three red nodes identified in red in Figure 7 (nodes A, B and C).  Removing these nodes yields a fragmentation measure of 0.59, and breaks the graph into 7 components (including two large ones comprising the left and right halves of the graph).   
The second question we ask is, given that we would like to diffuse certain information, which nodes would we want to be exposed to the information so as to potentially reach all other nodes quickly and with certainty? Let us assume that information that travels more than two links tends to degrade or be viewed with suspicion. Hence we want the smallest set of nodes that can reach all others within two links or less. The KeyPlayer algorithm finds that a set of three nodes (the square nodes in Figure 7, labeled A, C and D) reaches 100% of the network (including themselves).   A B C D E Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 11Discussion  
In this paper we have defined the KeyPlayer problem and demonstrated why the naïve centrality-based approach and more sophisticated graph-theoretic approaches fail to solve the problem. We have introduced new metrics for measuring success, and implemented a combinatorial optimization algorithm to maximize these quantities. Applications in both health and military areas were demonstrated.   
The metrics for measuring success in the KPP-1 problem are essentially measures of graph cohesion that may be useful descriptively in a number of contexts besides the key player problem. Typical applications might be the comparison of similar organizations, or using cohesion as a predictor of group performance.   
The fact that KPP-1 and KPP-2 have different solutions is interesting. For many, centrality is either a unitary concept with many highly correlated measures, or a fully multidimensional concept in which each measure indicates a different kind of centrality. I would suggest an intermediate view that divides notions of nodal importance into two basic types, corresponding to the KPP-1 and KPP-2 problems. KPP-1 measures quantify the extent to which a graph™s cohesion is reduced by the removal of that node, while KPP-2 measures quantify the extent to which a node™s ties reach into the network. It is the second type that is most directly about centrality: a node that is well-connected. The first type is not as much about the node™s well-connectedness as about the connectedness of the rest of the graph in the absence of the node. From the graph™s point of view, there is a loose analogy to the distinction in operant conditioning between positive reinforcement (KPP-2) and negative reinforcement (KPP-1):  positive reinforcement provides benefit (connectivity) by directly providing a boon (the node™s connections), while negative reinforcement provides benefit by relieving a stressor (the node holds together the otherwise fragmented graph). From the node™s point of view, a node achieves its highest values on KPP-2 measures when the graph is highly cohesive. In contrast, high values on KPP-1 measures will normally occur only when the graph is not very cohesive. Actors high on KPP-2 measures lend themselves to maximizing utilization of resources flowing through the network, while actors high on KPP-1 measures lend themselves to maximizing the benefits of brokerage, gatekeeping and playing actors off each other.   
Limitations and Next Steps  
There are significant dimensions to the problem that I have ignored. Perhaps the most important is the issue of data quality. If this approach is to yield a practical tool, we cannot simply assume perfect data. Rather, the method should be robust in the face of errors in the data. Two approaches will be explored. First, there is the notion of not optimizing too closely to the observed dataset. If the data are known to vary from the truth by a given magnitude (e.g., 10% of observed ties don™t actually exist and 10% of observed non-adjacent pairs are in fact adjacent), then we can randomly vary the data by this magnitude and optimize across a set of ﬁadjacentﬂ datasets obtained in this way. The result is a kp-set that is not necessarily optimal for the observed dataset, but will represent a high-quality solution for the neighborhood of the graph as a whole.   
An alternative approach is to treat knowledge of ties as probabilistic, modifying the KeyPlayer metrics accordingly. For example, suppose we knew, for each pair of nodes, the independent likelihood that a tie exists between them. Then, in principle, we could work out the expected distance (including infinity) between the nodes across all possible networks.4 KPP measures based on distance and reachability could then be computed substituting expected distance for observed distance. The practical challenge here is to find shortcut formulas for expected distance and connectedness that enable fast computation.                                                   4 Note that the problem being addressed is certainty of observed data values, not the existence of ties. It is assumed in this approach that ties are fixed and not probabilistically emerging as a function of node attributes or other ties. The dynamic nature of ties is a different phenomenon that wants its own models.  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 12 
Another issue concerns the use of geodesic distance at all. As discussed by Borgatti (2002), different kinds of flows processes have different kinds of characteristic trajectories. For example, infections that immunize (or kill) the host don™t return to nodes they have previously infected. Hence, they travel along graph theoretic paths. In contrast, gossip transmitted via email can easily reach the same node multiple times, but in general not from the same sources (i.e., a person doesn™t usually tell the same confidential story to the same person more than once). Hence, stories travel along trails. Neither infections nor stories necessarily travel via the shortest paths to each node. Consequently, for those processes, the expected distance travelled by something flowing through the network is not equal to geodesic distance, and it would make sense to substitute this other expected distance in the equations.   
For simplicity of exposition, this paper has assumed undirected simple graphs with non-valued edges. The extension to directed graphs is straightforward, but the extension to valued edges will require some development. An exception is the class of fragmentation measures, which generalize nicely along the lines of minimum weight cutsets, losing only the computational shortcuts available with non-valued data. The distance-based metrics will require different generalizations depending on the kinds of values, which could range from distances to capacities to probabilities of transmission. Multiple relations, recorded as separate graphs with a common node set, might be handled by summing the success criterion across all relations.   
Finally, it may be of interest in the future to incorporate actor attributes. In the military context, com-munication among actors with redundant skills may sometimes be less important than communication between actors with complementary skills. In the public health context, it is helpful in slowing epidemics to minimize mixing of different populations (such as when married women are linked to commercial sex workers via their husbands). Hence, an additional criteria we would want to consider in fragmenting a network is maximizing separation of actors with certain attributes.   
References  
Borgatti, S.P. 2002. Stopping terrorist networks: Can social network analysis really contribute? Sunbelt International Social Networks Conference. 13-17 February. New Orleans.   
Everett, M. G., & Borgatti, S. P. 1999. The centrality of groups and classes. Journal of Mathematical Sociology. 23(3): 181-201  
Glover F., 1986, Future paths for integer programming and links to artificial intelligence, Computers and Operations Research, 5: 533-549.  
Holland, J. 1975. Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems. University of Michigan Press.   
Kernighan, B.W., and Lin, S. 1970. Efficient heuristic procedure for partitioning graphs. Bell Systems Technical Journal. 49(2): 291-297.  
 
Krebs, V. 2002. Uncloaking terrorist networks. First Monday 7(4): April. http://www.firstmonday.dk/issues/issue7_4/krebs/index.html  
Metropolis,N., A. Rosenbluth, M. Rosenbluth, A. Teller, E. Teller. 1953. Equation of state calculations by fast computing machines", J. Chem. Phys.,21, 6, 1087-1092.  
Weeks, M.R., Clair, S., Borgatti, S.P., Radda, K., and Schensul, J.J. 2002. Social networks of drug users in high risk sites: Finding the connections. AIDS and Behavior 6(2): 193-206. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Balancing Efficiency and Vulnerability in Social Networks  Elisa Jayne Bienenstock University of California, Irvine Phillip Bonacich University of California, Los Angeles   
Abstract  
Network centrality is thought to be crucial for the efficient distribution of information or resources through a social network. Inherent to this structure, the flow of information in high-centrality networks can be easily undermined.  By introducing two concepts, network efficiency and vulnerability, we show that efficiency is compromised more in networks characterized by high degree centralization when degree and betweenness centrality are not distinct than in other networks, following the removal of network positions. Vulnerability is the loss in efficiency resulting from the elimination of nodes.  The resiliency of a network was then assessed following progressive removal of nodes and all adjacent nodes. Nodes were removed in two ways: 1) randomly, which modeled incidental vulnerability; or, 2) based on the calculated centrality measures, which modeled vulnerability to a strategic attack.  Our findings highlight the social impact of removing a person from a network, which is likely to disable, or make inactive, all direct ties to that individual. Such network analyses can be used to undermine or fortify existing network structures necessary for law enforcement and those concerned with national security.  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 2 
Introduction  Social networks can be generally defined as a group of inter-connected individuals. The patterns of exchange of information or resources from person to person varies dependent on the inherent structure of the network. One simple network can be modeled as a pinwheel structure: each person, e.g., node, is connected to a common tie, which is the individual occupying the hub, or center, of the network (Fig. 1a). This structure has been shown to facilitate the flow of communication, since information from any location requires only two steps to saturate the network. If, however, the center node is removed the entire network collapses as the nodes occupying the periphery of this structure become isolated. As such, the pinwheel network is both very efficient and highly vulnerable as it is easily penetrated from an outside attack. The stability of a network is, therefore, dependent on its organization and ability to withstand such an attack.  
Initial research found that networks with one, or several, central nodes were more efficient than networks in which the number of connections between nodes was more evenly dispersed (Bavelas, 1950). Freeman (1978) distinguished three conceptually different types of individual centrality: degree, betweenness and closeness, together with their corresponding system-wide, measure of the dispersion of the centrality, or centralization (Freeman, 1978:228). Degree is number of connections: a node with high degree has many connections. A network with high degree centralization is likely to have a few nodes with many ties and many nodes with few ties, such as the hub in a pinwheel structure. Betweenness measures the frequency with which a node is located on a path between other nodes: a node with high betweenness is in a position to act as either a bridge or a bottleneck. A network with high betweenness centralization is likely to have a few nodes that act as bridges. Closeness measures the degree to which a node is close to other nodes in the network. Centrality measures have been shown to be indicators of prestige or importance among actors in networks. Similarly, centralization has been associated with efficiency.     
In another study (Cook, 1983), it was shown that, for tasks other than communication, centrality measures are not good indicators of who has power in the network. While local centrality measures predicts which individuals in a network have more control of the flow of information, and global centrality measures are good predictors of overall efficiency, this study (Cook, 1983) showed that in exchange networks, where the value of the commodity exchanged is lost to the person who relinquishes it, centrality measures do not predict who will have power to control resources. As an alternative to traditional centrality measures, this study (Cook, 1983) employed a vulnerability measure known as point vulnerability which measures the reduction in maximum resource flow (RMF) to the network that results when each position is removed. In an exchange network each individual adds value to the total value possible for the network, the network is vulnerable from the removal of an individual to the degree that value is lost to the network. This concept, point vulnerability did not do any better than centrality, ultimately, as a measure of power in exchange networks, so development of this measure was abandoned (Markovsky et al., 1988). Application of network methods to criminal and terrorists activity suggests that vulnerability may be an important and under-utilized network measure.    Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 3A recent report suggested that high degree centrality networks were both efficient and invulnerable to random attacks when compared to random networks (Barabasi 2002).  This finding is in part a function of the definition used to define attack as the removal of one node from the network. Consider the pinwheel (Fig 1a). The only node essential for the functioning of the network is the central node and that node has only a 1/9 chance of being selected. The odds are good that the network can withstand a random attack. However, this report also notes that these networks are very susceptible to strategic attacks. If the network structure is known and centrality measures are calculated, then critical nodes are easily identified.   In this paper, we examine which network properties are required to design networks that are both efficient and resilient by comparing of networks based on the following four prototypes: random, scale-free, lattice and bipartite. We show that lattice structures and bipartite graphs that include a small proportion of random ties are the best at achieving enduring efficiency. While scale-free, high centrality networks do well when compared to random networks, they do not do well when compared with these other structures. We also expanded the scope of vulnerability, defining vulnerability as the removal of a node and all adjacent nodes. This models the likely effect of the removal of a node in a social network. When this more stringent type of vulnerability is considered the rewired lattice and rewired bipartite networks do well.  
        a.         b.         c.  
Figure 1.  A pinwheel, lattice, and bipartite graph.   
 
Methods   
Efficiency is defined as:        
 
 E is the ﬁefficiencyﬂ of a communications network; dij is the distance between vertices i and j. Shorter distances imply more effective communication and more efficient networks. When a network consists of more than one component such that i and j are not connected, dij is undefined. The reciprocal of the distance between nodes is zero for vertices in separate components and approaches one as the distance between two nodes diminishes.  The denominator creates a measure that varies from zero to one where one is complete connectivity, Ednnijjinin=->=111/()Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 4all nodes are directly connected to all other nodes, and zero indicates the dissolution of the network into separate components.   
 Vulnerability (EA ) is a measure of the average decrease in efficiency of the network after attack and takes into account the entire history of the attack and the rapidity of the decline.   
Let E1, E2,–,EK  be the efficiency the network after the elimination of 1, 2,  up to K nodes. EA measures the average loss of efficiency during K attacks so that networks with a more rapid decline will have higher EA scores.  Efficiency and the reduction in efficiency were compared for ten networks of each type. The reduction in efficiency resulting from random attacks, attacks aimed against individuals with high betweenness centrality and attacks aimed against individuals with high degree were was calculated for each network. Table 1 summarizes the measures calculated for each network and compared in the analysis that follows.   
  Table 1. Measures compared: Efficiency, reduction in efficiency and centralization.  
E Initial efficiency.  The range is from 0 to 1. ER Recalculated efficiency after K attacks on randomly selected nodes.  The range is from 0 to K.  EB Recalculated efficiency after K attacks on nodes with highest betweenness centrality.  The range is from 0 to K. ED Recalculated efficiency after K attacks on nodes with highest degree centrality The range is from 0 to K. CB Betweenness centralization.  The range is from 0 to 1. CD Degree centralization.  The range is from 0 to 1.  
Networks   
 Four network structures were compared. Networks were the same with respect to size (N=100) and density (density = 4).  
Random networks. Random networks serve as a baseline and have desirable properties of the own in terms of efficiency and vulnerability.  Distances between vertices are short and they are decentralized and thus relatively invulnerable.  To guarantee the connectedness of the network a circle frame network was imposed on 100 modes and 100 additional connections were randomly assigned.  
Scale-free networks.  Scale-free networks are networks characterized by having hubs (Fig 1a). Therefore, we predicted high degree centralization. Beginning with a small random network of ninety-five, additional positions with initial degree 2 were added using the scale-free algorithm; AiiKEEK==1Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 5the probability that a new node would connect to an existing node was proportional to the degree of the existing node.   
Lattice networks.  A ten by ten lattice network on a torus was created using the Von Neumann definition of neighbors (Fig 1b). As counterpoint to the scale-free network, lattice degree and betweenness centralization are zero. We also investigated a lattice that was rewired so that forty connections from the lattice network were replaced with randomly chosen connections, modeling a small world network (Watts, 1999).  Since a lattice is not an efficient structure, but it is very resistant to attack, we predicted a rewired lattice to be more efficient then the lattice with no random connections (Watts, 1999).  We hypothesized that this increase in efficiency would not undermine its resistance to attack in standard two-dimensional lattice. Lastly, we investigated the efficiency and resilience of three-dimensional lattices.   
Bipartite networks.  Bipartite networks were included because they modeled a structure that resembled real world criminal network structures. The network was composed of two types of actors. Actors can only be connected to members of the other class (Fig 1c). We were interested in a network that modeled a hierarchy where one class represented group leaders and the other the soldiers. The sizes of the two classes were twenty and eighty. Bipartite networks differ from actual criminal network insofar as in real networks members of the leadership are often directly connected. For that reason, bipartite network are likely less vulnerable than real life networks. In addition to strict bipartite networks we investigated bipartite networks that included some randomness. Forty edges from a bipartite network were randomly eliminated and replaced with 40 connections between positions in the larger class.  We expected this to increase efficiency. To ensure networks were connected each of the eighty vertices in the larger class was randomly connected to one of the vertices in the smaller class and 120 additional randomly chosen edges were then added.  
Results  
Node Vulnerability  
A comparison of the loss in efficiency for the random, scale free, rewired bipartite and rewired lattice structures to removal one node from the network, for five consecutive attacks confirm results of prior research that scale free networks are better than random networks at resisting random attacks, but they do not do better then a rewired bipartite graph structure. Values in table 2 and the error bars in Figure 2 indicate that scale free networks are the least resistant to strategic attacks that target nodes based on degree or betweenness centrality.    Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 6Table 2. Average Initial Efficiencies and Efficiencies Averaged over five attacks for ten networks of each type.    
  Average Efficiency during 5 Attacks Criteria for Target Selection  Initial Efficiency  Random High Betweenness  High Degree Random 0.329 0.306 0.165 0.167 Scale-free 0.370 0.346 0.037 0.041 Bipartite Rewired 0.373 0.349 0.155 0.145 2D Lattice Rewired 0.307 0.286 0.181 0.179 ]RandomSScale FreeHBipartite RewiredXLattice RewirednetworkError Bars show 95.0% Cl of MeanRandomBetweennessDegreeAttack Type0.100.200.30Average Efficiency]SHX]SHX]SHX Figure 2. Average Efficiency during random, betweenness and degree based attacks for four network types.   
Node Vulnerability vs. Neighborhood Vulnerability  The removal of a node from a graph is only the first step toward modeling the effect of the removal of an individual from a social network. The nature of human interaction is such that when one person is removed from a network, others, especially those who are directly connected to that person, are also affected. When considering the effect of the removal of an individual on network efficiency a model that focuses only on an isolated individual underestimates the impact that the loss a key person can have on a network. For example, in a criminal network, the arrest of one individual could result in a lull in the criminal activity simply because those connected to the arrested individual are alerted to the possibility that they may be under surveillance. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 7Alternatively, one network member™s ability to function may be contingent on the presences of another, for example when there is a division of labor in an organization. In this case the removal of one network member can incapacitate many.  To expand the scope of vulnerability accordingly we define vulnerability as the removal of a node and all adjacent nodes.  
 The following simulation illustrates the effect on network efficiency when vertices and their neighbors are eliminated by attacks rather than when vertices alone are eliminated.  Random networks of size 15 with different average degrees were created and attacked either by eliminating the most central (betweenness) position or by eliminating the most central position plus its neighbors.  Each cell table 3 is based on 10 simulations.   
Table 3.  Average degree and efficiency in random networks when position or position plus its neighbors eliminated.   Average degree Efficiency Nodal attack Neighborhood attack 3 .534 .456 .249 4 .607 .520 .252 5 .663 .571 .199 6 .707 .612 .268 7 .750 .648 .191 8 .786 .683 .120  These results indicate that nodal vulnerability differs from neighborhood vulnerability. Depending on the research question the implications for vulnerability are different for different measures. As degree, or connectivity of the average node increases and high betweenness nodes are targeted the decrease in efficiency is minor. In fact, just as efficiency increases with degree so does efficiency in spite of nodal attack. However, if neighborhoods are implicated along with the node the opposite is true. As average degree increases network efficiency decreases. This is not only because more people are removed from the network, but also because there is an increasing likelihood that a random person will be connected to a person with higher degree centrality. The implication is that cells of criminal activity, connected by a few individuals with high betweenness are very vulnerable to the discovery of these individuals.   
Centralization  For each structure type, ten networks were generated, each network containing 100 vertices with an average degree of 4 (200 edges).  When networks were rewired (the bipartite and lattice networks), the number of rewired edges was 40. The maximum number of attacks was 5. An attack is the removal of a node along with all adjacent nodes. Criteria for node selection were 1) random, 2) high degree centrality, or 3) high betweenness centrality.   For most networks, there was no difference between betweenness and degree centralization. This is, in part, because for most networks betweenness and degree were highly correlated, as high betweenness is a function of high degree centrality. Networks in which these two centrality measures were not synonymous were likely to be most capable of balancing Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 8 Network Initial Efficiency Betweenness Centralization Degree Centralization 0.331 0.265 0.095 Random  0.000 0.020 0.006 0.357 0.613 0.345 Scale Free  0.002 0.019 0.023 0.341 0.639 0.215 Bipartite  0.001 0.038 0.008 0.373 0.449 0.196 Bipartite Rewired 0.001 0.026 0.009 0.258 0.000 0.000 Lattice  0.000 0.000 0.000 0.307 0.238 0.048 Lattice Rewired 0.001 0.014 0.003 efficiency and invulnerability. For example, when correlations of nodal degree and betweenness were compared for three rewired-lattice networks, the correlations were 0.785, 0.729, and 0.753; for three scale-free networks the correlations were 0.943, 0.973, and 0.957.  
 Average values for initial efficiency, betweenness centralization and degree centralization for ten simulations runs for each type of network are presented in Table 4. The standard errors were small, so even small differences were significant. There was a relationship between centralization and efficiency: efficiency was related centralization as structures with high centrality also had high values for efficiency.  The scale-free network, which is highest in both types of centralization, did not have the highest initial efficiency. Rather, the rewired bipartite graph had the highest initial efficiency score. Table 5 presents correlation coefficients for initial efficiency by betweenness and degree centralization.   
Table 4. Initial efficiency, betweenness centralization and degree centralization with standard errors for six network structures.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 5. Correlation of Initial efficiency, betweenness centralization and degree centralization for six network structures.    Initial Efficiency Betweenness Centralization Degree Centralization Initial Efficiency 1.000 0.751* 0.740* Betweenness Centralization 0.751* 1.000 0.921** Degree Centralization 0.740* 0.921** 1.000 *Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed) **Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed)  
 Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 9    Average Efficiency during 5 Attacks Criteria for Target Selection Network Initial Efficiency Random Betweenness  Degree Random 0.331 .238 .166 .165   0.000 0.016 0.008 0.009 Scale Free 0.357 .234 .058 .057   0.002 0.034 0.014 0.013 Bipartite 0.341 .207 .132 .138   0.001 0.021 0.008 0.020 0.373 0.220 0.146 0.146 Bipartite Rewired 0.001 0.018 0.007 0.009 Lattice  0.258 .186 .187 .205   0.000 0.003 0.000 0.000 0.307 0.222 .182 .184 Lattice Rewired 0.001 0.006 0.006 0.006  Neighborhood Vulnerability to Attacks To be invulnerable to attacks, networks must be able to sustain successive attacks and still remain a network. In others words the network should not disintegrate into many components. A network should also be able to continue functioning. Table 6 presents data from ten runs of six network types. Each network was subject to a five hits of three types. After each hit the efficiency of the remaining network was computed and averaged for all attacks (EA). Values for random attacks, attacks based on degree centrality and attacks based on betweenness centrality are compared. Table 6. Efficiency and average reduction in efficiency due to random and selective attacks based on betweenness and degree centrality by network type.     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Scale-free networks are initially efficient, as are rewired bipartite graphs. The scale-free network is also more resistant than most other structures to random attacks (Figure 3) although again, not as resistant as random networks or the rewired lattices. The distinction between these structures becomes salient when strategic attacks are considered (Figure 4). Scale-free networks are the least resistant of all networks to strategic attacks. Adding random connections to the lattice and bipartite networks increases efficiency without sacrificing resilience. In fact the rewired bipartite network has higher efficiency after any type of attack then its rigidly structured counterpart. Graphs for degree vulnerability are not plotted since they do not differ significantly from the values for betweenness vulnerability.   
 
 
 
 
 
 Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Loss of Efficiency resulting from 5 random hits.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Loss of Efficiency resulting from 5 hits targeted at nodes with high betweenness.  00.050.10.150.20.250.30.350.4EfficiencyAttack 1Attack 2Attack 3Attack 4Attack 5Number of Attacks (K)EfficiencyRandomScale FreeBipartiteBipartiteRLattice2Lattice2R00.050.10.150.20.250.30.350.4EfficiencyAttack 1Attack 2Attack 3Attack 4Attack 5Number of Attacks (K)EfficiencyRandomScale FreeBipartiteBipartite-RLattice2Lattice2R Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 11Finally, the data clearly demonstrate that using centrality measures to select targets to weaken networks is beneficial. Table 5 presents the differences between measures of efficiency after attacks on targets chosen randomly or based on betweenness centrality. All but two values are positive indicating that efficiency levels after each attack are higher when the target is chosen randomly than when it is chosen strategically. In the two instances where this is not the case the values are nearly zero. Table 7. Differences in efficiency between random and selective attacks by network structure          Scale Free Rewired Bipartite Rewired Lattice 0 0.000 0.000 -0.001 1 0.045 -0.003 0.063 2 0.139 0.007 0.089 3 0.135 0.010 0.102 4 0.125 0.017 0.106 5 0.095 0.022 0.106 Conclusion Insights from social network analysis may assist those who design networks in constructing structures that maximize communication yet minimize vulnerability. Designers of networks that may come under attack face two dilemmas. First, centralized networks are very efficient but also vulnerable to selective attacks on their most central members.  Second, a high density of connections leads to shorter communication paths and less dependence on particular members but to ensure resistance to attack network members must be separated from one another so an attack on one member does not unravel the entire network. This paper explores classes of networks, random, scale-free, bipartite, and small-world, to explore what properties of networks obviate these dilemmas. The focus of this paper was on the resistance of networks to random attacks and attacks aimed at positions of high centrality. Future work will expand this to test network resilience to attacks based on other criteria. For example, selecting targets based on point vulnerability rather than centrality may prove detrimental to other structures.  This research provides insight into the relationship between network structure in terms of centrality, density, efficiency and vulnerability. Future work will test the robustness of these results by expanding the model and the analysis to include larger networks of varying densities. Understanding the relationship of standard network measure to efficiency and vulnerability is a first step toward designing organizational networks that maximize both efficiency and resistance to attack. This will allow researchers and analyst a systematic way to evaluate existing networks to uncover vulnerabilities.  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 12 References Barabasi, A. 2002. Linked: The New Science of Networks. Perseus Publishing. Cambridge. Bavelas, A. 1950. ﬁCommunication Patterns in Task-Oriented Groups.ﬂ The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 22 6: 725-730.  Cook, K. S., R,M. Emerson, M.R. Gillmore, and T. Yamagishi. 1983. ﬁThe Distribution of Power in Exchange Networks: Theory and Experimental Results.ﬂ American Journal of Sociology 89:275-305.   Freeman, L., 1978. ﬁCentrality in Social Networks: Conceptual Clarification.ﬂ Social Networks 1:215-239. Markovsky, B., D. Willer, and T. Patton. 1988. ﬁPower Relations in Exchange Networks.ﬂ American Sociological Review 53: 220-236.  Watts, D.J. Small Worlds: The Dynamics of Networks between Order and Randomness. Princeton University Press. New Jersey.    
 
 
 
 
 
  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2ˇ#8'$'*%DP.;"!DG,˜RQS2UT2ˇ˜"#&585&#&+fe=1hgi#8P"Ph),@"%je -:5&5rqs36Ph),!D3X'*),!$#&-:%HK;"!D!D3^NKt0#&585uQ\vCwz_\[?[,†\[,Zz{]˚ ˜.!D#&%('*),%0‡S3658),;.'*%$),%*…˚F36!D@"-:G,#&-BHI-:5&58),@—JL@"#–M,-:!D%D#–'ON2ˇ#8'D'D%DP";.!DG,˜ƒQS2hTya}⁄{−0‰.„$“(”o‘•’‚“§uŸ}ﬂŠłLØXÙ6ÙŽuí¼óuûŁó˝˛˝˝˛˝˝˛˝˝ƒó,+.-R÷Dñ(ûŁóŁ÷10hóŁî¯óOñ›ô¨ìpôlú)4Ëóuòlî5-56$óŁû7uòlîRÿUúhÿ7<+)/=+šôlú$ðÿ8>7˝ûŠòlóuõ$˙BADî$˙Łú$û,D.òlì:ó)Eî:FŁóŁî¯îlñ›ôlí¼õþäôló,GH/ŁíïóŁûŁóK+LDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.L'wDwL'•LLwł€£•¥LqDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ˆˇ˝˙˛ˇ˜˚! #"LDłR,+-˙łD•D¥L}˚R/10043.50LDwD€£RLD£LSRabQTzp•ZT[TwDL'ws DV"'*,354Z]$'&54#$'"9Ÿ^0V04`b`eded—$'&54#$'"Ab%Łnf]Rg74h`004i00`Sj`000p009 wDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.010203040506070809005101520Wall clock running time (Minutes)Millions of edgesRI Approx. - 32 Trials.15% Exact-on-sampleANF-0 - 32 TrialsANF - 32 TrialsANF-C - 32 TrialsL04i$0``70*0l('00\^`0V`00aWcW9HEY?YP>L#"\łwłL1\£q€#•D˚ˇ˘˜!#"%$&('*),+˝-/.0-%12+˝34$9)ˇ65b+8f˛76]+˝7L#"9$'"4$9)/b_fA@?^)%.B@#"0CłDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LÃµﬂŠ¥FıºµıDŽ¨ž(ﬁ¨œšŒ^§uœ£¦:łÃµª•¥À±6ı(ﬁµ¦Š¶\Á:ı(ﬁ¨§¨œ¾ž›ıDŽÃµª•¥À±6ı(ﬁs¦‚¶\ıD©^€‚ıDŽ˜º¤œ¾ﬂŠ¥Fı›§uı(ﬁr¦Š¶.§¨Ÿ}ıˇ€‚ﬁŁﬂŠŒ•Ÿ !"#$Ãµª•¥À±6ı(ﬁs¦‚¶\Œ}ﬂ‚ﬁuﬂ‚¡£¡šı(¡Eﬂ‚Œ•Œ•ﬁu¦*Î^œ£¥‹ﬂo§uœ£¦:ł}Ž%0Bo>,+?E1N9EIJr>.-YP/-P>˜TX>HE?213Rb_fFT˝f55476?Ÿ@98+8f˛899b&fA@5fT7;<4%0'&>=?)Bo>cP(Tm?/-CF>HE@+W˝E@+1N,EIJr>/-P>˜TC1RabQT˝f5D4E6=b_fA@˚f`Ÿ0?F8+8fA@,8+8f˛899b&fA@5fT7;G4IHRabQT˝f5KJMLONOP3Rab&fFT.1#"4$9)˚Q@PN9EIJ4>SRSQ<RT%0'&0TU)Bo>#"S+?cPT˛AY?WVNXR?/-CF>@HSE@+N9EIJ4>YRZA@P>˜TC13RF[`bzf5D4E6?Ÿ@98MRf˛89<;>=9b&fA@˚f\:T7;G4]1=EYPYP3Rab&fFT˝53RF[`b6f.1%0'&_^`)Bo>#"CF>HE@+ˆW˝E@+N9EIJ4>a+EbQN9EIJr>EbRYPYH>cA@P>˜T>RM[`bQT-f(fAf55476=b&fA@˚fgŸ?<8MQ(fA@,8SRf˛89<;>=/b_fA@˚f\:TE;<4RM[`bQT-f(fAf5JLONed3RF[`b_fFT-fzf.1=EYPYP(RbQT˝5RM[`b6f.1"R'bQT6RˆbQTo ˇ˙ˇ˚L'¥#¥#¥)%.C+M˙+)˚1R[bRab'f]R_jLRr45R;De:;$9)+M˙U+)˚#",jDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.!#"!'.0'1ˆRLRbL4+4G4+4F474ab"aeRbq1fbL"LRjNqeR"%$'-/.13!&CjLj[qjLR5j[qeRRabq1fRbLRabQTTQqeRUTL˙5$]˚SRbQT C"j˚j2b˚?3Rab&fFTDT˝RabQT?2?.j2b1jbQTRb_Rab884Lł!j˝˙ł1\L˜˚žf]R4 CLjjłj:,.#4]3Rab&fFT"!$#EY?łRLRL[\'&Ls R2TL˙5$9B4 #"wDL'wDL€Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ç‚ç!Ñ:ÖÄ.³Ñ:Öž›¦:ł}ž(ﬂŠ§¨ı$ł}ﬂo§uœ£¦:łL¦‚¶$±•œ£§¨¥‹ﬂ‚Ž¨¿^Žı$ﬂ:žŁŸL¬rœ£§¨Ÿ‹Ñ–±•œ¼§lÖ›ÖÄ.³ˇ˘Ä.³ı$ﬂ:žŁŸ0ł•¦^©^ıiºˇ³Ñˆ˘XÖÑ˙˘DÖç‚ç˛˝sŒ,©•ﬂo§uıÑ˙˘Ä.³ı$ﬂ:žŁŸ0ı$©•€‚ıÍÑ˜˚•Öƒºˇ³Ñ˙˘6ÖÑˆ˘XÖU®lÂƒ°n®!Ñˆ˘Ä.³ı$ﬂ:žŁŸ0ł•¦^©^ıiºˇ³#"$&%Ñˆ˘XÖèÑ8Ò&'¨Ö¬rŸ•ı(ﬁuıˇ.0/(ı$ﬁ¨¦F±•œ£§uŽœ£ł=§uŸ•ı$"%Ñ1˘6ÖJﬂŠ¡š¡,Î"$2%Ñ˙˘6Ö#"j¡ppL'Ls R£s Rg~L'•s R34˛576ˇ98:5;5?>ˇA@ˇ˛>CB9Dˇ5‚b+8f˛7+56‡}DfLfFEFEFE]L;7[RF[`b(f3RM[`bHGRbQT3RabHG&fFT.RbQT9 3RabHG&fFT˜R[b(f3R[bHG\I#"%$J˜KMLONQPRL˜S:-/.~]GTZTLbHG&fFTLT(.#EbHG&f556-G;Go*,"_G;^bHG&fFT`GTTLaGb^bHc,fFTLdGn)%.ec£Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ÑÑ*Ö"$2%ÑDÖÑuÒ‚Ö"$&%Ñ˙,:ÖX²^²Ò,•²Ò^²ÒÒ,•²Ò^²Ò,X²^²Ò,•²Ò^²ÒwC-=K^bHG&f56-G;GF8+…\Tkƒ^bHG&fFT˝5^bHG_fFTLG<8+…˜\HG&fc^bHG_fFT˝f˝5^bHG_fFT˝f^bHc9fFTLf^bHG_fFT˝f]R^bHG_fFTj2b˚:;.#48]vfM]]\.#Ej2b˚0C¥#"9$'"]^bHG_fFT—bHG&fFTL,9Lq[˙\j#"K|ENW[$6$/HeˇF$'-/)AqL CbG˜˝*;)L*,"ł#"^bHG&fFT—bHG&fFT¥~OZ$„&5.ŠbHG_fFT]^30&w5w¡}˚Rˇ˘˙ˆ˛˝ŠbHG_fbGKM3w˜ˆ˛˝•Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Ä.³®lÄ˛"èÂrÇÃ#Ñ6Öž(¦‚ł}ž$ﬂo§¨ı$ł}ﬂo§uœ£¦:ł0¦‚¶$±•œ£§¨¥‹ﬂ‚Ž¨¿^Žrı$ﬂ:žŁŸ¬rœ£§¨Ÿ‹ÑÆ±}œ¼§lÖ(ÖÄ.³ˇ˘Ä.³ı$ﬂ:žŁŸ0ł•¦^©^ıiºˇ³Ñ6Ö#Ñ6ÖÄ.³ı$ﬂ:žŁŸ0ı$©•€‚ıÍÑ˜˚•Öƒºˇ³#Ñ6ÖèÑ#Ñ,Ö0!R®lÂƒ°n®!ÑÄ.³ı$ﬂ:žŁŸ0ł•¦^©^ıiºˇ³"$&%Ñˆ˘ˇÖèÑ8ÒuÖ(ˇ.(ı(ﬁu¦ ±•œ¼§sœšł=§¨Ÿ•ı$"%Ñ1˘ˇÖJ"$&%Ñˆ˘ˇÖłTLTL—bqVfLfi*,"a—bLfLfˆ˛˝—bqVfLfˆ˛˝—bwfL35.˚&5$'"Lw3RbqVfL"qVfLfL5£#£5wqf]Rł—bHG&fFTŠbHc,fFTLŠbHc,fFT?HG—bHG&fFTˆˇcﬂ;>=9bHc5f[)%.>˙5.1:,&—bHc9fFTLTQ[DIaGS8FQ?GS8+6RXKM3?c>J<Q[RLT5^bHG&f˚6O;6*;EG8R<R‰*J3Z"<R^0V04`3RF[`bHGb`[j¡Łnf88łf]Rg74h`004i00`?ˆˇcﬂ;>=]R`000˛˝˚¥Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.^`00?G*,3#"04i$0``70e0l_'00$'"9R^`0V`c3RbHG_fFT˝fI#"!LONQPRLS21:-.UTV?ˆˇGﬂ;>=HG&fc?HGˆˇcﬂ;>=/bHc?ˆˇGﬂ;>=I*,3=)%.2˙#"2˙˚)%.?˚Ÿ…\9U.#E?6ƒ49V.#E?…˜\2.#Eˆˇcﬂ;>=`ƒ42.#E˘ˇcﬂ…\HG&fcfefLƒ?5bHG5?HGFfˆˇcﬂ;>=9bHc5f9V.#E? ?˘ˇcﬂR ?2˙R˘ˇcﬂ? 2˙_q1fR\R˙˚˙#"K W9H>+I>PO )%.?˜F$RI#"1I'-%+B1V3MWLONP˛X[ L}Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.!4ﬂ‚ł}©;.›ÒÄ.³®lÄ˛"èÂrÇÃ#Ñ6Öž(¦‚ł}ž$ﬂo§¨ı$ł}ﬂo§uœ£¦:ł0¦‚¶$±•œ£§¨¥‹ﬂ‚Ž¨¿^Žrı$ﬂ:žŁŸ¬rœ£§¨Ÿ‹ÑÆ±}œ¼§lÖÖ®lÄ˛ mÂrÇÃ#$Ñ#Ñ6Ö¨ÖÃ®¨ç:³Ä.³ˇ˘äºˇ³}ﬁŁŽl§s±}ª}žŁ¿‚ı(§ƒ¦‚¶#ﬂ‚ł}©#ﬂ‚ł}©Ä.³ı$ﬂ:žŁŸ0ı$©•€‚ıÍÑ˜˚•Öƒºˇ³®lÄ#Ñ•ÖRœ¾Žƒł•¦Š§sœšłC¥ ı$¥F¦‚ﬁu¢0ÂrÇÃ°˙ﬂŠœ£§r¶Æ¦‚ﬁrœ£§sœ¼¶~ł•ıDž›ı$ŽuŽuﬂŠﬁu¢Xı$©=±•ª^Ê,ı(ﬁ!®lÄÑ6ÖRœ¾Žƒł•¦Š§sœšłC¥ ı$¥F¦‚ﬁu¢ÍÂrÇÃ°˙ﬂŠœ£§r¶Æ¦‚ﬁrœ£§sœ¼¶~ł•ıDž›ı$ŽuŽuﬂŠﬁu¢!#Ñ6ÖèÑ#Ñ,Öµ³Ñ#ÑpÖh§¨¦Ñ#Ñ,Ö}ﬁŁŽl§s±}ª}žŁ¿‚ı(§ƒ¦‚¶#Ä.³ı$ﬂ:žŁŸ0ł•¦^©^ıiºˇ³®lÄ#Ñ,ÖƒœšŽƒł}¦Š§sœšł=¥Fı$¥ ¦:ﬁ¨¢ÍÂrÇÃ!Ñ,Ö#Ñ,Ö®Ë¶ÂrÇÃ®lÄ#$Ñ#ÑÃ$2%Ñ˙˘"ˇÖèÑ8Ò&'¨Ö$2%Ñ˙˘"ˇÖ¬rŸ}ı(ﬁuı\/$ı(ﬁu¦±}œ¼§ŁŽƒœ£ł=§¨Ÿ}ı$¦‚ª^§uŒ•ª^§"%ÑH˘"ˇÖL'LDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LL'L'L'L'L'L'L'L'L})GaGGaGGGL-FBrGL'L}L}DfL'L'L}#}L'L'L'L}L'L}#}#} 4(˜!*;)9DwLR<5ˇˇ˙˙łLwł"%$P?V'1^&(&(53`00TL˙5$\płs R}DfLs"LLqDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ÑÖÑÖº¤ı(€:ﬁ¨ı$ıﬁŁﬂ‚ž‚²Ã¤ﬂŠ¥Fı©^€‚ıDŽiﬂŠÎ,²ºµœ¾ﬂŠ¥C²·U¦:ﬁ¨ł}ı(¡š¡Ô:«Ó)*:²º¤œ£ﬁ·U¢^ž(¡£ı‚«:«ÒÒ•²˝słX©^œ£ﬁ™4ﬁuœ¾©•«}«Ô:²:Ô˝słX©^œ£ﬁ˝µł•œ£¶Æ¦‚ﬁu¥Ó^«,2*ŠÔ}«‚ÓÒ,}²:ÓÔ˝słX©^œ£ﬁ·U¦:ﬁuﬂ*Ò&*‚Ô&,}«‚ÔÒ•²Óº¤œ£ﬁÔoÅlÒDÓ‚Ó•«}«Ô&,:Ò*ŠÒÒ•²Ó˝słX©^œ£ﬁs¦‚ª^§uı(ﬁÒ‚Ô}«Ô&,}«,‚«2*ŠÔ:²,˝słX©^œ£ﬁ,?@?+*J33Rab&fFT˙LRj2bGŁ:;.#4]^&(&=\Lłs R\(RabQT˝f5JLONOP3Rab&fFT\35.˚&5$'"9D?3Rab&fFT>cO2P-W9X#>^&(&T^300%0`H?>IP>@H0L'¥4@!-/$'3<)iu[$':,:4Lqts R0~L'wDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.02468101214cornellcyclegriduniform80-20corarouterRMS(relative error)Data set1 extra bit3 extra bits5 extra bits7 extra bits9 extra bits€Ÿ\TL˙5$z“˜\I~1@!"%)\€s R0~=L£s R^&(&]^^04$9)RRRbQTR\#D!*J"9Ÿˇ%babQT˝fR’bQT˝f%f5<bfR„f5˝J˚˛ ˜i"!$#&%˘i+˙[\T5‰qeRAš˚*,3!-/$Rabc}<f54+4.RabLf5b4745W[$"!",/.03^(p000;`łRqeR5€ł\LLłDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.€55£^=\5£wqeD€łLq•L£C\ CL}˛D£˛5wqeD€łLq•\£˛DLł˛Lq˛wqeD€ł5Lq•S\wS\LKŒR06$'3=)9R^TZ>cO2PEYN-W9X>ˆBo>eV>H>>>@N)PW-IGYXS?/-UJ4>Wo>N9Jr>@N9PWV9+-•8GRG8j2b86j˚f,;R#=R(R;mR=:aZR;;˛#"?L˛)%.LR65qf;5L}#}˚D=5LB85€•˛*R5q}Df5=585€(;=LDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.051015202530cornellcyclegriduniform80-20corarouterRMS (relative error)Data SetRI Approx. - 32 trialsANF - 32 trials05101520cornellcyclegriduniform80-20corarouterRMS (relative error)Data SetRI Approx. - 64 trialsANF - 64 trials02468101214cornellcyclegriduniform80-20corarouterRMS (relative error)Data SetRI Approx. - 128 trialsANF - 128 trials5wqB5€ł5Lq•00.511.522.533.54cornellcyclegriduniform80-20corarouterWall clock running time (Minutes)Data SetRI Approx. - 32 trialsANF - 32 trials0123456cornellcyclegriduniform80-20corarouterWall clock running time (Minutes)Data SetRI Approx. - 64 trialsANF - 64 trials024681012cornellcyclegriduniform80-20corarouterWall clock running time (Minutes)Data SetRI Approx. - 128 trialsANF - 128 trialswqbG$ﬁfLTL*,06$#D5€ł5Lq•£Ÿ\......
......r
xN nodest nodess nodes0204060801001201400102030405060708090RMS (relative error)Running time (seconds)Exact-on-sample for .1% - 15%ANF using 2 - 256 trials10100100010000100000010203040Time (seconds) in log scaleMillions of edges0.15% Exact-on-sampleANF (32 trials)\bc-‡f\d••£02*,:,:,*;.13($'&54#$'"ŒfiW[$L'€Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.wº4ﬂo§Łﬂ!!RÄKÑÎ•ﬂ:žO§ŁÖ¹µÃµÄ!˝µł•œ¼¶Æ¦:ﬁ¨¥•²,Ò&*ŠÎ·U¦:ﬁuﬂÓ:²‚ÎÔoÅlÒÓ‚Ô}²ŠÓŠÎr¦:ª^§¨ı$ﬁ‚«Ò:²**oÎ^040lwł5€ł€łL}˛!>@H*J"g@5ˇ+)%.£}#}$'&54#$#Ÿ•ŸL.13OZ$9˜pwLZ\LKB5w•\5¡}}#}LLRjqeR\\w•02*,:,:,*;.13ł¥Dł˘ #"•?L'€€wL£Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Ò•²Ò•²,)*Ò^²Ò•²,:Ó6ØÒ^²,‚ÓÒ•²Ò•²,:ÓÒ^²ÅŁ²)*ÅŁ²ÒÅu²2*ÅŁ²ÒÅu²ÒÅŁ²)*ÅŁ²ÒÅu²‚ÓÑ–±XÖƒºµı$¡¼§ŁﬂFœ£¥FŒ6¦‚ﬁ¨§uﬂ‚ł}ž›ı¥=>8@dD˙LWI*,:J:‘35.ﬁW6Lf˘qVfFEFEFE˛8;#">•RbQTTiR’TL˙5$Y$/H˚ˇF.135$'3<)9DBVEW>N)P/V>WDEYN,>@N)P`G-LS>>/VY>>P>HT¥}˛0Cˇ#"%$ˆ-˜KX˙ˆ?KX˙ˆwHwwłłG^)%.L'•Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Ä.œš¡£¥ Å¯Ãs¦:œ£ﬁ¹sł•œš¥‹ﬂo§uœ£¦:ł!^Ÿ•¦‚ﬁ¨§¹µ©•ª•¡¼§!^ž›œ£Å¯Ä\œr¦‚¥‹ﬂŠłXž›ıÂƒŸ•ﬁuœš¡£¡šı(ﬁs¹¤žO§¨œš¦‚ł·U¦:¥ ıD©^¢º¤ﬁuﬂ‚¥‹ﬂLc4$9)R¥06.ﬁ8#$'"I˜eB¥¥łˇ#"!&,˝3.0':-%+V1-%'MS+L4$9)˚Q>j}˚RLL}˚R˝D5D!FD!ˇ#"1I&+.0':+˝'*.1,&.jL'LpL'€L'¥Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.01e+102e+103e+104e+105e+106e+107e+108e+109e+1010K20K30K40K50K60K70K80K90KN(infty) -- Number of reachable pairsNumber of nodes deleted (graph had approx. 285K nodes)(Uniform) random selectionDecreasing individual hop exponentDecreasing node degree01234510K20K30K40K50K60K70K80K90KHop exponentNumber of nodes deleted (graph had approx. 285K nodes)(Uniform) random selectionDecreasing individual hop exponentDecreasing node degreesL'LŸjLR\w00R˙66L)%.00V`0V`£˛€łqˆ}Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5`0`70`0£w[\LK``004i00`[j`000#"9$#R%000l"#"^`[`I0Vi$0``50`040jLwł ˇˇO«•²Ò!,²Rﬁuœ£łFﬂŠłX©h²O«U,}Ñ;O*ŠÖ)*Z*^«‚Ô•²,!Rﬁ¨¦^©^ı$ﬁ$«²sﬂ‚€‚Ÿ}ﬂ*ÁoﬂŠł?«Rﬂ‚ł}©ˇ²˝!(«}ŒXﬂŠ€‚ıDŽrÒ)*,O^ÒŠÓ•«^Ò}²²p·U¦‚Ÿ•ı$łE²>!/O«•Ñ1,:Ö;O}«‚º¤ı$ž›ı$¥À±6ı(ﬁ)*O«^«}Ò}²Ó0·r³?²*¸²äœšł•œšł•€F§¨Ÿ•ıÀł•ı›§l¬R¦‚ﬁu¿ÍÁoﬂŠ¡šª•ıˇ¦Š¶~ž›ªXŽl§u¦‚¥Fı(ﬁŁŽ(²h®¯łUx#.J.0yAzI{2{X|o«}ŒXﬂŠ€‚ıDŽ,OÒ:²qLDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Ô¸²,Ä}ﬂ‚¡£¦:ª^§uŽ¨¦:Ž$«HIG#)ä«}²²•Ä.¡šﬂiﬂŠﬁ¨§¨œšłE²˙O«,˙DÔ:Ò,O•Ò•«‚Ô^²F®iº4²Xtjm&n2o,w?²ä¦‚§¨¦^©•ﬂ}²\¹sł=ﬂŠŒ•ﬁuœš¦‚ﬁuœ¼ÅË±}ﬂ‚Ž¨ı$©‹ﬂ‚¡£€:¦‚ﬁuœ¼§uŸ•¥¶Æﬁu¦‚¥€:ﬁuﬂ‚Œ•ŸL©•ﬂŠ§uﬂ}²~®¯ł^Ò•«•Ò•²DÒ7m3t•²!,²²sﬂ‚€‚Ÿ}ﬂ*ÁoﬂŠł?«!,²sﬂ!²a˝ﬂ‹€:ﬁuﬂ‚Œ•ŸE²r®¯ł_N)H%G^.ˇH%G>_N)@]ˇHIG>_ˇ˘O«XŒ}ﬂ‚€‚ıDŽ;O}²ˇ²X²EœšŒ^§¨¦:łäﬂŠł}©˙ˆ/˛˝˜˚! O«•ŒXﬂŠ€‚ıDŽ0,,O),:Ô}²¸²•ÇÀ²•Ãs¦^©^œšł•ı‚«˙ˆ}²!,²œ¼§¨§¨ı$ﬁ$²?!_N)$#^.0HMy˝P˛&('o«•Œ}ﬂ‚€‚ıDŽƒÒ:Ò‚Ò<O^Ò-,•²$Ó0·¤²ﬂŠ¡š¥Fı(ﬁD«"™ ²E!¸².Ä}ﬂ‚¡£¦:ª^§uŽ¨¦:Ž$«~·¤².Ä}ﬂ‚¡£¦:ª^§uŽ¨¦:Ž$«.ﬂ‚ł}©§¨¦:¡£ı$ﬁuﬂ‚ł}ž›ır¦‚¶,§¨Ÿ•ı¤®¯ł:§uı(ﬁuł•ı›§h§¨¦‚Œ6¦‚¡š¦‚€:¢‚²,®¯ł)˘*# B+˘-'o«Ò:²Z*0·¤²ˇ²ﬂŠ¡š¥Fı(ﬁhﬂ‚ł}©.ˆ!G&"+"+"Š«6Ò}²$ÔÍ™ ²!^ﬂ‚¡¼§u¦‚łäﬂŠł}©¸²1˘32ï²‚Ô&,•²IrmRkmSfIgˇw^²Ò!,²S²"Â\ﬂ‚ª•ﬁu¦}«U·¤²ﬂŠ¡š¥ ı$ﬁ$«S™ ²7!§¨¦:ŒX¦:¡£¦:€‚¢:²\®¯łYG&">"+"Š«,Ò:²q#qDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SESSION IVNetworked Worlds
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Data Mining in Social NetworksDavid Jensen and Jennifer NevilleKnowledge Discovery LaboratoryComputer Science Department, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003{jensen, jneville}@cs.umass.eduAbstract. Several techniques for learning statistical models from relational data have beendeveloped recently by researchers in machine learning and data mining. All of thesetechniques must address a similar set of representational and algorithmic choices and mustface a set of statistical challenges unique to learning from relational data.IntroductionRecent research projects in two closely related areas of computer science Ñ machine learningand data mining Ñ have developed methods for constructing statistical models of network data.Examples of such data include social networks, networks of web pages, complex relationaldatabases, and data on interrelated people, places, things, and events extracted from textdocuments. Such data sets are often called "relational" because the relations among entities arecentral (e.g., acquaintanceship ties between people, links between web pages, or organizationalaffiliations between people and organizations).1These algorithms differ from a substantially older and more established set of data miningalgorithms developed to analyze propositional data. Propositional data are individual records,each of which can be represented as an attribute vector and each of which are assumed to bestatistically independent of any other. For example, a propositional data set for learning medicaldiagnostic rules might represent each patient as a vector of diagnostic test results, and analysiswould assume that knowing the disease of one patient tells you nothing about another patient. Incontrast, analysis of a relational representation of the same data would retract this latterassumption and add information about familial relationships, workplace contacts, and otherrelationships among patients that might influence their medical status.The handful of data mining techniques that have been developed recently for relational datainclude probabilistic relational models (PRMs) (Friedman, Getoor, Koller, and Pfeffer 1999),Bayesian logic programs (BLPs) (Kersting and de Raedt 2000), first-order Bayesian classifiers(Flach and Lachiche 1999), and relational probability trees (RPTs) (Jensen and Neville 2002). Ineach of these cases, both the structure and the parameters of a statistical model can be learneddirectly from data, easing the job of data analysts, and greatly improving the fidelity of the                                                            1 This meaning of "relational" should be distinguished from the more restrictive meaning of "data stored in relational databases."While relational databases can represent relational data, relational data can also be represented and accessed in other ways.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2resulting model. Older techniques include inductive logic programming (ILP) (Muggleton 1992;Dzeroski and Lavrac 2001) and social network analysis (Wasserman and Faust 1994).For example, we have employed relational probability trees (RPTs) to learn models thatpredict the box office success of a movie based on attributes of the movie and related records,including the movie's actors, directors, producers, and the studios that made the movie. We havealso analyzed relational data in other ways to predict fraudulent cell phone use based on thecalling patterns of individual phone numbers. Finally, we have produced models that predict thefunction and location of proteins in a cell based on network of interactions with other proteins.Many of these techniques for relational learning share a common set of statistical challengesand design issues. In this paper, we survey these issues, using examples from our work onPROXIMITY, an integrated system for relational learning, and an algorithm for learning RPTs thatwe have incorporated into PROXIMITY. For each issue, we briefly discuss our design choices inPROXIMITY, and point to alternative approaches used by other systems.We begin by describing a specific data set and an example analysis task Ñ predicting thebox-office receipts of movies Ñ that we use throughout the remainder of the paper. Next, wedescribe some of the basic features of PROXIMITY and our approach to querying data and learningRPTs. The next several sections discuss a set of representational and algorithmic choices facedby techniques for relational learning and a set of statistical issues unique to relational data. Wefinish with some brief conclusions.Example Data and Analysis TaskConsider the relational data shown schematically in Figure 1. The data consist of movies andassociated objects including people (who act in, produce, or direct the movies), organizations(studios), events (releases of the movie), and other objects (awards). These objects are connectedin the ways that you would expect (e.g., actors are linked to movies they act in) and in someoccasionally unexpected ways (e.g., movies are linked directly to other movies that are remakes).In addition to the high-level structure of the database shown in Figure 1, the database containsattributes associated with each object, including the titles and genres of movies, the names andages of persons, and the countries and box-office receipts of movie releases.The data are drawn primarily from a large online resource, the Internet Movie Database(www.imdb.com) that makes its data public for research and other non-commercial purposes. Inaddition, we have added other data drawn from the Hollywood Stock Exchange (www.hsx.com),an artificial market where players trade in stocks that track the relative popularity of movieactors.The data are voluminous, consisting of over 300,000 movies, 650,000 persons, and 11,000studios. Those objects are connected by over 2.3 million acted-in links, 300,000 directed links,and 200,000 produced links. The available data on movies vary widely. For example, not allmovies have releases, and HSX data are only available for a small percentage of actors in IMDb.Data are more complete for more recent movies and persons.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3Figure 1: Example schema for data from the Internet Movie Database.The movie data support a variety of interesting predictive modeling tasks. We have alreadymentioned one Ñ predicting the opening weekend box office receipts of a movie Ñ and we willuse this task as an example throughout the paper. Specifically, we will focus on predicting aprobability distribution over a simple binary attribute of movies Ñ Does the movie make morethan $2 million in its opening weekend? We will call this attribute receipts.We could attempt to build models of other attributes of objects (e.g., a movie's genre or anactor's gender) or attributes of links (e.g, the type of a link between a person and a movie) withPROXIMITY. In addition to these, other types of prediction tasks are certainly possible. One couldattempt to learn models that predict missing links between objects. For example, reviewerssometimes call a movie a "crypto-sequel" when it stars the same actors and has a similar plot lineas another recent movie, but does not explicitly tie the two storylines. For example, the 1998movie "You've Got Mail" starring Tom Hanks and Meg Ryan was said to be a crypto-sequel tothe 1993 movie "Sleepless in Seattle" (as well as a remake of the 1940 movie "Shop Around TheCorner" starring James Stewart and Margaret Sullavan). Given enough examples of crypto-sequels, a data mining algorithm could learn a predictive model from the movie data. Recentwork by Getoor, Friedman, Koller, and Taskar (2001) has created models that predict theexistence of missing links.One could also attempt to learn models that predict an attribute of a subgraph, rather thanonly a single object or link. For example, the emergence of a highly paid Hollywood movie starmay consist of a set of successful movies in which the actor had a starring role and one or moreawards. Models of this pattern would consist of many objects and links, combined in a particulartemporal sequence.In this paper, we will focus almost exclusively on the task of learning probabilitydistributions over the values of attributes of objects and links. While predicting link existenceand classifying subgraphs are extremely interesting problems, the techniques learningDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4probabilistic models for these tasks are much less numerous and much less well-developed thanfor simple attribute modeling.One important input to relational learning algorithms is a schema or interpretation of thedata that specifies a type system over the objects and links in the data. For example, Figure 1above specifies one schema for the movie data, but others are possible. For example, analternative schema might specify people as either actors, directors, or producers. Figure 2provides a hierarchy of possible object types as well as two possible families of schemasconstructed from those object types (a full schema would also specify a set of link types). Such ahierarchy is sometimes called an ontology (Gruber 1993).Figure 2: An example ontology of movie objects.Querying and LearningTo address learning tasks of this kind, our research group is constructing PROXIMITY Ñ a systemfor machine learning and data mining in relational data. The system is designed as a frameworkwithin which a variety of analysis tools can be used in combination. At the foundation ofPROXIMITY is a graph database for storing semi-structured data that can be represented as agraph. The database can be accessed by tools for querying data, sampling data, and calculatingattributes that depend partially or entirely on network structure (e.g., measures drawn from socialnetwork analysis). Sampled data can then be analyzed with tools that construct statistical models.Finally, all these tools can be called from a scripting language interface. In addition to thesecomponents, we are developing additional components for clustering, graph partitioning, andadditional types of statistical modeling.In this paper, we will focus on a relatively simple combination of two tools Ñ our querylanguage and one of our learning algorithms. The query language is a visual language forexpressing queries to the graph database. The learning algorithm constructs relational probabilityDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5trees (RPTs), a type of probabilistic classifier for relational data. The two components work inconcert. The query language is used to extract subgraphs from a large network of data; the RPTalgorithm is used to learn a model that estimates a conditional probability distribution for thevalue of an attribute of a class of objects or links represented in all those subgraphs. Thatestimate is conditioned on the attributes of other objects and links in the subgraph.For example, a query might extract subgraphs consisting of a movie and all directly relatedactors, producers, directors, studios, and awards. An RPT could then be constructed to estimatethe probability that a movie makes more than $2 million in its opening weekend (receipts =True), given attributes of the actors, producers, directors, studios, and awards. Note that differentmovies will have different numbers of related objects such as actors and awards. Thus, thesubgraphs could not be represented directly as simple attribute vectors.Our query language, QGraph, represents queries as graphs with associated attributeconstraints and annotations on vertices and edges (Blau, Immerman, and Jensen 2002). Forexample, Figure 3 shows the query described above with a movie and all its related objects. Thenumeric annotation [1..] on the actor vertex specifies that a match must have one or more actors,and that all associated actors should be returned as part of each matching subgraph. Some objecttypes and link types are left unspecified because of known connectivity constraints in the data.Matches to the query are shown in Figure 4. Actual names of people, studios, and movies are leftout for simplicity. The first match has three actors and no award; the second has four actors andno award, and shares an actor and a studio with the first match; the third match has only a singleactor, but won an award. The fact that entire subgraphs are returned as part of a match is a subtle,yet vital, feature of the language for our purposes. Other languages such as SQL, for example,can only return a single record as a match, not a record of variable size, such as a subgraph.Figure 3: QGraph query for IMDb data.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6Figure 4: Matches to the query in Figure 3.Our learning algorithm for relational probability trees constructs trees such as the one shownin Figure 5. The tree represents a series of questions to ask about any subgraph returned by thecorresponding query. In this tree, the root node asks whether the movie has more than five actorsborn after 1943. If so, the subgraph travels down the left-hand branch to a node asking whetherthe movie at the center of the subgraph is a drama. The subgraph continues moving downappropriate branches of the tree until a leaf node is reached. The leaf nodes contain probabilitydistributions over the values of the receipts attribute. Leaf nodes in Figure 5 shows the numberof movie subgraphs of each class that reach the leaf, as well as their respective probabilities. Theleftmost pair of numbers indicate the number and probability of movies with opening weekendbox office receipts exceeding $2 million (receipts = True). The second numbers indicate theconverse (receipts = False).Figure 5: An example relational probability tree (RPT)Our construction algorithm for RPTs is a recursive partitioning algorithm similar in spirit toCART (Breiman, Friedman, Olshen and Stone 1984), C4.5 (Quinlan 1993), and CHAID (KassDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.71980). However, the RPT algorithm searches over the attributes of different object types in thesubgraph and multiple methods of aggregating the values of those attributes and creating binarysplits on those aggregated values. For example, for a numeric attribute such as birth year, itsearches over splits such as MEAN(birthyr)>x, PROPORTION(birthyr>x)>y, MAXIMUM(birthyr)>y,MINIMUM(birthyr)>x, and COUNT(birthyr>x)>y. Our current approach continues partitioning thetraining data until a stopping criteria is reached. Our current stopping criteria uses a Bonferroni-adjusted chi-square test analogous to that used in CHAID. However, such methods face a varietyof problems due to multiple comparison effects (Jensen and Cohen 2000), and we are exploringthe use of randomization tests (Jensen 1992) to better adjust for such effects.This two-step approach of querying and then learning is necessary because of the semi-structured data model that underlies Proximity. In Proximity's graph database, objects and linksare not created with strong type information. Rather, data about each object or link is stored inzero or more attributes, name-value pairs such as <age, 54> or <genre, comedy>. Even typeinformation (e.g., person or movie) is stored as an ordinary attribute without privledged status.As a result, attributes are not constrained to occur in particular combinations, in contrast to moreconventional relational databases, where a static schema defines both type information and thefields (attributes) corresponding to each entity or relation type. If such structure is needed inProximity, it can be imposed by a QGraph query. The labels in a query (e.g., the "movie","actor", and other labels in Figure 3) are assigned to the matching portions of a subquery andremain on those elements for use by other algorithms such as the RPT construction algorithm.Similarly, we often employ particular schemas (such as the one shown in Figure 1) to aidcommunication, but this is a convenience, not a necessity.This high degree of flexibility imposes a performance penalty for querying. However, suchflexibility is essential for effective machine learning and data mining. First, practical data miningoften involves the creation of many new attributes as a human data analyst tries alternativemethods for understanding and modeling the data. Adding many attributes to a conventionaldatabase would require constant updates to its schema, a costly operation for traditionalrelational databases. Second, a particular schema is just one way of interpreting a given data set,and it can bias analysis in important ways. To enable truly effective data mining, analysts mustbe able to change the schema easily, and thus reconceptualize the domain (Jensen & Neville2002b; Neville & Jensen 2002).Design Choices: Data, Tasks, and ModelsTechniques for relational learning can be better understood by examining them in the context ofa set of design choices and statistical issues. This section describes several decision choices andthe next section covers a small set of unique statistical issues facing relational learningalgorithms.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8Data characteristics! Network size Ñ Raw size is one of the most obvious methods of characterizing a relationaldata set. PROXIMITY has been constructed and evaluated on relatively large networks. Thelargest data set we have analyzed (on wireless phone fraud) contains nearly 2 million objectsand 7 million links. The complete IMDb data set contains over 1.1 million objects and over 3.1million links. These fairly large data sets contrast with the relatively small networks typicallyexamined by work in social network analysis and inductive logic programming.! Connectivity Ñ The degree of connectivity among different portions of the data graph isanother important characteristic of relational data sets. Our work focuses on networksconsisting of a small number of large connected components. In contrast, much of the work inILP and SNA has focused on many small disconnected components, each of which can beconsidered a data instance. For example, some work in ILP has analyzed the relationalstructure of molecules to predict their mutagenicity (Srinivasan, Muggleton, Sternberg, andKing 1996). Each molecule is considered a single instance for purposes of learning. Someother work has focused on forms of relational data in which linkages are formed by space andtime.  However, these types of relations are highly homogeneous (e.g., a square spatial regionis linked to eight adjoining regions), whereas the types of relations we consider can be highlyirregular (e.g., a given movie might have only a few actors or a cast of thousands).! Homogeneity Ñ Many techniques that analyze relational data assume the data consist ofhomogeneous objects. Such networks include sets of web pages, phone numbers, or personswithin an organization. In contrast, several recently developed techniques, including our workon RPTs, can analyze sets of relational data with heterogenous objects, such as movies,people, and studios that make up the IMDb data.Task! Level of relational dependence Ñ The most commonly used modeling techniques frommachine learning, data mining, and statistics analyze independent attribute vectors, thusassuming that relational dependencies are unimportant, or at least beyond the scope ofanalysis. Specialized techniques for spatial and temporal data have been developed thatassume a highly regular type of relational dependence. In contrast, the work discussed hereaddresses relational data sets with potentially irregular relational structure, with variation inthe number and type of links among objects, and these variations are assumed to havesignificance for modeling.! Type of task Ñ Nearly all the algorithms discussed here focus on supervised learning. That is,they attempt to predict the value of some attribute whose true value is known in the data set. Incontrast, some approaches focus on unsupervised learning, where the task is to discern someunknown structure in the data. Clustering algorithms are a form of unsupervised learning, andDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.9similar work has recently been undertaken for relational data (e.g., Taskar, Segal, and Koller2001).! Level of determinism Ñ RPTs, PRMs, and many of the other approaches discussed hereattempt to learn probabilistic models of relational data. However, some techniques arespecially adapted to learning in deterministic domains. For example, such techniques havebeen applied to chess, learning grammars for artificial and natural languages, and inducingcomputer programs from examples. Most work in inductive logic programming is focused ondeterministic domains, though some recent work extends this work into probabilistic domains(Dzeroski and Lavrac 2001).! Locality of inference Ñ PROXIMITY's combination of querying for subgraphs and learningbased on those subgraphs assumes that all relevant relational information is preserved in theportion of the entire data set represented in the subgraph. If important information resides onelements outside the matched subgraph, then the RPT cannot capture it. The subgraph isassumed to represents the relevant "local neighborhood" of an object (e.g., a movie), and moreglobal features of the graph are assumed to be unimportant. A user can choose to alter thequery, thus forming subgraphs with smaller or larger local neighborhoods, depending on theirbeliefs about the size of the relevant neighborhood. Similar locality constraints apply explicitlyor implicitly for most techniques, but the degree of these constraints can vary considerably.Model Representation and Learning! Type of model Ñ To date, we have incorporated modeling algorithms into PROXIMITY thatconstruct conditional or discriminative models. This contrasts with other work focused onconstructing generative models. Generative models define a probability distribution over theentire space of data instances. For example, for the problem of predicting the receipts ofmovies, a generative model would define the probability of all possible movie subgraphs alongwith a probability distribution over possible values of the receipts attribute. In contrast, adiscriminative model defines a probability distribution over the values of receipts, given aparticular subgraph. As with other types of Bayesian network models, PRMs are generativemodels. As with other types of tree-based models, RPTs are discriminative models. Generativemodels have a wider range of uses (such as detecting anomalies in a data set), provide a morecomplete description of the dependencies in a data set, and allow for more robust inference inthe presence of missing data. However, their accuracy on purely discriminative tasks is oftenlower than models explicitly learned for that purpose, and they can be more difficult to learn.! Search over model structures Ñ The RPT learning algorithm searches over a wide range ofpossible structures for the tree and for the attributes included in the tree. In contrast, someapproaches to relational learning, including first-order Bayesian networks, PROXIMITY's ownrelational Bayesian classifer, and other techniques in social network analysis only learn theparameters for a model with fixed structure and attributes.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10! Attribute construction Ñ RPT learning involves a limited form of attribute construction.Aggregate attributes (e.g., average actor age) are constructed and evaluated when constructingthe tree. Some techniques such as ILP offer far more extensive search of such "constructed"attributes, greatly expanding the set of possible models that can be learned (Silverstein andPazzani 1991). Other techniques do no search whatsoever, relying on the existing attributes onobjects and links.! Use of background knowledge Ñ Data analysts often have substantial background knowledgethat can greatly assist model construction. Some techniques can used encoded backgroundknowledge in the learning process. For example, background knowledge in first-order logiccan be used by ILP approaches to improve both efficiency and the quality of induced models.Similarly, prior probability distributions can be used in Bayesian learning techniques. To date,PROXIMITY does not employ any explicit form of background knowledge in its learningalgorithms.Statistical IssuesOur recent work on relational learning has concentrated on the unique challenges of learningprobabilistic models in relational data. Specifically, we are examining how particularcharacteristics of relational data affect the statistical inferences necessary for accurate learning.We have identified three features of relational data Ñ concentrated linkage, degree disparity, andrelational autocorrelation Ñ and shown how they lead to two pathological behaviors in learningalgorithms.To explain more fully, the relevant features of relational data are:! Concentrated linkage Ñ Real relational data sets can show striking non-uniformities in theconcentration of linkage between different types of objects. For example, in our IMDb data,movies are linked to only a single primary studio, and each such studio is typically linked tomany movies. We refer to this as concentrated linkage (Jensen and Neville 2002a). It contrastswith other situations where a smaller number of movies link to a single object (e.g., directors)or where many movies link to many objects of the same type simultaneously (e.g., actors).Figure 6 shows a schematic of the two situations. We have found concentrated linkage inmany relational data sets. Perhaps the best example is publicly traded companies that each linkto a single accounting firm, of which there are only a very small number.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11Figure 6: Concentrated linkage! Degree disparity Ñ Another characteristic that occurs in some relational data sets is degreedisparity. This condition arises when objects of different classes have widely differentdistributions of degree (the number links to objects of a particular type). For example, inIMDb, we found that US-based studios were systematically linked to a larger number ofmovies than foreign studios (p<0.0001). Figure 7 shows degree disparity schematically. Wehave found similar degree disparity in other data sets. For example, the number of ownersdiffers systematically among publicly traded companies in different industries and the numberof hyperlinks differs systematically among different classes of web pages at university websites.Figure 7: Degree disparity! Relational autocorrelation Ñ Autocorrelation is the correlation among values of the sameattribute for related objects. For example, temporal autocorrelation occurs when values of agiven attribute (e.g., stock price) at time t tend to correlate highly with the value of the sameattribute at time t+1. By analogy, we define relational autocorrelation as the correlationamong values of given variable on objects that are nearby in graph space (Jensen and Neville2002a). For example, the box office receipts of a movie tend to be highly correlated with thereceipts of other movies made by the same director (correlation coefficient = 0.65) but not formovies starring the same actors (correlation coefficient = 0.17). Figure 8 showsautocorrelation schematically. We have found many other examples of autocorrelation,including correlation of the fraud status of interconnected wireless phone numbers and topicsof interconnected web pages.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12Figure 8: Relational autocorrelationThese three characteristics of relational data can greatly complicate efforts to construct goodstatistical models. Specifically, they can lead to:! Biased feature selection Ñ Our recent work has shown that high levels of concentratedlinkage and relational autocorrelation can cause data mining algorithms to select models thathave the weakest, rather than the strongest, statistical support from the data (Jensen andNeville 2002a). This pathology occurs because linkage and autocorrelation combine to reducethe effective sample size of the data, thus increasing the variance of statistics used to assess therelatively utility of different components in learned models. Given that learning algorithmsselect the best component among many options, they can often select components with highvariance, but low true utility, thus reducing the overall accuracy of the resulting model.! Spurious correlation Ñ In other work, we demonstrate a pathology associated with buildingmodels that aggregate the values of many objects (e.g., the ages of many actors associated witha movie). This is a common method for simplifying relational data, and it is used in both RPTsand PRMs. When aggregation is used on data with degree disparity, it can lead data miningalgorithms to include completely spurious elements in their models (Type I errors) and tocompletely miss very useful elements (Type II errors) (Jensen and Neville, in preparation).These errors occur with degree disparity because many aggregation functions (e.g., MAXIMUM)will produce apparent correlation between the aggregated values (e.g., maximum moviereceipts) and a class label (e.g., studio location) whenever degree disparity occurs, regardlessof whether movie receipts has any correlation with studio location.Both of these effects show the problems associated with violating the assumption ofindependence among data instances that underlies so many of the techniques common tomachine learning, data mining, and statistical modeling techniques. These results imply that newapproaches are necessary to extend current techniques for data mining to relational data. We aredeveloping one potentially promising class of techniques, based on randomization tests andresampling-based methods. We expect that these computationally intensive statistical procedureswill allow us to adjust for the unique characteristics of a given relational data set, and makeaccurate parameter estimates and hypothesis tests. We are incorporating these approaches intoour algorithm for constructing relational probability trees. We conjecture that similar approacheswill need to be incorporated into all accurate techniques for building statistical models fromrelational data.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.13ConclusionsRecent work in machine learning and data mining has made impressive strides toward learninghighly accurate models of relational data. However, little of this work has made good use ofresearch in other areas, such as social network analysis and statistics. Cross-disciplinary effortsand joint research efforts should be encouraged to promote rapid development and disseminationof useful algorithms and data representations. In particular, this work should focus on the uniquestatistical challenges raised by relational data.ReferencesBlau, H., N. Immerman, and D. Jensen (2002). A Visual Language for Querying and Updating Graphs. University ofMassachusetts Amherst Computer Science Technical Report 2002-037.Breiman, L., J. Friedman, R. Olshen, and C. Stone (1984). Classification and Regression Trees. Belmont, CA:Wadsworth International Group.Dzeroski, S. and N. Lavrac, (Eds.) (2001). Relational Data Mining. Berlin: Springer.Flach, P. and N. Lachiche (1999). 1BC: A first-order Bayesian classifier. Proceedings of the Ninth InternationalWorkshop on Inductive Logic Programming (ILP'99). S. Dzeroski and Peter Flach (Eds.). Springer. 92-103.Friedman, N., L. Getoor, D. Koller, and A. Pfeffer (1999). Learning Probabilistic Relational Models. In IJCAI'99.1300-1309.Getoor, L., N. Friedman, D. Koller, and B. Taskar (2001). Learning probabilistic models of relational structure.Proceedings of the Eighteenth International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML).Gruber, T. (1993). Towards principles for the design of ontologies used for knowledge sharing. Formal Ontology inConceptual Analysis and Knowledge Representation. Kluwer Academic Publishers. N. Guarino and R. Poli(Eds.).Kass, G.V. (1980). An exploratory technique for investigating large quantities of categorical data. Applied Statistics29:119-127.Kersting, K. and Luc De Raedt (2000). Bayesian logic programs. Proceedings of the Work-in-Progress Track at the10th International Conference on Inductive Logic Programming. J. Cussens and A. Frisch (Eds.). 138-155.Jensen, D. (1992). Induction with Randomization Testing. PhD thesis. Washington University. St. Louis, Missouri.Jensen, D. and P. Cohen (2000). Multiple comparisons in induction algorithms. Machine Learning 38: 309-338.Jensen, D. and J. Neville (2002a). Linkage and autocorrelation cause feature selection bias in relational learning.Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Machine Learning.Jensen, D. and J. Neville (2002b). Schemas and models. Proceedings of the Multi-Relational Data MiningWorkshop, 8th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining.Jensen, D. and J. Neville (in preparation). The effect of degree disparity on feature selection in relational learning.Muggleton, S. (Ed.) (1992). Inductive Logic Programming. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.Neville, J. and D. Jensen (2002). Supporting relational knowledge discovery: Lessons in architecture and algorithmdesign. Proceedings of the Data Mining Lessons Learned Workshop, 19th International Conference onMachine Learning.Quinlan, J. R. (1993). C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.Silverstein, G. and Pazzani, M. (1991). Relational cliches: Constraining constructive induction during relationallearning. Proceedings of the Eighth International Workshop on Machine Learning.Srinivasan, A., S. Muggleton, M. Sternberg, R. King (1996). Theories for mutagenicity: A study in first-order andfeature-based induction. Artificial Intelligence 85: 277-299.Taskar, B., E. Segal, and Daphne Koller (2001). Probabilistic classification and clustering in relational data.Proceeding of the 17th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-01). 870-878.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14Wassermann, S. and Faust, K (1994). Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.AcknowledgmentsThis research is supported by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency under contractnumbers F30602-01-2-0566 and F30602-00-2-0597, respectively. The U.S. Government isauthorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for governmental purposes notwithstanding anycopyright notation hereon. The views and conclusions contained herein are those of the authorsand should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies or endorsementseither expressed or implied, of DARPA or the U.S. Government.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RandomModelsforNetworkDataPeterD.DepartmentofStatisticsUniversityofWashingtonSeattle,Washingtonhoff@stat.washington.eduwww.stat.washington.edu/hoffAbstractOneimpedimenttothestatisticalanalysisofnetworkdatahasbeentheyinmodelingthedependenceamongtheobservations.Intheverysimplecaseofbinary(0-1)networkdata,someresearchershaveparameterizednetworkdependenceintermsofexponentialfamilyrepresentations.AccurateparameterestimationforsuchmodelsisquiteandthemostcommonlyusedmodelsoftendisplayatlackofAdditionally,suchmodelsaregenerallylimitedtobinarydata.Incontrast,randommodelshavebeenawidelysuccessfultoolincapturingstatisticaldependenceforavarietyofdatatypes,andallowforprediction,imputation,andhypothesistest-ingwithinageneralregressioncontext.Weproposenovelrandomstructurestocapturenetworkdependence,whichcanalsoprovidegraphicalrepresentationsofnetworkstructureandvariability.1NetworkDependenceNetworkdatatypicallyconsistofasetofnnodesandarelationaltieyi;j,measuredoneachorderedpairofnodesi;j=1;:::;n:Thisframeworkhasmanyapplications,includingthestudyofwar,trade,thebehaviorofepidemics,theinterconnectednessoftheWorldWideWeb,andtelephonecallingpatterns.Itisoftenofinteresttorelateeachnetworkresponseyi;jtoapossiblypair-spvectorvaluedpredictorvariablexi;j.Aframeworkfordoingsoisthegeneralizedlinearmodel(see,forexampleMcCullaghandNelder1983),inwhichtheexpectedvalueoftheresponseismodeledasafunctionofalinearpredictor0xi;j,whereisanunknownvectorofregressioncotstobeestimatedfromthedata.TheordinaryregressionmodelE(yi;j)=0xi;jisperhapsthemostcommonlyusedmodelofthistype.Ageneralizedlinearmodelforbinary(0-1)dataislogisticregression,whichrelatestheexpectationoftheresponsetotheregressionvariableviatherelationg(E[yi;j])=0xi;j,whereg(p)=logp1p.ThisresearchwassupportedbyofNavalResearchgrantN00014-02-1-1011.1Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Asanexampleoftheuseofsuchstatisticalmodels,considertheanalysisofstrongfriendshiptiesamong13boysand14girlsinasixth-gradeclassroom,ascollectedbyHansell(1984).Eachstudentwasaskediftheylikedeachotherstudent\alot",\some",or\notmuch".Astrongfriendshiptieisconsideredpresentifastudentlikesanotherstudent\alot."Alsorecordedisthesexofeachstudent.Thedata,presentedinFigure1,suggestageneralpreferenceforsame-sexfriendshipties.Ofpotentialinterestisstatisticalestimationofthispreference,aswellasaintervalforitsvalue.Oneapproachforsuchstatisticalanalysiswouldbetoformulatethelogisticregressionmodelg(E[yi;jjxi;j;])=0+1xi;j,wherexi;jisoneifchildreniandjareofthesamesex,andzerootherwise,and=(0;1)(a)boygirl(b)Figure1:(a)Sociomatrixforfriendshipdata:Rowsandcolumns1-13areboys,14-27aregirls;(b)Graphicalrepresentationoffriendshipdata:Darkbluelinesarereciprocatedties.areparameterstobeestimated.Estimationofregressioncotstypicallyproceedsundertheassumptionthattheobservationsareconditionallyindependentgivenandthexi;j's.However,thisassumptionisoftenviolatedbymanynetworkdatasets.Forexample,thedataonfriendshiptiesdisplayseveraltypesofdependence:Within-nodedependence:Thenumberoftiessentbyeachstudentvariesconsiderably,rangingfrom0to19withameanof5.8andastandarddeviationof4.7(thestandarddeviationofthenumberoftiesreceivedwas3.2).Thisnodelevelvariabilitysuggeststhatresponsesfromthesameindividualarepositivelydependent,inthattheproba-bilitythatyi;j=1(isendsatietoj),ishighifweknowyi;k=1forlotsofothernodesk,andlowerifyi;kismostlyzero.Moreformally,wemaywishtohaveamodelinwhichPr(yi;j=1jyi;1;:::;yi;j1;yi;j+1;:::;yi;n)isanincreasingfunctionofyi;k;k6=j.Reciprocity:Fordirectedrelations,itisoftenexpectedthatyi;jandyj;iarepositivelydependent.Theclassroomdataexhibitasizabledegreeofreciprocity,inthatthenumberofpairsinwhichyi;j=yj;i=1is24,whichismorethanwewouldexpectduetojustrandomchance:Inonly11of500(2.2%)randompermutationsofthenetworkdata,holdingconstantthenumberoftiessentbyeachstudent,didthenumberof2Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.suchreciprocaldyadsexceed24.Theaveragenumberofreciprocaldyadsinthe500permutationswas17.2.Thissuggestsanappropriatemodelwouldbeonewhichallowedforpositivedependencebetweenyi;jandyj;i.TransitivityandBalance:Inmanysituationsweexpectthattwonodeswithapositiverelationwillrelatesimilarlytoothernodes.Forrelationswhicharepositiveornegative,thishasledtotheconceptof\balance"inwhichapositivevalueforyi;jimpliesyi;kandyj;karelikelytobeofthesamesignforothernodesk.Arelatedconceptistransitivity,inwhichalargevalueofyi;jtogetherwithalargevalueofyj;kimpliesalargevalueofyi;k(seeWassermanandFaust,1994,Chapter6).Theclassroomdataexhibitalargedegreeoftransitivity,inthatthenumberofnon-vacuouslytransitiveorderedtriples(seeWassermanandFaust,page244),is400.In500randompermutationsofthenetworkdata,holdingconstantthenumberoftiessentbyeachstudent,thelargestobservednumberoftransitivetripleswas347.Thisindicatesthedataexhibittlymoretransitivitythanwouldbeexpectedduetojustrandomchanceandnode-levelvariability,andanappropriatemodelshouldallowforsomeformoftransitivedependence.Inthisarticle,wediscussstatisticalregressionmodelswhichcandescribesuchtypesofnetworkdependence.Thisisdonebyincorporatingrandomstructuresinageneral-izedlinearmodelsetting.WediscussparameterestimationforthesemodelsinaBayesianframework,andprovideexamplestatisticalanalysesoftheclassroomdatadescribedaboveandofadatasetonalliancesandamongNewGuineantribes.2NetworkRandomModelsGeneralizedlinearmodels,orglm's,areubiquitoustoolswhichextendlinearregressionmodelstonon-normaldataandtransformablyadditivecovariate(McCullaghandNelder,1983).Astandardglmassumestheexpectationoftheresponsevariableyi;jcanbewrittenasafunctionofalinearpredictor=0xi;j.Assumingobservationsareconditionallyindependentgiventhexi;j'sand,themodelis:Pr(y1;2;:::;yn;n1jX;)=Yi6=jp(yi;jjxi;j;)g(E[yi;jjxi;j;])=i;j=0xi;j:Examplesofglm'sincludeordinarylinearregression,logisticregression,Poissonregression,andquasilikelihoodmethods.Asdiscussedabove,onefeaturethatdistinguishesnetworkdataisthelikelydependenceamongtheyi;j's.Thislackofindependencemakesstandardglmmodelsinappropriate.Inothersettingswhichinvolvedependentdata,acommonapproachtoparameterestimationhasbeenthegeneralizedlinearmodel(McCullochandSearle,2002)inwhichitisassumedthenetworkobservationscanbemodeledasconditionallyindependent,given3Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.appropriaterandomtermswhichcanbeincorporatedintotheglmframework.ThemodelabovebecomesPr(y1;2;:::;yn;n1jX;;)=Yi6=jp(yi;jjxi;j;;i;j)(1)g(E[yi;jjX;;i;j])=i;j=0xi;j+i;j;wherei;jisanunobservedrandomThedistributionofanddependenceamongthei;j'sdeterminesthedependenceamongtheyi;j's.Formanykindsofnetworkdata,wemaywishtoaformforthei;j'sthatinducesthekindsofdependencedescribedabove,suchaswithin-nodedependence,reciprocity,transitivity,andbalance.Asimpleapproachtomodelingthenodevariabilitythatgivesrisetowithin-nodede-pendenceistheuseofrandomintercepts,thatis,toleti;j=ai+bj+i;j,whereaiandbjrepresentindependentlydistributedsender-andreceiver-spSuchadistributionontheai'sandbj'sinducesapositivedependenceamongresponsesinvolvingacommonnode.Typically,thedistributionofthesearetakentobenormaldistributionswithmeansequaltozero,andvariancestobeestimatedfromthedata.Modelingotherformsofnetworkdependenceisnotasstraightforward.Inthecaseofbinarylogisticregression,Raftery,andHandcock(2002)proposeusingalatent-variableapproachasameansofmodelingbalance,transitivity,andreciprocityinnetworkdata.Asappliedtotheglmabove,suchanapproachpresumestheerrori;jcanbewrittenasafunctionfofindependentk-dimensionallatentvariableszi;zj2Rksothati;j=f(zi;zj),i;j=1;:::;n.Thefunctionfischosentobesimpleandtomimictheformsofnetworkdependencedescribedabove.Incorporatingboththerandominterceptsandthezi'sintothemodel,andassumingindependentnormaldistributions,(1)becomesi;j=0xi;j+ai+bj+f(zi;zj)a1;:::;an˘i.i.d.Normal(0,˙2a)b1;:::;bn˘i.i.d.Normal(0,˙2b)z1;:::;zn˘i.i.d.Normal(0,Ik˙2z);where;˙2a;˙2b,and˙2zareparameterstobeestimated,andIkisthekkidentitymatrix.Additionally,iftheresearcherisinterestedinlocalnetworkstructure,itmaybedesirabletoestimateai;bi;ziforeachnode.Itremainstochooseasuitablefunctionf.Oneapproachistopresumereciprocity,transitivity,andbalanceariseduetotheexistenceofunobservednodecharacteristics,andthatnodesrelatepreferentiallytoothernodeswithsimilarvaluesofthosecharacteristics.Thismotivateslettingfbeameasureof\similarity"betweentherandomziandzj,whichgivesrisetoa\latentposition"interpretationasdiscussedinetal.(2002).Forexample,considerthefollowingformsforf:(distancemodel)f(zi;zj)=zizjj;(innerproductmodel)f(zi;zj)=z0izj:4Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Inthecaseofdirectedresponses,eachoftheabovefunctionsinducesadegreeofreciprocityasi;j=f(zi;zj)=f(zj;zi)=j;iduetothesymmetryoff.Thecommonerrorterminducesapositivedependencebetweenyi;jandyj;i.Theabovefunctionsalsogiverisetohigher-orderdependence.Forexample,thedistancemodelgivesanerrorstructurethatisinherentlytransitive,sincejzizjjjzizkj+jzkzjjbythetriangleinequality.Theobservationofstrongtiesfromitokandktojsuggeststhatjzizkjandjzkzjjaresmall,andthereforejzizjjcannotbetoolargeandwemightexpectstrongtiesfromitoj.Theinnerproductmodelasimilarbutmorecomplicatedrelation:inthespecialcasethatthevectorsziareofunitlength,z0izjz0izk+z0kzj(1+2p(1z0kzi)(1z0kzj)).Anundirectedsignedgraphissaidtobebalancediftheproductoftherelationsinallcyclesisnonnegative,i.e.yi1;i2yi2;i3yik1;ik0forallsequencesofindicesforwhichthecorrespondingdataareavailable(WassermanandFaust1994,Chapter6).Asf(zi;zj)existsinthemodelforeachpairi;j,balanceintermsofthisrandomisequivalenttothebalanceofthecompletegraphformedbythesociomatrixwithi;jthentryequaltof(zi;zj).Foracompletesignedgraph,allcyclesarebalancedifandonlyifeachtriadisbalanced,i.e.f(zi;zj)f(zj;zk)f(zk;zi)0foralltriplesi;j;k.Interestingly,thisisbytheinnerproductmodelinonedimension(zi2R),as(z0izj)(z0jzk)(z0kzj)0.Forzi2Rk;k>1,thesetermsarenotnecessarilybalanced,althoughtheyare\probabilistically"balancedinthefollowingsense:ifthedirectionsofthezi'sareuniformlydistributed,thentheexpectednumberofbalancedtriadsexceedsthenumberofimbalancedtriads,withthedecreasingwithincreasingk.Anadditionalfeatureoftheinnerproductmodelisthatifthedirectionsofthez0isareuniformlydistributed,theningeneralE(z0izj)=0.Inparticular,ifeachziisavectorofkindependentnormalrandomvariableswithmean0andvariance˙2z,thenz0izjwillhavemean0andvariancek˙4z,furtheringtheinterpretationofz0izjasanerrorterm.Ontheotherhand,zizjjisalwaysnegative,andsowelackthisinterpretationforthedistancemodel.However,thedistancemodelmaybeeasiertointerpretasaspatialrepresentationofnetworkstructure:Thezi'scanbeinterpretedaspositionsinalatent\socialspace,"withnodeshavingstrongtiestooneanotherbeingestimatedasclosetogether,andsubsetsofnodeswithstrongwithin-grouptiesbeingestimatedasclustersinthissocialspace.Additionally,plottingestimatesandregionsforthezi'sgivesagraphical,model-basedrepresentationofthenetworkdata.3ParameterEstimationGivennetworkdataY=fyi;jgandpossibleregressorvariablesX=fxi;jg,thegoalistomakestatisticalinferenceontheunknownmodelparameters,whichwegenericallydenoteas.Theparametermayincludetheregressioncots,thevariancesoftherandomandpossiblytherandomthemselves.WetakeaBayesianapproachtoparam-eterestimation,inthatweposita(potentiallypriorprobabilitydistributionp(),andbaseourinferenceontheposterior,orconditionaldistributionoftheparametersgiventheinformationinthedata,whichisgivenbyBayes'rule,p(jY)=p(Yj)p()=p(Y).Aclosedformexpressionforthedesiredconditionaldistributionisgenerallyunavailable,5Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.howeverwecanmakeapproximaterandomsamplesfromthisdistributionusingMarkovchainMonteCarlo(MCMC)simulation(GelfandandSmith1990,Besag,Green,Higdon,andMengersen1995).MCMC-basedinferenceconstructsadependentsequenceof-valuesasfollows:Giventhelth-valuelinthesequence,sampleaparametervaluefromaproposaldistributionJ(jl);computetheacceptanceprobabilityr=max1;p(Yj)p()J(lj)p(Yj)p()J(jl);setl+1=withprobabilityr,otherwisesetl+1=l:Theparticulardetails,suchasthechoiceoftheproposaldistributionJ,willdependonthemodelandthedata.Seeetal.(2002)forMCMCalgorithmsdesignedspforsuchlatentvariablemodels.Theresultofthealgorithmisasequenceofvalueshavingadistributionthatisapprox-imatelyequaltothetargetdistributionp(jY).Statisticalinferencecanbebasedonthesesamples.Forexample,apointestimateofisoftentakentobetheposteriormean,whichisapproximatedbytheaverageofthesampled-values.Posteriorintervalscanbebasedonthesamplequantiles.4ExampleDataAnalysesWenowapplythemethodsdescribedabovetothestatisticalanalysisoftwoexampledatasets.Intheexample,weusetheinnerproductmodelasameansofmakinginferenceonthepreferenceforsamesexfriendshiptiesinHansell'sclassroomdata.Inthesecondexample,weusethedistancemodeltomakeinferenceonthenetworkofalliancesamongsixteenNewGuineantribesstudiedbyRead(1954).Bothdatasetsinvolvebinarynetworkdata,althoughthemethodsareeasilyadaptedtoothertypesofnetworkdataviaanappropriategeneralizedlinearmodel.4.1ClassroomFriendshipsHansell's(1984)dataexhibitatendencyofchildrentoformsamesexfriendshipties,inthat72%ofthetiesaresame-sex.Weconsiderastatisticalanalysisofthispreference,inwhichweestimatethelogoddsofasame-sextie,aswellasmakeaintervalforitsvalue.Thisisdoneviathelogisticregressionmodelwithrandomdescribedabove,g(E[yi;jj;xi;j;i;j])=0+1xi;j+i;j;wherexi;jistheindicatorthatiandjareofthesamesex,=f0;1gareparameterstobeestimated,andi;jisarandomInthisparametrization,0isthelogoddsofafriendshipbetweenchildrenofoppositesexes,and0+1isthelogoddsforchildrenofthesamesex.6Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Asdescribedintheintroduction,Hansell's(1984)classroomdataexhibitseveralformsofnetworkdependence,includingnode-levelvariability,reciprocity,andtransitivity.Thissuggestswemodelthedatawithnode-spratesofsendingandreceivingties,aswellasatermwhichcapturesreciprocityandtransitivity.Wechoosethefollowinginner-productmodelwithrandomsenderandreceiverlogodds(yi;j=1)=0+1xi;j+ai+bj+z0izja1;:::;an˘i:i:d:Normal(0;˙2a)b1;:::;bn˘i:i:d:Normal(0;˙2b)z1;:::;zn˘i:i:d:Normal(0;˙2z)Theparametersinthismodelaretheregressioncots0and1,aswellasthevarianceterms˙2a;˙2b;˙2z;whichdeterminethedependenciesbetweenties.ABayesiananalysiswasperformedusingthemethodsoutlinedinSection3.Thepriordistributionsfor0and1weretakentobeindependent,normaldistributions,bothhavingmeanzeroandvariance100.Thevarianceterms˙2a;˙2b;˙2zweregiveninverse-Gamma(2,1)distributions,havinganexpectationofonebutanvariance.AnMCMCalgorithmwasusedtoobtainthe500,000approximatesamplesfromtheposteriordistribu-tionp(0;1;˙2a;˙2b;˙2zjY).Marginalposteriordistributionsof1;˙2a;˙2b;˙2zarepresentedinFigure2.Theresultssuggestatpreferenceforsamesexfriendshipties,inthattheposteriordistributionfor1iscenteredaroundamedianof1.49,anda95%quantile-basedintervalfor1is(0.84,2.11),whichdoesnotcontainzero.Theposteriordis-tributionsof˙2aand˙2zhavedeviatedfromtheirpriordistributionsandhavemovedtotheright,givingevidenceforsender-spvariabilityaswellastheneedforthelatentvariablesz1;:::;zn.Theposteriorfor˙2bconcentratesmassonlowvalues,andisnotmuchtfromthepriordistribution,indicatinglittleevidenceforstrongreceiver-spvariability.Incomparison,anaiveapproachtoinferencewouldbetotreateachpossibletieasaBernoullirandomvariable,independentofallotherties.Usingstandardlogisticregression,ourestimateof1is1.3withastandarderrorof0.2,givinganapproximate95%intervalof(0.91,1.70),whichisofsubstantiallysmallerwidththantheintervalobtainedwiththerandommodel.Ofcourse,wemightexpecttheintervalbasedonthisnaiveanalysistobetoosmall,asitincorrectlyassumesalltiesbetweenindividualsareindependentandthusoverestimatestheprecisionoftheparameterestimate.4.2TribalalliancesRead(1954)describesanumberofnetworkrelationsbetweensixteenNewGuineantribes.Hereweconsiderthenetworkofalliancesbetweentribes,lettingyi;j=1iftribesiandjhaveanalliance,andyi;j=0otherwise.Weanalyzethesedatausingthesimpledistancemodelwithnocovariatesorseparatesender-andreceiver-sprandomlogoddsPr(yi;j=1j0;zi;zj)=0jzizjj;where0representsthebaselineoddsofatiebetweentwonodesthathavethesamelatentposition(i.e.0themaximumlogoddsofatie),andthezi'sarelatentpositionsinR2.7Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.0.00.51.01.52.02.50.00.20.40.60.81.01.2p(beta|Y)012345670.00.10.20.30.40.50.6p(sigma_a^2|Y)0.00.51.01.52.00.00.51.01.5p(sigma_b^2|Y)0.00.51.01.52.02.53.00.00.20.40.60.81.01.2p(sigma_z^2|Y)Figure2:Marginalposteriordistributionsfortheclassroomdata:Dashedlinesrepresentthepriordistributionsforthevarianceparameters,solidlinestheposterior.Verticallinesgivetheposteriormedian.Withoutseparatesender-andreceiver-spwemayexpectthattribeswithmanyallianceswillbeestimatedasbeingmorecentrallylocated,andthosewithfewtiesasbeingontheperiphery.Bayesianestimatesandintervalsfor0andthezi'sareobtainedusingthemethodsoutlinedinSection3.Inparticular,samplesoflatentpositionsfromtheposteriordistributionp(z1;:::;z16jY)areplottedinthepanelofFigure1(colorsarechosensothatnearbynodelocationswillhavesimilarcolors).Additionally,ablacklinedrawnbetweennodesindicatesthepresenceofanalliance.Ad-hocapproaches,orsimplepointestimatesoflatentlocations,mightuncoversomeofthestructureofthenetwork.Ourmethodgoesbeyondthisbyprovidingposteriorregionsfornodelocations,whichinturngiveusamodel-basedmeasureofuncertaintyaboutthenetworkstructure.Additionally,formsofpredictiveinferencecanbeobtainedfromsuchamodel.Forexample,supposethatthepresenceorabsenceofanalliancebetweenpair(i;j)isunobservedormissing.Themodelcanbewithallavailableinformation(excludingtheunknownyi;j),andfromtheavailableinformationtheposteriordistributionsofziandzjcanbeobtained.Fromthese,predictiveinferenceaboutthevalueofyi;jcanbemade.8Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12345678910111213141516Figure3:Tribalalliancenetworkandmarginalposteriordistributionsoflocations.AlsocollectedbyRead(1954)weredataonbetweenthetribes.Itisinterestingtonotethat,basedonaclusteringofnodes(1,2,15,16),(3,4,6,7,8,11,12),and(5,9,10,13,14),therewerenowithin-clustereventhoughnoteverytribewithinaclusterhadanalliancewitheveryotherclusterco-member.Additionally,node7,towardsthecenterofthealliancestructure,hadnowithanyoftheother15tribes.Wenotethatbothresponsesandalliance)couldbemodeledconcurrentlybyasimilarmethod,inwhichamultinomiallogisticrandommodelisemployedinplaceofthebinarylogisticrandommodelabove.5DiscussionThisarticleproposesaformofgeneralizedlinearmodelforthestatisticalanalysisofnetworkdataforwhichparameterestimationispracticaltoimplement.Theapproachhassomeadvantagesoverexistingsocialnetworkmodelsandinferentialprocedures:theapproachallowsforpredictionandhypothesistesting;lendsitselftoamodel-basedmethodofnetworkvisualization;ishighlyextendableandinterpretableintermsofwellknownstatisticalproceduressuchasregressionandgeneralizedlinearmodels;andhasafeasiblemeansofexactparameterestimation.Themodelsdiscussedherecancapturesometypesofnetworkdependence,althoughitispossible(orevenlikely)thatinmanydatasetstherearetypesofdependenciesthatcannot9Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.bewell-representedwiththesemodels.Itthenbecomesimportanttodevelopmethodsforassessingmodellackofanddeterminingtheoflackofontheestimationofregressioncots.Furthermore,itmaybeusefultocombinethetypesofrandomdiscussedherewithothertypesofrandomorlatentvariables.Forexample,NowickiandSnijders(2001)discussalatentclassmodel,ausefulmodelforidentifyingclustersofnodesthatrelatetoothersinsimilarways.Theirlatentclassmodel,combinedwithtypesofrandommodelspresentedhereandpossiblyotherrandomstructures,couldprovidearichclassofmodelsfordependentnetworkdata.ReferencesBesag,J.,Green,P.,Higdon,D.,andMengersen,K.(1995),\Bayesiancomputationandstochasticsystems,"Statist.Sci.,10,3{66,Withcommentsandareplybytheauthors.Gelfand,A.E.andSmith,A.F.M.(1990),\Sampling-basedapproachestocalculatingmarginaldensities,"J.Amer.Statist.Assoc.,85,398{409.Hansell,S.(1984),\Cooperativegroups,weakties,andtheintegrationofpeerfriendships,"SocialPsychologyQuarterly,47,316{328.P.D.,Raftery,A.E.,andHandcock,M.S.(2002),\LatentSpaceApproachestoSocialNetworkAnalysis,"JournaloftheAmericanStatisticalAssociation,97,toappear.McCullagh,P.andNelder,J.A.(1983),Generalizedlinearmodels,Chapman&Hall,London.McCulloch,C.E.andSearle,S.R.(2001),Generalized,linear,andmixedmodels,WileySeriesinProbabilityandStatistics:Texts,References,andPocketbooksSection,Wiley-Interscience[JohnWiley&Sons],NewYork.Nowicki,K.andSnijders,T.A.B.(2001),\EstimationandPredictionforStochasticBlockStruc-tures,"JournaloftheAmericanStatisticalAssociation,96,1077{1087.Read,K.(1954),\Culturesofthecentralhighlands,NewGuinea,"SouthwesternJournalofAn-thropology,10,1{43.Wasserman,S.andFaust,K.(1994),SocialNetworkAnalysis:MethodsandApplications,Cam-bridge:CambridgeUniversityPress.10Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PredictabilityofLarge-scaleSpatiallyEmbedded
Networks
CarterT.Butts
⁄10/23/02AbstractAlthoughitiswell-knownthatthereisarelationshipbetweensocio-physicaldis-
tanceandedgeprobabilityininterpersonalnetworks,thepredictivepowerofsuch
distancesfortotalnetworkstructurehasnotbeenestablished.Here,itisshownthat
upperboundsonthemarginaledgeprobabilitiesforfar-ﬂungdyadscanbeusedto
placealowerboundonthepredictivepowerofdistance,andonesuchboundisde-
rived.Applicationofthisboundtothespecialcaseofuniformlyplacedverticeson
theplanesuggeststhatonlymodestconstraintsarerequiredfordistanceeto

dominateatlargephysicalscales.
Keywords:
socialnetworks,spatialmodels,Shannonentropy,predictivepower,dis-
tance1Introduction
Numerousstudiesshowastrongrelationshipbetweenphysicaldistanceandsocialstructure
(e.g.,Merton(1948);Festingeretal.(1950);CaplowandForman(1950);Blakeetal.(1956);

Whyte(1957);Sommer(1969);Snowetal.(1981);Latan´
eetal.(1995));arguably,fewother
ﬁndingsinthesocialsciencescanclaimsuchadegreeofstrengthandgenerality.Whilethis

isaninterestingandimportantresultinandofitself,itbegsacriticalquestion:assuming
ThismaterialisbaseduponworksupportedbytheNationalScienceFoundationunderGrantNo.
0100999,aswellasanNSFGraduateResearchFellowship.AdditionalsupportwasprovidedbytheCenterfor

theComputationalAnalysisofSocialandOrganizationalSystemsandtheInstituteforComplexEngineered
SystemsatCarnegieMellonUniversity.
†IwouldliketothankKathleenCarley,DavidKrackhardt,ShelbyStewman,DavidRode,andKatie
Faustfortheircommentsandinput.
‡InstituteforMathematicalBehavioralSciencesandDepartmentofSociology,UniversityofCalifornia-
Irvine,Irvine,CA92697,buttsc@uci.edu
1Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.thatthedistance/edgeprobabilityrelationshipisasitappearstobe,towhatextentcanthis
accountforthevariabilityofsocialstructure
writlarge
?Inhis1984comment,“Chanceand
NecessityinSociologicalTheory,”BruceMayhewmakesthecharacteristicallyboldclaim

thatwellover90%ofthevariationinsocialstructureisdeterminedbyphysicalspace
1.IfMayhew’sassertioniscorrect,thenwewouldexpectfornetworkmodelsbasedonvertex
positiontoallowustodevelopextremelycrediblepredictionsoflarge-scalenetworkstructure.
Sinceindividualpositionscanbeinferredfrompopulationdata,sucharesultshould(in

principle,atleast)allowustoreducetheproblemofmacrostructuralpredictiontooneof

spatialdemography.Iftheassertionisfalse,bycontrast,thenotherapproacheswillbe

requiredtoelymodelthestructureofsocialmacrostructure.
Whilethe“Mayhewquestion”isunlikelytobesettledbyasinglepaper,itisshownhere
thattherequirementsforpredictingnetworkstructurefromvertexlayoutarefairlymodest.

Fairlyminimalconstraintsontheprobabilityofedgesbetweendistantaltersaret

toestablishalowerboundonthepredictivepowerofdistance,wherepredictivepoweris

deﬁnedintermsofreductionintheShannonentropyofthetotalstructure.Applicationof

thisboundtothespecialcaseofverticesinaplanarregionsuggeststhattherequirements
forstrongdistance(e.g.,
>90%uncertaintyreduction)arelikelytobeattainable
inpracticeformoderatetolargephysicalscales,andthusthatitisreasonabletoexpect

thatlarge-scalespatiallyembeddedsocialnetworkswillbereadilypredictablefromvertex

positiondata.
2NotationandBasicAssumptions
Fortheresultswhichfollow,wewillfocusexclusivelyonthecaseofalooplessundirected
graphG=(V,E
)withknownvertexset
Vanduncertain(i.e.,random)edgeset
E.(For
convenience,wedenotethecardinalityof
VbyN=|V|.)Itisassumedfurtherthat
Gisspatiallyembedded,inthesensethatthereexistssomespace
Sandset
V={v1,...,vN}suchthat
VSandviisthe
position
ofvertex
vi.Weassumethatthereexistssome
distancefunction,
d,on
S,butdonotrequireittobeametric(i.e.,itneednotsatisfythe
triangleinequality).Substantively,thethemostobviousinterpretationof
Sisasasocio-
physicalspace(oftencalleda“Blau”space(Blau,1977));suchaspacemayincludeboth

physicalanddemographicdimensions,includinggender,age,race,andprimarylanguage.

Forthepurposesofourpresentapplication,wewillfocusonaphysicalspaceinterpretation

ofS,butitshouldbeemphasizedthatthisisnotrequiredforthegeneralresulttoapply.
1This,hequips,beinganartiÞciallylowestimateduetomeasurementerror.
2Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3PredictabilityofSpatiallyEmbeddedNetworks
What,precisely,ismeantbythe“predictability”ofspatiallyembeddednetworks?Inthe
contextofthispaper,predictabilityisunderstoodtobetheextenttowhichourinitial

uncertaintyregardingnetworkstructureisreducedbytheprovisionofnewinformation.

Speciﬁcally,weareinterestedintheextenttowhichknowledgeofvertexpositionswithin
Sreducesouruncertaintyregardingtheedgesetof
G.Anaturalmeasureofuncertainty–and
theonewhichweshallemployhere–istheShannonentropy,whichcanbeinterpretedasthe

expectedlengthofanoptimallyencodedsignalexpressingthevalueofarandomvariable.

Denotingtheentropyfunctionby
I,weformthe
R2-likepredictabilitymeasure
P(G|V)1−I(G|V)I(G)(1)whichexpressestheextenttowhichknowledgeofthevertexpositionset,
V,canaccount
forthetotalinformationcontentof
G.With
Pasournotionofpredictability,wecanstate
thefollowinggeneralresult:
Theorem1(Predictability).
Let
G=(V,E
)beaspatiallyembeddedrandomgraph
withvertexpositionset
Vanddistancefunction
d,andlet
Gbedistributedsuchthat
p{vi,vjE(G)vi,vj:d(vi,vj)rc,forsome
0.5.Then
P(G|V)pd(vi,vj)rc1−IB(),and
lim0P(G|V)pd(vi,vj)rc,where
P(G|V)=1−I(G|V)I(G),IistheShannonentropy,and
IB()=−log2−(1−)log
2(1−).Proof.
Forconvenienceinnotation,let
dij=d(vi,vj)andlet
eijvi,vjE(G).Webeginbyassumingthat,foractorswithinradius
rc,distancetellsus
nothingregard-ingedgeprobability;thatistosay,
p(eij|dij<rc)=0.5.Thenittriviallyfollowsfrom
thedeﬁnitionoftheShannonentropythat
I(eij|dij<rc)=1.Forthecomplementary
case,webeginbynotingthat
I(eij|dijrc)=−p(eij|dijrc)log
2p(eij|dijrc)−1−p(eij|dijrc)log21−p(eij|dijrc).Thefactthat
p(eij|dijrc)0.5then
impliesthat
I(eij|dijrc)log2−(1−)log
2(1−)=IB().Wenowconsidertheentropyoftheentiregraph.Usingthewell-knownresultthat
I(X,Y
)I(X)+I(Y)for(possiblydependent)randomvariables
X,Y
,wecanboundthe
3Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.entropyofthegraphbythesumofthe(independent)edgewiseentropies.Thereforewehave
I(G|V){i,j}I(eij|V){i,j}:dij<rc1+{i,j}:dijrcIB()=|V(G)|2p(dij<rc)+|V(G)|2p(dijrc)IB()=p(dij<rc)+p(dijrc)IB()|V(G)|2=p(dij<rc)+1−p(dij<rc)IB()|V(G)|2.Sincetheuninformativeentropyof
Gisgivenby
I(G)=|V(G)|2,itfollowsthat
P(G|V)=1−I(G|V)I(G)1−p(dij<rc)+1−p(dij<rc)IB()|V(G)|2|V(G)|2=1−p(dij<rc)−1−p(dij<rc)IB()=p(dijrc)−p(dijrc)IB()=p(dijrc)1−IB()whichdemonstratestheﬁrstportionofTheorem1.Tocompletetheproof,weallow
0andtakethelimit:
lim0P(G|V)lim0p(dijrc)1−IB()=lim
0p(dijrc)1+log2+(1
−)log
2(1−)=p(dijrc).Thisisapowerfulandgeneralresult:ittellsusthatwheneverwecanplaceareasonable
upperboundonthemarginaledgeprobabilitybetweendistantvertices,wecanusethe

quantilesofthedistancedistributiontoplacealowerboundonthepredictivepowerof
V.Furthermore,whenthisboundonmarginaledgeprobabilitybecomessmall,thepredictive

powerofthepositionsetbecomesboundedbytheprobabilitythatthedistancebetween

tworandomlyselectedverticeswillexceedthecriticalthreshold.Thus,wherethethreshold
4Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.distanceissmallrelativetotheoveralldistribution,wecan
guarantee
thatthetotalstructure
willbeeasilypredictedfromvertexpositionalone.
Oneimportantandsomewhatcounter-intuitiveaspectofTheorem1isthatitdoesnot
dependon
N:thepredictabilityofthetotalstructurecanbeboundedbyafunctionwhich
dependsonlyonthegeometryofthepopulationlayout.Similarly,wedidnothaveto
assumedyadicindependencetoobtainthisresult(onlyboundsontheedgewisemarginals).
ThesetwofactsgreatlyfacilitatetheapplicationofTheorem1intheﬁeld,wherepopulation

distributionsandsomecrudeestimatesofthedistance/edgeprobabilityrelationshipmaybe

allthatisavailable.Theyalsoservetoreinforcetheargumentthatthepredictivepower

ofdistanceisrobusttovaryingassumptionsabouttheprecisedeterminantsofnetwork

structure.4UniformPopulationDistributiononthePlane
Considerthespecialcaseinwhichapopulationofarbitrarysizeisplaceduniformlywithin

asquareregionofsize
×.Suchamodelmaybethoughtofasaﬁrstapproximationto
asparsepopulationdistributioninphysicalspace,particularlyoverlargeareas.Here,we

showtheminimumthresholddistancesnecessarytoobtainagivenlevelofpredictivepower

forastructureontheplane,asafunctionofthelinearscale(
)oftheembeddingregion.
Aswillbeshown,theonlymodestcriticalthresholdsarerequiredtoguaranteehighlevels

ofpredictabilityunderuniformvertexplacement.
4.1DistributionofInter-pointDistances
InordertoapplyTheorem1,wemustﬁrstknowthedistributionofinter-pointdistances
forsquareplanarregions.Undertheassumptionthat
distheeuclideandistance,wederive
thisdistributioninthefollowinglemma:
Lemma1.
Let
vi,vjdesignatetworandomlyselectedpointsonatwo-dimensionalplane,
witheachcoordinatebeingIID
U(0).Thenthedensityfunctionof
d(vi,vj)isgivenby
f(d)=2d2−4d3+d240d2d22sin−122−d2d2−43−d2−2+22−d2420otherwise,5Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.withassociateddistributionfunction
F(d)=0d<02222−d333+d4440d13+2d221−22d2−4d4+sin
−1d2−22d2+8(d2−2)323−d4421d>2.Proof.
Forthetwo-dimensionalcase,wemaywritetheeuclideandistanceintermsofcoor-
dinate
d(vi,vj)=(vi)1−(vj)12+(vi)2−(vj)22Byassumption,thesecoordinatesareuniformlydistributedon[0
].Itcaneasilybeshown
thatthedbetweentwosuchuniformdeviatesisdistributedTriangularwithlower

bound
−,upperbound
,andmode0.Thus,wemaysimplifythedistributionof
dasfollows:
d(vi,vj)U(0)−U(0)2+U(0)−U(0)2T(−
0)2+T(−
0)2Notethat
T(−
0)issymmetricabouttheorigin;thus,itisastandardresultthat
FT2(x)=2FT(x)−1,where
FT2andFTarethecumulativedistributionfunctionsof
variates
T2andT,respectively(Evansetal.,2000).Forthedistributionfunctionofa
Triangulardeviatewithlowerbound
a,upperbound
b,andmode
cwehave
FT(x)=0x<0(x−a)2(b−a)(c−a)0x<c1−(b−x)2(b−a)(b−c)cxb1x>b,andhence
FT2(x)=2FTx−1=
0x<02(x−a)2(b−a)(c−a)−10x<c1−2(b−x)2(b−a)(b−c)cxb1x>b6Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.which,bysymmetry,canbecollapsedto
=1−2(b−x)22bb=1−(b−x)2b2(for0
xb2).Toobtaintheassociateddensityfunction,
fT2(x),wesimplydtiate:
fT2(x)=FT2(x)=1−(b−x)2b2=1bx−1b20xb20otherwise
Havingderivedthedensityofasingle
T2variate,wenowmustconsiderthesumoftwo
such(IID)variates.Sincethevariatesinquestionareindependent,theirjointdensityis

simplytheproductoftheirindividualdensities,andwemayobtainthedensityofthesum

viaconvolution.Inthiscase,however,wenotethatthedomainof
T2+T2dependsonthe
individualvariates,andhencesomecareisneededinchoosingthelimitsofintegration.We
dividethedensityat
x=b2(thepointbeyondwhichbothvariatesmustbegreaterthan0),
takingthelowerregionﬁrst:
fT2+T2x0xb2=x0fT2(y)fT2(x−y)dy=x01by−1b21bx−y−1b2dy=1b2sin−12y−xx
x0−2yb3
x0+2x−yb3
x0+yb4
x0=1b2sin−1(1)−sin−1(−1)−2xb3−2xb3+xb4=b2−4xb3+xb47Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Now,weconsidertheupperregion:
fT2+T2xb2<x2b2=b2x−b2fT2(y)fT2(x−y)dy=b2x−b21by−1b21bx−y−1b2dy=1b2sin−12y−xx
b2x−b2−2yb3
b2x−b2+2x−yb3
b2x−b2+yb4
b2x−b2=1b2sin−12b2−xx−sin−1x−2b2x−2b3b−x−b2+2b3x−b2−b+2b2−xb4=2b2sin−12b2−xx−4b3b−x−b2+2b2−xb4Finally,puttingthistogether,weobtainthecompletedensityforasumoftwosquared
triangularvariates:
fT2+T2(x)=
b2−4xb3+xb40xb22b2sin−12b2−xx−4b3b−x−b2+2b2−xb4b2<x2b20otherwise
Fromtheabove,wemaynowderivethedensityof
d.Thelaststepinthisprocess
involvesapplyingapositivesquareroottransformationtothesumofsquaredtriangular

variates.Thisisamonotonicallyincreasingone-to-onetransformation,andwecanthus

derivethenewdensitybyasimplechangeofvariables:
fT2+T2(x)=fT2+T2x2|J|(where|J|istheJacobiandeterminantofthetransformation)
=fT2+T2x22x=2xb2−4xb3+x2b40xb2x2b2sin−12b2−x2x2−4b3b−x2−b2+2b2−x2b4b<x2b0otherwise
Toarriveatthedistributionfunctionof
d,weneedmerelyintegrate
fT2+T2overthedesired
8Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ScaleP(G|V)x90%95%99%
0.1x0.1km
rc0.0190.0130.006
1x1km
rc0.1920.1330.058
10x10km
rc1.9241.3310.578
100x100km
rc19.23613.3115.923
Allrcvaluesgiveninkilometers.
Table1:MaximumCriticalRadiusasaFunctionofScaleandUncertaintyReduction,Uni-
formVertexPlacement
range.FT2+T2(x)=
0x<0˘x02xb2−4xb3+x2b4dy0xb˘b02xb2−4xb3+x2b4dy+˘xb2x2b2sin−12b2−x2x2−4b3b−x2−b2+2b2−x2b4dyb<x
2b1x>2b=0x<0222b2−4x33b3+x44b40xb13+2x2b21−2b2x2−b4x4+sin
−1x2−2b2x2+8(x2−b2)32b3−x4b4b<x2b1x>2bSubstitutionof
dforxandforbcompletestheproof.
4.2Predictability
UsingLemma1togetherwithTheorem1,wemaydeterminethemaximum
rcvalueneeded
toguaranteethatagivenfractionoftheuncertaintyin
Gcanbeaccountedforbythe
euclideandistancesbetweenvertexpositions;thesethresholdvaluesareshowninTable1.

Asthetableindicates,acriticalradiusatorbelowapproximately%20ofthelinearscaleof

theregionisadequatefora%90uncertaintyreduction,withareductionof%99possiblefor

radiiof0
.06orless.
9Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Howdothesethresholdvaluescomparetoempiricalassessmentsofthedistance/edge
probabilityrelationship?Fitsofdyadicedgemodelstoexistingdatasetssuggestthatalow-

probabilitythresholdisattainable,butalsoclearlyindicatethatthresholdswilldependupon

relationalcontent(Butts,2002).Recallingthat
P(G|V)pd(vi,vj)rc1−IB(),we
canexpresstheadequacyofthethresholdapproximationintermsof
IB().Inthisregard,
0.001isttobringthepredictabilityboundwithinapproximately1%ofthelimit;
suchaboundisnothardtoachieveinpractice.BasedontheButtsmodels,thresholdsof

aslittleas0.05kmmaybereasonableapproximationsforface-to-facecontact,withlarger

thresholdsofapproximately0.25kmand18kmforsocialfriendshipandtelephonecontacts,

respectively.Althoughitmaybepossibletoobtain
more
predictivepowerusingtheseor
othermodelsthanTable1wouldsuggest,thelowerboundsaloneindicatethatphysical

layouthasthepotentialtoaccountfortheoverwhelmingmajorityofnetworkstructureat

evenmodestspatialscales.
5Conclusion
Tosummarize,then,itwouldseemthatevena
verymodestnullmodelbasedonphysical
distance(thethresholdmodel)mustaccountforthevastmajorityofnetworkstructurein

large-scalenetworks,underquiteminimalassumptions.Sinceﬁttedmodelshavethecapacity

tobemuchmoreinformativethanthenullmodel,theyareexpectedtoprovideevenmore

informationaboutnetworkmacrostructureatevensmallerscales.Thus,notonlymightone

reasonablyspeculatethatdistancecouldaccountformostoftheuncertaintyinlarge-scale

interpersonalnetworks,italmost
hastodoso.Thiswouldseemtovindicatetheintuition
oftheoristssuchasMayhew,whoperceivedthatphysicalspacewasacriticalstructuring

force,butwhodidnotdemonstratetheextentofthatresult.
ReferencesBlake,R.R.,Rhead,C.,Wedge,B.,andMonton,J.(1956).Housingarchitectureandsocial
interaction.
Sociometry
,19:133–139.
Blau,P.M.(1977).
InequalityandHeterogeneity
.FreePress,NewYork.
Butts,C.T.(2002).
SpatialModelsofLarge-scaleInterpersonalNetworks
.DoctoralDisser-
tation,CarnegieMellonUniversity.
Caplow,T.andForman,R.(1950).Neighborhoodinteractioninahomogeneouscommunity.
AmericanSociologicalReview
,15:357–366.
Evans,M.,Hastings,N.,andPeacock,B.(2000).
StatisticalDistributions
.JohnWileyand
Sons,NewYork,thirdedition.
10Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Festinger,L.,Schachter,S.,andBack,K.(1950).
SocialPressuresinInformalGroups
.StanfordUniversityPress,Stanford,California.
Latan´
e,B.,Liu,J.H.,Nowak,A.,Bonevento,M.,andZheng,L.(1995).Distancematters:
Physicalspaceandsocialimpact.
PersonalityandSocialPsychologyBulletin
,21(8):795–
805.Mayhew,B.H.(1984).Chanceandnecessityinsociologicaltheory.
JournalofMathematical
Sociology
,9:305–339.
Merton,R.(1948).Thesocialpsychologyofhousing.InDennis,W.,editor,
CurrentTrends
inSocialPsychology
,pages163–217.UniversityofPittsburghPress,Pittsburgh,PA.
Snow,D.A.,Leahy,P.J.,andSchwab,W.A.(1981).Socialinteractioninaheterogeneous
apartment:Aninvestigationoftheofenvironmentuponbehavior.
Sociological
Focus
,14(4):309–319.
Sommer,R.(1969).
PersonalSpace
.Prentice-Hall,EnglewoodNJ.
Whyte,W.H.(1957).
TheOrganizationMan
.Doubleday,GardenCity,NY.
11Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MTML Framework Page 1   
   
 Using Multi-theoretical Multi-level (MTML) Models to Study Adversarial Networks  Noshir S. Contractor Departments of Speech Communication & Psychology Research Affiliate, Beckman Institute for Advanced Science & Technology University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign  Peter R. Monge Annenberg School for Communication & Marshall School of Business University of Southern California  
 
 Abstract  
 
This paper applies the multi-theoretical multi-level (MTML) model to study the creation, maintenance and dissolution of adversarial communication and knowledge networks.  It begins by identifying the theoretical mechanisms that influence the dynamics and co-evolution of communication and knowledge networks in general.  Next it describes how examining adversarial social networks requires an extension to the MTML framework. In particular, we describe how community ecology theory helps us better understand how the network linkages in a focal network can be influenced by other networks within the same population as well as networks within other populations in the community. Finally, we briefly describe an analytic framework that we have developed to specify (i) multi-theoretical multi-level models for the evolution of these network, (ii) agent based computational models in Blanche to assess the transient and long-term implications of these theoretical mechanisms on the co-evolution of the networks, and (iii) p* analytic techniques to validate these predictions using empirical data.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Some of the material in this paper has been adapted from Monge & Contractor (2003). Theories of Communication Networks. New York: Oxford University Press. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MTML Framework Page 2   
  Using Multi-theoretical Multi-level (MTML) Models to Study Adversarial Networks  
Overview  To date, most network research has been limited by five major problems.  First, it tends to be atheoretical, ignoring the various social theories that contain network implications.  Second, it explores single levels of analysis rather than the multiple levels out of which most networks are comprised.  Third, network analysis has employed limited theoretical insights from contemporary complex systems analysis and computer simulations.  Fourth, it typically uses descriptive rather than inferential statistics, thus robbing it of the ability to make theoretical claims about the larger universe of networks.  Finally, almost all the research is static and cross-sectional rather than dynamic. In our book, Theories of Communication Networks (2003), we propose solutions to all five problems. First, we have developed a multi-theoretical model that relates different social theories with different network properties.  Second, the model is multi-level, offering a network decomposition that applies pertinent social theories at all network levels: individuals, dyads, triples, groups, and the entire network.  Third, the model relies on a complex systems perspective, implementing Blanche, an agent-based network computer simulation environment, to generate and test theories and hypotheses.  Fourth, the model utilizes the p* family, a set of innovative tools for statistical network analysis, to provide a basis for valid multilevel statistical inferences.  Finally, our model relates communication networks to other networks, enabling more sophisticated study of how dynamic organizational networks emerge.   This paper advances arguments in support of a multi-theoretical multi-level approach to study the emergence of adversarial networks.  Recent advances in digital technologies invite consideration of organizing as a process that is accomplished by flexible, adaptive, and ad hoc networks that can be created, maintained, dissolved, and reconstituted with remarkable alacrity. We propose, and describe briefly, a Multi-theoretical Multi-level (MTML) framework -- based on network formulations of social theories -- to examine the mechanisms that influence people and organizations to forge network links with other individuals, organizations, as well as non-human agents (such as knowledge repositories).  We extend the MTML framework to explicitly advance our understanding of adversarial networks. Adversarial social networks are defined as the networks of multiple organizations within a population or the networks of multiple populations of organizations within a community (van Meter, 2001). These networks exist in the same or similar niches, competing for the same or similar resources, and seek to drive out their competitors, thus dominating the community.  The relations among these nodes represent ties that vary in the extent to which they may be ﬁadversarial.ﬂ  For instance, the multiple intelligence gathering organizations within the US (such as the CIA, FBI, and the NSA) are populations of organizations that are sometimes collectively referred to as the ﬁintelligence community.ﬂ The relationships between these populations range from being Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MTML Framework Page 3   
  cooperative to competitive. Also included within the ﬁintelligence community.ﬂ are additional populations including intelligence gathering organizations of ﬁfriendlyﬂ countries as well as the intelligence gathering organizations of hostile countries and non-sovereign entities. This conceptualization of adversarial networks includes communities (or populations of organizations) within a variety of contexts including the telecommunications industry, the Wi-Fi landscape, biological warfare, the film industry, and even the development and distribution of retail consumer products. Arquilla and Ronfeldt (2001) identify several recent social movements and ideological campaigns that they identify as ﬁnetwarsﬂ in which ﬁnumerous dispersed small groups using the latest communications technologies could act conjointly across great distancesﬂ (p. 2). The groups they consider include terrorists, criminals, separatists, drug cartels, radical activists, non-government organizations (NGOs) and civil society advocates. They noted similar adversarial network patterns when they examined the organizational forms of seemingly disparate activities such as the al-Qaeda network™s terrorist operations (see also Krebs, 2001), the Chechen effort to secede from Russia, the Direct Action Network™s operations during the 1999 World Trade Organization summit in Seattle, Greenpeace, the International Campaign to Ban Landmines (ICBL), and the Zapatista National Liberation Army. Therefore, although the notion of adversarial networks has captured a great deal of attention in the context of terrorist networks, the theoretical scope is increasingly relevant to a much wider cast of social contexts, many of which do not carry the same illegal and illicit connotations (Bryant, Shumate, & Monge, 2002).  
From ﬁNetworks in Organizationsﬂ to ﬁNetworks as Organizationﬂ Network forms of organization are neither vertically organized hierarchies like their bureaucratic predecessors nor are they unorganized marketplaces governed by supply and demand (Powell, 1990; Williamson, 1996).  Rather, network organizational forms are built on generalized structures that link people and knowledge in all parts of the organization to one other, while simultaneously tying them to multiple external contacts. These new forms are knowledge intensive (Badaracco, 1991), agile (Goldman, Nagel, & Preiss, 1995), and are constantly adapting as new links are added and dysfunctional ones are dropped.  Thus, the evolving network form is the organization. Knowledge networks by themselves and as organizational forms are understood as general concepts.  Knowledge circulates throughout network organizations in a variety of forms: as individual and cognitive networks (Carley, 1995); as distributed work team networks (Hollingshead, 1998); as internal organization-wide networks enabled by Intranets (Monge & Contractor, 2001; 2003); and as external network connections via Extranets (Bar, 1995). Further, these networks are highly interdependent and co-evolve with the network forms of which they are a part. In fact, because knowledge work consists primarily of linking and integrating the various components of knowledge together, it is crucial for scholars to examine all parts of the entire knowledge network concurrently over time.  This includes efforts to compile, extend, test and refine current understanding of (i) how best to characterize knowledge networks at various levels and Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MTML Framework Page 4   
  measure their state and dynamic evolution; and (ii) the theoretical mechanisms that explain the evolution of these networks.  
Multi-Theoretical Multi-level (MTML) Model for Studying the Emergence of Networks  Monge and Contractor (2003) have proposed a multi-theoretical multi-level (MTML) model to study the creation, maintenance, development, and reconstitution of network linkages in organizational and inter-organizational contexts. In general terms, we ask the question: ﬁWhat are the social mechanisms that help us understand why individuals (or aggregates of individuals) seek to forge, sustain, or dissolve our network ties with other human and non-human agents?ﬂ As developments in information and communication technologies continue to reduce or eliminate the potential logistic barriers to our network relations, it becomes increasingly important to identify the various social factors that enable or constrain the development of these network linkages. Monge and Contractor (2003) identify a wide array of theories that can be used to develop network formulations. The theories and their theoretical mechanisms are summarized in Table 1. In the interest of brevity, the following summary does not include citations to the various scholars who have contributed to these theories. Details about the theories and their intellectual proponents can be found in Monge and Contractor (2003).  Theories of self-interest focus on how actors (people, organizations, etc.) make choices that favor their personal preferences and desires (Bourdieu & Wacquant, 1992; Coleman, 1986). That is, Person i™s decision to forge a tie with another Person j is motivated entirely by Person i™s self-interest and ability in seeking a resource that Person j possesses. Two primary theories in this area are the theory of social capital (Burt, 1992, 2001; Lin 2001) and transaction cost economics (Williamson, 1975, 1985). Distinct from human capital, which describes individual personal characteristics, social capital focuses on the properties of the communication networks in which people are embedded. Structural holes in the network provide people opportunities to invest their information, communication, and other social resources in the expectation of reaping profits. Transaction cost economics examines the information and communication costs involved in market and organizational transactions as well as ways in which to minimize these costs. Network forms of organization provide an alternative to markets and hierarchy, which focuses on embeddedness in complex networks (Powell, 1990). Information flows are essential in determining to whom a firm should link and joint value maximization offers an alternative principle to minimizing transaction costs (Zajac & Olsen, 1993). Self-interest mechanisms are likely to foster the formation of separate adversarial networks. These theories suggest that each network will invest its own social capital to expand its own network. They also suggest that each network will seek to exploit the structural holes of its adversaries. Theories of mutual interest and collective action examine how coordinated activity produces outcomes unattainable by individual action (Marwell & Oliver, 1993). Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MTML Framework Page 5   
  That is, Individual i™s and Individual j™s decision to forge a tie is motivated by their belief that it serves their mutual (or collective) interest in accomplishing common or complementary goals. One theory that exemplifies this perspective is public goods theory (Hardin, 1982; Samuelson, 1954), which examines the communication strategies that enable organizers to induce members of a collective to contribute their resources to the Table 1. Selected Social Theories and their Theoretical Mechanisms  Theory   Theoretical Mechanism  
Theories of Self-Interest Social Capital   Investments in opportunities Structural Holes      Control of information flow Transaction Costs      Cost minimization  Mutual Self Interest &  Collective Action   Joint value maximization Public Good Theory Inducements to contribute Critical Mass Theory Number of people with resources & interests  Cognitive Theories   Cognitive mechanisms leading to: Semantic/knowledge Networks  Shared interpretations Cognitive social structures  Similarity in perceptual structures Cognitive Consistency  Balance theory     Drive to avoid imbalance & restore balance  Cognitive Dissonance     Drive to reduce dissonance  
Contagion Theories   Exposure to contact leading to: Social Information Processing    Social influence Social Learning Theory     Imitation, modeling Institutional Theory     Mimetic behavior Structural Theory of Action    Similar positions in structure and roles  Exchange and Dependency   Exchange of valued resources Social Exchange Theory      Equality of exchange Resource Dependency      Inequality of exchange Network Exchange      Complex calculi for balance  Homophily & Proximity  Choices based on similarity Social Comparison Theory     Choose comparable others Social Identity       Choose based on own group identity Physical proximity       Influence of distance Electronic Proximity       Influence of accessibility  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MTML Framework Page 6   
  Theories of Network Co-evolution Variation, Selection, Retention Organizational ecology      Competition for scare resources NK(C)        Network density and complexity Community ecology      Commensalist/Symbiotic relns b/w populations  
realization of a public good. Mutual interest often conflicts with the individual self-interests of the members of a collective and sometimes leads to free riding (Olson, 1965) and other social and communication dilemmas (Bonacich & Schneider, 1992; Kalman, Monge, Fulk, & Heino, 2002). Network relations are often essential to the provision and maintenance of the good. Mutual interest theories apply largely to the separate adversaries, as they seek to foster their own agendas in consort with those of like minds. Insight can be gained by analyzing what the various networks define as their collective goods and bads, and the strategies and enticements they use to induce others in join their networks or at least support their separate causes. Contagion theories address questions pertaining to the spread of ideas, messages, attitudes, and beliefs through some form of direct contact (Carley, 1991; Contractor & Eisenberg, 1990). For instance, Person i™s decision to forge a tie with another Person j is motivated by others in Person i™s network who have forged ties with Person j. Contagion theories are based on a disease metaphor, where exposure to communication messages leads to "contamination." Inoculation theory (McGuire, 1966) provides strategies that can be used to prevent contamination. Two competing contagion mechanisms have received considerable attention in the research literature. Contagion by cohesion implies that people are influenced by direct contact with others in their communication networks (Erickson, 1988). Contagion by structural equivalence suggests that those who have similar structural patterns of relationships within the network are more likely to influence one another (Burt, 1987). Social information processing (social influence) theory (Fulk, Schmitz, & Steinfield, 1990) suggests that the attitudes and beliefs of people become similar to those of the others in their communication networks. Social cognitive theory (Bandura, 1986) and institutional theory (DiMaggio & Powell, 1983; Meyer & Rowan, 1977) posit that mimetic processes lead to contagion, whereby people and institutions imitate the practices of those in their relevant networks. Contagion theories apply to adversarial networks in at least three ways. First, each contending network attempts to extend itself by acquiring and linking new members that accept its core identity. Second, they seek to infect the members of their adversaries™ networks with messages, information, and ideologies that will undermine or destroy them. Finally, the adversaries seek to defend themselves by inoculating the members of their own networks against their rivals™ efforts to infect them. Cognitive theories explore the role that meaning, knowledge, and perceptions play in communication networks. Individual i™s decision to forge a tie with another Person j is motivated by who Individual i thinks Person j knows or what i thinks j knows or possesses. Semantic networks are created on the basis of shared message content and similarity in interpretation and understanding (Carley, 1986; Monge & Eisenberg, 1987). A complementary perspective views interorganizational networks as structures of Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MTML Framework Page 7   
  knowledge (Kogut, Shan, & Walker, 1993). Creating interorganizational alliances requires building extensive knowledge networks among prospective partners and maintaining them among current partners. These knowledge networks are the mechanisms though which organizations share both explicit and tacit knowledge. Cognitive communication structures represent the perceptions that people have about their communication networks, that is, about who in their networks talk to whom (Corman & Scott, 1994). These individual cognitive communication networks can be aggregated to provide a collective or consensual view of the entire network (Krackhardt, 1987). Cognitive consistency theory examines the extent to which the attitudes, beliefs, opinions and values of network members are governed by a drive toward consistency or balance (Heider, 1958). The theory suggests that network members tend toward cognitive similarity as a function of the cognitive balance in their networks rather than alternative mechanisms such as contagion (Davis & Leinhardt, 1972; Holland & Leinhardt, 1975). Transactive memory systems consist of knowledge networks in which people assume responsibility for mastery among various aspects of a larger knowledge domain. In this way the collective is more knowledgeable than any component (Hollingshead, 2000, Moreland, 1999; Wegner, 1987). Knowledge repositories linked to the larger knowledge network facilitate knowledge storage and processing (Wegner, 1995). While knowledge flow is essential to an effective knowledge network, communication dilemmas sometimes lead people to withhold potentially useful information (Kalman, et al., 2002). These theories offer insights into adversarial networks. Competitors often develop differing semantic networks based on ingroup-outgroup polarization. While developing their own knowledge networks, competitors seek to undermine the knowledge networks of others, often by disseminating misinformation and faulty knowledge to their opponents, including their cognitive communication structures. Finally transactive memory systems help identify where crucial expertise lies within knowledge networks, thus helping adversaries to build their own expertise and to mount attacks their opponents. Exchange and dependency theories seek to explain the emergence of communication networks on the basis of the distribution of information and material resources across the members of a network (Emerson, 1962, 1972a, 1972b; Homans, 1950). That is, Person i™s decision to forge a tie with another Person j is motivated by i™s interest in seeking a resource that j possesses, and in exchange offering Individual j some resource that i possesses and is of interest to j. People seek what they need from others while giving what others also seek. The exchange form of this family of theories is based largely on equality, assuming that giving and getting generally balances out across the network (Bienenstock & Bonacich, 1992; Cook, 1982). The dependency form emphasizes inequality and focuses on how those who are resource rich in the network tend to dominate those who are resource poor (Benson, 1975; Freeman, 1977, 1979). Consequently, power, control, trust, and ethical behavior are central issues to both theories (Oliver, 1991). Adversaries seek to dominate each other, perhaps to the point of destroying all opponents. While they are likely to utilize exchange mechanisms within their own networks, adversarial networks are dominated by attempts to assert dependency relations on their competitors. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MTML Framework Page 8   
  Homophily and proximity theories account for network emergence on the basis of the similarity of network members© traits (Brass, 1995) as well as their similarity of place (Homans, 1950). Agent i™s decision to forge a tie with another Agent j is motivated by i and j sharing common traits (gender, tenure, etc.) or being proximate in physical or electronic spaces. Traits represent a variety of personal and demographic characteristics such as age, gender, race, professional interests, etc. (Carley, 1991; Coleman, 1957, Marsden, 1988) Social comparison theory suggests that people feel discomfort when they compare themselves to others who are different because they have a natural desire to affiliate with those who are like themselves (Festinger, 1954). Of course, this ignores the old adage that opposites attract, which would argue for a heterophily mechanism. Proximity theories argue that people communicate most frequently with those to whom they are physically closest (Monge, et al, 1985). The theory of electronic propinquity extends this to the realm of email, telephones and other forms of electronic communication (Contractor & Bishop, 2000;Korzenny & Bauer, 1981; Wellman, 2001). Homophily theory suggests that networks engaged in adversarial relations are likely to be comprised of people and organizations who are more similar to each other than to the members of their competitors™ networks. A block model of all adversarial networks (in a given adversarial community) combined into a supra-network would reveal greater similarity within than between blocks. Proximity theory indicates that competing adversarial networks should exist in separate physical and electronic spaces. Yet similarity of traits and space also predicts likely points of contact between competitors and possible locations for penetration of one network by another, both overt and covert. Coevolutionary theory extends traditional evolutionary theory that posits aspirations towards ﬁfitnessﬂ based on mechanisms of variation, selection, retention, and struggle or competition (Aldrich, 1999; Campbell, 1965; Hawley, 1986). For example, Entity i™s decision to forge a tie with Entity j is motivated entirely by i™s belief that the network linkage will increase i™s fitness (measured as performance, survivability, adaptability, robustness, etc.; Hannan & Freeman, 1977). Random or planned variations in organizational traits occur, which are selected and retained on the basis of their contribution to organizational fitness and survival(Baum, 1996; Nelson & Winter, 1982). Coevolutionary theory articulates how communities of organizational populations linked by intra-and-interpopulation networks compete and cooperate with each other for scare resources (Astley, 1985; Kauffman, 1993). In order to survive, organizational networks must adapt to the constantly changing environmental niches in which they find themselves while also attempting to influence the ways in which their environments change (McKelvey, 1997). In most social contexts, more than one of the theoretical mechanisms reviewed above simultaneously influence people. In some cases different theories, some using similar theoretical mechanisms, offer similar explanations but at different levels of analysis. For instance, contagion mechanisms help explain the emergence of networks among individuals as well as among adversarial organizations. In other cases, different theories offer contradictory explanations for the emergence of networks. For instance, Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MTML Framework Page 9   
  theories of self-interest would suggest that adversarial networks create links with others who are indirectly connected to their adversaries, thereby increasing the amount of nonredundant information that can be gleaned. On the other hand, cognitive theories of balance suggest that people seek to be friends with enemies of their enemies thereby increasing their cognitive need for balance.  
 
 
 
EXTENSIONS TO MTML MODEL FOR THE STUDY OF ADVERSARIAL NETWORKS: A COMMUNITY ECOLOGY PERSPECTIVE  The MTML model proposed by Monge and Contractor (2003) focused largely on the social mechanisms that explain the creation, maintenance, and dissolution of network linkages within single networks. It does so by examining the structural tendencies of various relations (such as communication linkages, knowledge linkages, trust relations) among the actors within that network and the attributes (such as gender, level in the hierarchy, and level of expertise) of the actors within that same network. Also included in that model, though not extensive explored, was the influence of other networks on the focal network as well as the influence of the focal network at previous points in time.  These relations are summarized in Figure 1. In the case of adversarial networks it is  Figure 1. The MTML network structuring process  The MTML NetworkStructuring ProcessesStructure of the focalnetworkEndogenous mechanismsExogenous attributesof actorsExogenous relations innetworks important to further explore the ways in which competitors influence each other and coevolve within the community.  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MTML Framework Page 10   
  There are several examples of how adversarial networks influence the structuring of ties within a focal network. For instance, Baker and Faulkner (1993) note that the activation of ties within a covert network are often constrained by the structure and scope of ties within the adversaries™ networks. The desire to communicate, share information, and coordinate within a covert network have to be reconciled with the desire to shield the identity, structure and content of the focal network --- that is, the very survival of the covert network. Indeed as Weiser (2001) says a recently uncovered terrorist manual notes explicitly the premium put on secrecy over communication. Further, as Rothenberg (2001, p. 41) states, the viability of terrorist networks is specifically enhanced by other networks in the community Œ ﬁthe American democratic system that they seek to destroy, a system that permits open movement, freedom of choice, and respects privacy.ﬂ  As described earlier, many of the MTML mechanisms (such as self-interest, social exchange, and proximity) can account for how competing networks configure themselves to advance their position in the community while decreasing the viability of their competitors. Community ecology theory (Aldrich, 1999; Baum & Singh, 1994; Hawley, 1950) provides a  framework to explain the coevolution of populations of adversarial networks within a community.  Community ecology examines multiple populations of differing organizations as well as the various niches in which they occur.  Organizations must typically compete with others in their own populations to acquire the resources they need to survive in their selected environments.    For example, Barnett (1990) studied the competition among the members of the population of the telephone companies in Pennsylvania from 1879-1934, until one company AT&T dominated the market. And Staber (1989) studied the emergence or worker and consumer coops showing how they competed for customer loyalty. Likewise members of the population of US intelligence organizations (such as the FBI, CIA, NSA) compete with each other for resources, jurisdiction, and legitimacy.  But internal competition is not the only challenge that populations face.  They must deal with the members of other populations of friendly and adversarial intelligence organizations outside the US as well as of non-governmental organizations that coexist in their niche.  For example, Haveman (1992) studied the competition between banks and savings and loan associations for customers and their funds under changing regulatory conditions.  And Carroll and Swaminathan (1992) examined the emergence of microbreweries and brewpubs who competed  with the mass producers.  Often organizations must compete, but under some conditions organizations from different populations can also cooperate, seeking mutually beneficial outcomes, a fact that Kauffman (1995, p. 215) says is much more commonly recognized now than in earlier theorizing.  Aldrich (1999, citing Hawley, 1950) argues that two types of interdependence drive community dynamics:  commensalism and symbiosis.  ﬁCommensalism refers to competition and cooperation between similar units, whereas symbiosis refers to mutual interdependence between dissimilar unitsﬂ  (p. 298, italics in the original).  Thus, in large part, relations both within and among populations govern communities.  The first relation is the degree to which similar populations in the same Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MTML Framework Page 11   
  niches compete or cooperate and the second is the degree to which different populations in the same or different niches support each other. An important issue that has arisen with regard to community ecology is how to define a community (Aldrich, 1999; DiMaggio, 1994).  Hawley™s (1950) original sociological work on community ecology focuses relationships within geographically and temporally bound communities.  As community ecology has been refitted for organizational scholarship, the definitions of community have taken a more functional approach (Ruef, 2000).  That is not to say, however, that organizational scholars completely agree on how community should be defined, operationalized, or analyzed.  Astley™s (1985) organizational model of community focuses on the technology-based interrelationships between populations.  Barnett and his colleagues (Barnett, 1994; Barnett & Carroll, 1987; Barnett, Mischke, & Ocasio, 2000) define community on the basis of commensalist and symbiotic relationships between organizations.  Hannan and Carroll (1995) broaden the scope of this definition, asserting that community ﬁrefers to the broader set of organizational populations whose interactions have a systemic character, often caused by functional differentiation" (p. 30).  Rosenkopf and Tushman (1994) add that context is important, in their case the technological context.  Aldrich (1999) and Ruef (2000) add that the populations in a community should be organized around a ﬁcore,ﬂ whether it be technological, normative, functional, or legal-regulatory.  Ruef (2000) goes about organizing his community of health care populations by focuses on four main functions of the health care field.  Aldrich (1999, p. 301) proffers this succinct definition:  ﬁAn organizational community is a set of coevolving organizational populations joined by ties of commensalism and symbiosis through their orientation to a common technology, normative order, or legal-regulatory regime.ﬂ (p. 301). Aldrich (1999, p. 302) proposes a taxonomy of eight possible relations between organizational populations based on the effects these relations have on each of the population. Aldrich proposes 6 types of commensalist relations (those that occur among similar units): full competition (where each population negatively impacts the other); partial competition (where only one of the populations has a negative effect on the other); predatory competition (where one population has a positive effect on the other while the latter has a negative impact on the former); neutrality (where neither population has a positive or negative impact on the other); partial mutualism (where one has a positive effect on the other, but the latter has no impact on the former), full mutualism (where both have positive impacts on each other). While full mutualism is defined as a commensalist relation (between similar populations), symbiosis is defined as a mutually beneficial relation between dissimilar populations. Finally, Aldrich (1999; p. 302) defines a dominance relation where a ﬁdominant population controls the flow of resources to other populations (Hawley, 1950). The structure of the community and the coevolution of the populations of networks that comprise it depend on the outcome of commensalistic and symbiotic relations.ﬂ  Aldrich™s (1999) review illustrates several research examples for each of these intra- and inter-population relationships. However, most of the extant research in this area has examined only two populations at a time. Clearly, the community ecology theory Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MTML Framework Page 12   
  posits an examination of multiple (not just two) populations within the community and their co-evolving influences on one another. Social network analysis in general, and the MTML framework proposed here, is particularly well-suited to this task. For instance, we can begin to hypothesize and empirically test how the populations within the community co-evolve when relations among the competing populations are considered at the triadic, sub-groups, and global levels. To what extent is the creation of  ties within adversarial networks influenced by their common technology, normative order, or legal-regulatory regime? And, to what extent are the creation, maintenance, and dissolution of network relations within focal adversarial networks influenced by the various commensalist relations (within other organizations in the same population) and symbiotic relations with other populations within the community? Thus community ecology theory provides an important addition to the previously described MTML mechanisms in explaining the emergence of adversarial networks.   ANALYTIC FRAMEWORK FOR STUDYING MTML MODELS   The previous section has described theoretical mechanisms that offer explanations for the co-evolution of communication and knowledge networks. The schematic in the following figure describes a comprehensive analytic methodology developed by Contractor et al (1999) as part of our ongoing NSF-funded research to computationally model, empirically assess, and statistically validate the multiple theories that explain co-evolution of knowledge networks. These include changes resulting from the interventions of technologies. The schematic shows the relationship among the key elements of the analytic framework approach: (1) theory building/hypothesis formulation about mechanisms of network co-evolution; (2) computational modeling/simulation of those mechanisms and how they produce emergent behavior; (3) collection and analysis of empirical data, and (4) development and deployment of novel ﬁcommunity-wareﬂ knowledge network enabling tools. The new kinds of data analysis and theory validation are enabled by (5) advances in p* statistical techniques for modeling and analyzing network data.  Table 2 provides an illustration of how p* network analytic techniques can be used to simultaneously test multiple theories at multiple levels (Contractor, Wasserman, & Faust, 2002). Table 2 summarizes various genres of network hypotheses in terms of the probabilities of graph realizations exhibiting the hypothesized relational property.  In each case, the hypothesis is that graph realizations with the hypothesized property have larger probabilities of being observed.  In other words, the probability of ties being present or absent in the graph reflects the hypothesized relational property. The table begins by distinguishing endogenous and exogenous variables that influence the probability of ties being present or absent in the focal network. It should be noted that the exogenous-endogenous distinction being made here is not equivalent to similar terminology used in the development of causal models in general and structural equation models in particular. Unlike its use in causal modeling, endogenous variables here are not Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MTML Framework Page 13   
  predicted by exogenous variables. Here, both explain structural tendencies of the network.  Endogenous variables (Rows 1 through 4 in Table 2) refer to various relational properties of the focal network itself that influence the probability of ties being present or absent in the same network. From a meta-theoretical perspective, these endogenous variables capture the extent to which relational properties of the network influence its self-organization.  Exogenous variables (Rows 5 through 11 in Table 2) refer to various properties outside the specific relation within the focal network that influence the probability of ties being present or absent in the focal network. Hence exogenous variables include the attributes of the actors in the network, additional network relations among the actors, the same network relation at previous points in time, as well as other networks within the same population or other populations. Within each of these two categories (i.e., endogenous and exogenous variables), the table offers a further sub-classification based on the extent to which the probability of ties being present or absent in the network are influenced by properties at the actor, dyad, triad, and global levels. In addition to including genres of network hypotheses, the third column in Table 2 also   
Figure 2. Analytic framework to study the coevolution of adversarial networks   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Endogenous variables (Rows 1 through 4 in Table 2) refer to various relational properties of the focal network itself that influence the probability of ties being present or absent in the same network. From a meta-theoretical perspective, these endogenous variables 1. MTML model to  explain the co-evolution of adversarial networks   2. Computationally model the theoretical mechanisms of MTML to predict coevolution of adversarial networks and their performance  4. Use ﬁcommunity- wareﬂ web-based tools to enable the co-evolution of adversarial networks  3. Collect empirical data on co-evolution of adversarial networks 5. Develop and deploy      p* statistical methods      to validate the predictions of computational models with empirical data     theory and models Micro-behavioral theoriesModel predictions of network evolution and meso-level organizational performance Multi-level hypotheses andconcepts to be measured Technology augmentation Web-based surveys and real time computer-captured data New hypotheses Refinements to theory  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MTML Framework Page 14   
  capture the extent to which relational properties of the network influence its self-organization.  Exogenous variables (Rows 5 through 11 in Table 2) refer to various properties outside the specific relation within the focal network that influence the probability of ties being present or absent in the focal network. Hence exogenous variables include the attributes of the actors in the network, additional network relations among the actors, the same network relation at previous points in time, as well as other networks within the same population or other populations. Within each of these two categories (i.e., endogenous and exogenous variables), the table offers a further sub-classification based on the extent to which the probability of ties being present or absent in the network are influenced by properties at the actor, dyad, triad, and global levels. In addition to including genres of network hypotheses, the third column in Table 2 also includes specific theories, previously discussed in the MTML models that might provide support for hypotheses.  As such it demonstrates a close coupling between the MTML model and p* as a confirmatory analytic technique for empirically testing the model.  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MTML Framework Page 15   
  Table 2. Summary of a multilevel multi-theoretical framework to test hypotheses about adversarial networks (Variable of interest:  Probability of the realizations of a graph)  Independent variable  Examples of specific measures Hypotheses: Graph realizations where there is greater likelihood of – 1. Endogenous (same network): Actor level Actor centrality, structural autonomy. – high actor centrality have higher probabilities of occurring (e.g., Theory of structural holes) 2. Endogenous (same network): Dyad level Mutuality, Reciprocation – high mutuality have higher probabilities of occurring (e.g., Exchange Theory) 3. Endogenous (same network): Triad level Transitivity, cyclicality – high  cyclicality have higher probabilities of occurring (e.g., Balance Theory) 4. Endogenous (same network): Global level Network density, centralization  – high centralization have higher probabilities of occurring. (e.g., Collective action theory) 5. Exogenous: Actor attributes (Actor level) Age, gender, organization type, education – ties between actors with similar attributes have higher probabilities of occurring (e.g., Theories of homophily) 6. Exogenous: Actor attributes (Dyad level) Differential mutuality and reciprocation  – mutual ties between actors with similar attributes have higher probabilities of occurring (e.g., Exchange Theory) 7. Exogenous: Actor attributes (Triad level) Differential transitivity and cyclicality – transitive (or cyclical) ties between actors with similar attributes have higher probabilities of occurring. (e.g., Balance Theory) 8. Exogenous: Actor attributes (Global level) Differential network density, centralization – network centralization among actors with similar attributes have higher probabilities of occurring. (e.g., Collective action theory) 9. Exogenous: Network (Other relations) Advice, friendship network  – communication ties co-occurring with ties on a second relation have higher probabilities of occurring. (e.g., Cognitive  theories) 10. Exogenous: Network (Same relation at previous point in time) Communication network – ties between actors co-occurring with ties at preceding points in time have higher probability of occurring. (e.g., Evolutionary theories) 11. Exogenous: Other networks (Within the same population and in other populations) Actor, dyad, triad, and global metrics in other networks – ties between actors co-occurring due to structural properties of other networks within the same population and other populations within the community (e.g., Community Ecology theory)  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MTML Framework Page 16   
      References  
Aldrich, H. (1999). Organizations evolving. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Arquilla, J., & Ronfeldt, D. (2001). The advent of netwar (revisited). In J. Arquilla & D. Ronfeldt (Eds.), Networks and netwars: The future of terror, crime, and militancy (pp. 1-25). Santa Monica, CA: Rand. Astley, W. G. (1985). The two ecologies: Population and community perspectives on organizational evolution. Administrative Science Quarterly, 30, 224-241. Badaracco, J. L., Jr. (1991). The knowledge link: How firms compete through strategic alliances. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press. Baker, W. E., & Faulkner, R. R. (1993). The social organization of conspiracy: Illegal networks in the heavy electrical equipment industry. American Sociological Review, 58, 837-860. Bar, F. (1995), Intelligent Manufacturing in the Global Information Economy, in The Transition to a Global Economy: Challenges for United States and the World, W. Drake ed., New York, NY: 20th Century Fund. Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. Barnett, W. P. (1994). The liability of collective action: Growth and change among early American telephone companies. In J. A. C. Baum & J. V. Singh (Eds.), Evolutionary dynamics of organizations (pp. 337-354). New York: Oxford University Press. Barnett, W. P., & Carroll, G. R. (1987). Competition and mutualism among early telephone companies. Administrative Science Quarterly, 32, 400-421. Barnett, W. P., Mischke, G. A., & Ocasio, W. (2000). The evolution of collective strategies among organizations. Organization Studies, 21, 325-354. Baum, J. A. C.  (1996).  Organizational ecology.  In S. Clegg, C. Hardy, & W. Nord (Eds.), Handbook of organization studies (pp. 77-114).  Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Baum, J. A. C., & Singh, J. V. (1994). Organizational hierarchies and evolutionary processes: Some reflections on a theory of organizational evolution. In J. A. C. Baum & J. V. Singh (Eds.), Evolutionary dynamics of organizations (pp. 3-20). New York: Oxford University Press. Benson, J. K. (1975). The interorganizational network as a political economy. Administrative Science Quarterly, 20, 229-249. Bienenstock, E. J., & Bonacich, P. (1997). Network exchange as a cooperative game. Rationality and Society, 9, 37-65. Bonacich, P., & Schneider, S.  (1992).  Communication networks and collective action.  In W. B. G. Liebrand, D. M. Messick, & H. A. M. Wilke (Eds.), Social dilemmas:  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MTML Framework Page 17   
  Theoretical issues and research findings (pp. 225-245).  New York:  Pergammon Press. Bourdieu, P., & Wacquant, L. J. D. (1992).  An invitation to reflexive sociology.  Chicago, IL:  University of Chicago Press. Brass, D. J. (1995). A social network perspective on human resources management. Research in Personnel and Human Resources Management, 13, 39-79. Bryant, A., Shumate, M., & Monge, P. (2002). Globalization and coevolving communities: The legitimate, illegitimate, and legal. Paper under publication review. Burt, R. S. (1987). Social contagion and innovation: Cohesion versus structural equivalence. American Journal of Sociology, 92, 1287-1335. Burt, R. S. (1992). Structural holes: The social structure of competition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Burt, R. S. (2001). Structural holes versus network closure as social capital. In N. Lin, K. Cook,  & R. S. Burt (Eds.), Social Capital: Theory and Research, (pp. 31-56) New York: Aldine de Gruyter. Campbell, D. T.  (1965).  Variation and selective retention in socio-cultural evolution.  In H.R. Barringer, G.I. Blanksten, & R. Mack (Eds.), Social change in developing areas:  A reinterpretation of evolutionary theory  (pp. 19-49).  Cambridge, MA:  Schenkman. Carley, K. (1986). An approach for relating social structure to cognitive structure. Journal of Mathematical Sociology, 12, 137-189. Carley, K. (1991). A theory of group stability. American Sociological Review, 56, 331-354. Carley, K. M. (1995). Communication technologies and their effect on cultural  homogeneity, consensus, and the diffusion of new ideas. Sociological Perspectives, 38(4), 547-571. Carroll, G. R., & Swaninathan, A. (1992). The organizational ecology of strategic groups in the American brewing industry from 1975-1990. Corporate and Industrial Change, 1, 65-97. Coleman, J. S. (1957). Community conflict. New York: Free Press. Coleman, J. S. (1986). Individual interests and collective action: Selected essays. New York: Cambridge University Press. Contractor, N., & Bishop, A.. P. (2000). Reconfiguring community networks: The case of PrairieKNOW. In T. Ishida (Ed.), Digital cities: Technologies, experiences, and future perspectives.  Lecture Notes in Computer Science (pp. 151-164).  Berlin: Springer-Verlag. Contractor, N. S., Carley, K., Levitt, R., Monge, P., Wasserman, S., Bar, F., Fulk, J., Hollingshead, A., & Kunz, J. (1999). Co-Evolution of Knowledge Networks and Twenty-First Century Forms: Computational Modeling and Empirical Testing. Research proposal funded by the National Science Foundation (Grant # IIS-9980109). Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MTML Framework Page 18   
  Contractor, N. S., & Eisenberg, E. M. (1990). Communication networks and new media in organizations. In J. Fulk & C.W. Steinfield (Eds.), Organizations and communication Technology (pp. 143-172). Newbury Park, CA: Sage. Contractor, N. S., Wasserman, S., & Faust, K. (2002). Testing multi-theoretical multilevel hypotheses about organizational networks: An analytic framework and empirical example. Paper under publication review. Cook, K. S. (1982). Network structures from an exchange perspective. In P. V. Marsden & N. Lin (Eds.), Social structure and network analysis (pp. 177-218). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. Corman, S. R., & Scott, C. R. (1994). Perceived networks, activity, foci, and observable communication in social collectives. Communication Theory, 4, 171-190. Davis, J., & Leinhardt, S. (1972). The structure of positive interpersonal relations in small groups. In J. Berger (Ed.), Sociological theories in progress. (Vol. 2, pp. 218-251). Boston, MA: Houghton-Mifflin. DiMaggio, P. (1994). The challenge of community evolution. In J. A. C. Baum, & J. V. Singh (Eds.), Evolutionary dynamics of organizations (pp. 444-450). New York: Oxford University Press. DiMaggio, P.J., & Powell, W. W. (1983). The iron cage revisited: Institutional isomorphism and collective rationality in organizational fields. American Sociological Review, 48, 147-160. Emerson, R. M. (1962). Power-dependence relations. American Sociological Review, 27, 31-41. Emerson, R.M. (1972a). Exchange theory, part I: A psychological basis for social exchange. In J. Berger, M. Zelditch, & B. Anderson (Eds.), Sociological theories in progress (Vol. 2, pp. 38-57). Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin. Emerson, R.M. (1972b). Exchange theory, part II: Exchange relations and networks. In J. Berger, M. Zelditch, & B. Anderson (Eds.), Sociological theories in progress (Vol. 2, pp. 58-87). Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin. Erickson, B. (1988). The relational basis of attitudes. In S. D. B. B. Wellman (Ed.), Social structures: A network approach, (pp. 99-121,): Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Festinger, L. (1954). A theory of social comparison processes. Human Relations, 7, 114-140. Freeman, L. (1977). A set of measures of centrality based on betweenness. Sociometry, 40, 35-41. Freeman, L. (1979). Centrality in social networks: I Conceptual clarification. Social Networks, 1, 215-239. Fulk, J., Schmitz, J., & Steinfield, C. W. (1990). A social influence model of technology use. In J. Fulk & C. W. Steinfield (Eds.), Organizations and communication technology (pp. 117-140). Newbury Park, CA: Sage. Goldman, S. L, Nagel, R. N., & Preiss, K. (1995). Agile competitors and virtual organizations: Strategies for enriching the customer. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MTML Framework Page 19   
  Hannan, M. T., & Freeman, J. (1977). The population ecology of organizations. American Journal of Sociology, 82, 929-984. Hardin, R.  (1982).  Collective action.  Baltimore, MD:  John Hopkins University Press. Haveman, H. A. (1992). Between a rock and a hard place: Organizational change and performance under conditions of fundamental environmental transformation. Administrative Science Quarterly, 37, 48-75. Hawley, A. (1950). Human ecology: A theory of community structure. New York: Ronald Press. Hawley, A.  (1986).  Human ecology:  A theoretical essay.  Chicago:  University of Chicago Press. Heider, F. (1958). The psychology of interpersonal relations. New York: John Wiley. Holland, P. W., & Leinhardt, S. (1979). Perspectives on social network research. New York: Academic Press. Hollingshead, A. B. (1998). Distributed expertise and communication processes ingroups. In E.A. Mannix, M. A. Neale, D. H Gruenfeld, Research on Managing in Groups and Teams. (Volume 1). Greenwich, CN: JAI Press. Hollingshead, A.B. (2000).  Perceptions of expertise and transactive memory in work relations.  Group Processes and Intergroup Relations, 3, 257-267. Homans, G. C. (1950). The human group. New York: Harcourt Brace. Kalman, M. E., Monge, P. R., Fulk, J., & Heino, R.  (2002).  Resolving communication dilemmas in database-mediate collaboration.  Communication Research, 29, 125-154. Kauffman, S.A.  (1993).  The origins of order:  Self-organizing and selection in evolution.  New York:  Oxford University Press. Kauffman, S. A. (1995). At home in the universe: The search for the laws of self-organization and complexity. New York: Oxford University Press. Kogut, B., Shan, W., & Walker, G. (1993). Knowledge in the network and the network as knowledge: Structuring of new industries. In G. Grabher (Ed.), The embedded firm: On the socioeconomics of industrial networks (pp. 67-94). New York: Routledge. Korzenny, F. & Bauer, C. (1981). Testing the theory of electronic propinquity: Organizational teleconferencing. Communication Research, 8, 479-498. Krackhardt, D. (1987). Cognitive social structures. Social Networks, 9, 109-134. Krebs, V. (2001). Mapping networks of terrorist cells. Connections, 24, 43-52. Lin, N. (2001). Building a network theory of social capital. In N. Lin, K. Cook, R. S. Burt (Eds.), Social Capital: Theory and Research (pp. 3-30). New York: Aldine de Gruyter. Marsden, P. V., (1988). Homogeneity in confiding relations. Social Networks, 10, 57-76. Marwell, G., & Oliver, P. (1993). The critical mass in collective action: A micro-social theory. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press. McGuire, W. J. (1966). Attitudes and opinions. Annual Review of Psychology, 17,  475-514. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MTML Framework Page 20   
  McKelvey, B. (1997). Quasi-natural organization science. Organization Science, 8, 352-380. Meyer, J. W., & Rowan, B. (1977). Institutionalized organizations: Formal structure as myth and ceremony. American Journal of Sociology, 83, 340-363. Monge, P. R., & Contractor, N. S. (2001). Emergence of communication networks. In F. Jablin, & L. L. Putnam (Eds.), The new handbook of organizational communication (pp. 440-502). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Monge, P. R., & Contractor, N. S. (2003). Theories of communication networks. New York: Oxford University Press. Monge, P. R., & Eisenberg, E. M. (1987). Emergent communication networks. In F. M. Jablin, L.L. Putnam, K.H. Roberts, and L.W. Porter, (Eds.), Handbook of organizational communication (pp. 304-342). Newbury Park, CA: Sage. Monge, P. R., Rothman, L.W., Eisenberg, E.M., Miller, K.I., & Kirste, K.K. (1985). The dynamics of organizational proximity. Management Science, 31, 1129-1141. Moreland, R. L. (1999). Transactive memory: Learning who knows what in work groups and organizations. In L. Thompson, D. Messick, & J. Levine (Eds.), Sharing knowledge in organizations (pp. 3-31). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Nelson, R. R., & Winter, S. G. (1982). An evolutionary theory of economic change.  Cambridge, MA:  Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. Oliver, C. (1991). Network relations and loss of organizational autonomy. Human Relations, 44, 943-961. Olson, M., Jr. (1965). The logic of collective action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Powell, W. W. (1990). Neither market nor hierarchy: Network forms of organization. In L.L. Cummings & B. Staw (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior (pp. 295-336). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press. Ruef, M. (2000). The emergence of organizational forms: A community ecology approach. American Journal of Sociology, 106, 658-714. Samuelson, P. (1954). The pure theory of public expenditure. Review of Economics and Statistics, 36, 387-389. Staber, U. H. (1989). Age dependence and historical effects of the failure rates of worker cooperatives. Economic and Industrial Democracy, 10, 59-80. Rosenkopf, L., & Tushman, M. L. (1994). The coevolution of technology and organization. In J. A. C. Baum & J. V. Singh (Eds.), Evolutionary dynamics of organizations (pp. 403-424). New York: Oxford University Press. Rothenberg, R. (2001). From whole cloth: Making up the terrorist network. Connections, 24, 36-42. van Meeter, K. M. (2001). Terrorists/Liberators: Researching and dealing with adversary social networks. Connections, 24, 66-78. Wegner, D. M. (1987).  Transactive memory: A contemporary analysis of the group mind.  In B. Mullen & G. R. Goethals (Eds.), Theories of group behavior (pp. 185-208).  New York: Springer-Verlag. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MTML Framework Page 21   
  Wegner, D. M. (1995). A computer network model of human transactive memory.  Social Cognition, 13, 319-339. Weiser, B. (October 28, 2001). Captured terrorist manual suggests hijackers did a lot by the Book. New York Times. Wellman, B. (2001). Computer networks as social networks. Science, 293, 2031-2034. Williamson, O. E. (1975). Markets and hierarchies: Analysis and antitrust implications, a study of the economics of internal organization. New York: Free Press. Williamson, O. E. (1985). The economic institutions of capitalism: Firms, markets, relational contracting. New York: Free Press. Williamson, O. E. (1996). Economic organization: The case for candor. Academy of Management Review, 21, 48-57. Zajac, E. J., & Olsen, C. P. (1993). From transaction cost to transactional value analysis: Implications for the study of interorganizational strategies. Journal of Management Studies, 30, 131-145.  
 Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IdentifyingInternationalNetworks:
LatentSpacesandImputation
MichaelD.Ward
PoliticalScience
UniversityofWashington
Seattle,Washington
98195
PeterD.Ho®
1
Statistics
UniversityofWashington
Seattle,Washington
98195
CoreyLowellLofdahl
Simulation&Information
TechnologyOperations
SAIC
Burlington,MA01803
Introduction
Mostanalysesofworldpoliticsandstudiesofnationalsecuritypoliciesrecognizethe
inter-
dependence
amongthesalientactorsacrossthesalientissues.Traditionally,international
politicshasbeende¯nedasthescopeandextentoftherelationsamongindependentcoun-
tries,thoughttobethemostimportantelementsinworldpolitics.Thismeansthatactors
aswellastheiractionsarestrategicallyinterdependent(Signorino1999).Ignoringthein-
terdependenceamongthesephenomenawouldappeartobeaseriousoversightthatplague
attemptstounderstand,letalonepredict,thecourseofnationalsecuritypolicyandworld
politicsmoregenerally.Withveryfewexceptions,
quantitative,systematic
studiesofin-
ternationalrelationsandnationalsecurityhaveassumedthatthemajoractorsandactions
thatcompriseworldpoliticsconsistofunconnectedactionsandactors.Gametheoretic
modelsarelegion,butrarelydealwithmorethantwoactorsatatime.Somebeginning
attemptstomodeltheinterdependencyininternationalrelationshaveappearedinthelit-
erature(WardandKirby1987;GleditschandWard2001;GleditschandWard2001;Ward
andGleditsch2002;Gleditsch2002;Lofdahl2002),butasyetnetworkmodelshaveyet
bewidelyappliedinscholarlyorpolicyworkoninternationalpolitics.Thisissomewhat
surprising,sinceitisevidentat¯rstblushthatinternationalpoliticsisabouttheinterde-
pendencethatappearsaroundtheworld.
Socialnetworkanalysisisonetechniquethathasbeendevelopedtomapandmeasure
therelationshipsand°owsamongagents.Thenodesinthenetworkaretheindividuals
andgroupsandthelinksamongthemillustratetheirinterdependencies,bothinterms
ofstructureandintermsofthe°owsofinformationfromonenodetoothers.Since
thedevelopmentofthesociogram(Moreno1934),sociologistsamongothershavebeen
interestedinanalyzingthelinkagesamongindividualsandgroups.Aninterestingearly
exampleisfoundintheearlyworkofColeman,KatzandMenzel(1957).Mostearly
theoreticaladvanceswerebasedongraphtheoryasdevelopedandadvancedbyFrank
Hararyandhisstudentsandcollaborators(Harary1959;Harary1969;Harary,Norman
andCartwright1965).Theso-called\Columbiaschool"workedthroughoutthe1960sand
beyondtofurtheradvancethesubstantive¯ndingsinthisarenaofsociology(White1963;
White,BoormanandBreiger1976).Broaderdisseminationoftheseideascamemuchmore
recentlywithdidacticwritings(KnokeandKuklinski1982;Scott1991)aswellasearly
1
PeterHo®'sresearchissupportedbyO±ceofNavalResearchgrantN00014-02-1-1011.
1
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.applicationsthatarebynowcanonical(PadgettandAnsell1993;Hansell1983).Indeed,
socialnetworkanalysishasbecomeevenmorefashionableasoutsideofsociologyintechnical
¯elds,andhasspreadtothewiderpressasanimportantmethodforunderstandingan
increasinglyperplexingandcomplicatedsocialenvironment(Garreau2001).However,it
issomewhatironicthattodatetherearenopublishedapplicationsofnetworkanalysisto
thestudyofinternationalrelations.
2
Ho®,RafteryandHandcock(2002inpress)developedprobabilisticmodelsoflinks
amongactorsbasedonlatentpositionsofactorsinanunobserved\socialspace."Weapply
suchamodelalargedatabaseoninternationalrelationsthatistypicalforthenationalsecu-
rityandinternationalpoliticsliteratures,anddiscussmakingpredictiveinferenceonlinks
thataremissingatrandom.Inparticular,weanalyzetheinteractionsamongimportant
socialactorsinCentralAsia,usingdatatakenfromtheKansasEventDataSurveyanauto-
matedtextuallyorienteddatageneratingprocess(Schrodt,DavisandWeddle1994;Gerner,
Schrodt,FranciscoandWeddle1994),speci¯callytheCASIAdatabase,availablefromthe
KEDSWebsiteathttp://www.ku.edu/keds/data.html.Thisdatabasecapturesthedaily
ebband°owofcooperativeandcon°ictualeventsamongimportantpoliticalandeconomic
agents(typicallycalled\actors"intheinternationalrelationsliterature)intheCentral
Asianregion.
Ourmainpurposeistoillustratethevalueinusingalatentspaceapproachtounder-
standingnetworkstructureinanapplied,internationalrelationscontext.
EventDataonInternationalRelationsamongCentral
AsianCountries
Eventdataarenominalorordinalcodingsoftherecordedinteractionsofinternational
actors.
3
Berelson(1952)introducedtheconceptofcontentanalysistothesocialsciences,
butitwasNorth,Holsti,ZaninovichandZinnes(1963)thatpioneereditsuseinstudiesof
worldpolitics.Eventdatahavebeenwidelyusedinquantitativeinternationalrelations
researchandinpolicyresearchforfourdecades,followingtheirintroduction,eventdata
ininternationalrelationswerewidelyused(North1967;McClellandandHoggard1969;
Azar1980).UntilthedevelopmentofmachinecodingtheWorldEventInteractionSurvey
(WEIS)andCon°ictonPeaceDatabank(COPDAB)werethetwodominantschema.The
contemporary,state-of-the-artisfoundintheKansasEventDataSystem(KEDS)which
usesautomatedcodingofEnglish-languagenewsreportstogeneratepoliticaleventdata
(Schrodt2000;Schrodt,DavisandWeddle1994).
AccordingtoSchrodt,therearethreemajorstepsinvolvedincreatingeventdata.
2
StevenJ.Brams(1966;1968)andlaterScho¯eld(1972)triedtoestimatelinkagesamongcountries,but
thislineofresearchwasnotpursued.Someworkwithelementarygraphtheoryinthe¯eldofinternational
relationshasappearedmorerecently(Lai1995),butlikemostoftheearlywork,thisappliestoasmall
numberofactors,typicallythree.
3
ThissectionistakenandadaptedwithpermissionfromtheKEDSWebsiteat
http://www.ku.edu/keds/intro.html.
2
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1.
First,asourceofnewsisidenti¯ed.Typicallyanewssummaryisused,ideallyone
thatisalreadyavailableinamachinereadableformat.Thetwocurrent
defacto
publicallyavailablestandardsaretheReutersnewsserviceleadparagraphsorthe
ForeignBroadcastInformationService(FBIS)
4
2.
Second,acodingsystemisdeveloped,oroneoftheextantcodingsystemssuchas
theWorldEventsInteractionSurvey(akaWEIS),theCon°ictandPeaceDataBank
(COPDAB),orCAMEO(aKEDScodingschema(Gerner,Schrodt,
Ä
OmÄurYilmaz
andAbu-Jabr2002))ischosen.Thiscodingsystemmustspecifywhattypesof
interactionsconstitutean\event."Thisrequiresthespeci¯cationofwhichactors
willbecoded,forexample,whethernonstateactorssuchasNATOandtheUnited
Nationsorguerillamovementsorsalientindividualswillbeincluded.Atthesame
timethecodingrulesmustspecifywhatbasicissueareaswillbeincluded.The
COPDABdatasetincludesageneral\issuearea"whichdescribeswhetheranaction
isprimarilymilitary,economic,diplomaticoroneof¯veothertypesofrelationship.
Incontrast,WEISalsohadafewspeci¯c\issuearenas"suchastheVietnamWar,
Arab-Israelicon°ict,andSALTnegotiations.
3.
Thecodingrulesthemselvesmaybedevelopedintermsofamanualthatisgiven
tohumancodersormorefrequentlyisencapsulatedinacomputerprogramsuchas
KEDS,whichusesextensivedictionariestoidentifyactorsandeventsandassociate
thesewithspeci¯cnumericalcodes.Thesedictionariesaredevelopedtheoreticallyby
speci¯cationandtunedpracticallybycodingalargenumberoftestsentencesfrom
theactualdataandaddingtheappropriatevocabularywhenthemachinesmakesan
observederror.
Table
1
showsasampleoftheleadsentencesofreportsontheReutersnewswirethat
precededIraq'sinvasionofKuwaitinAugust1990.Generallyeachleadcorrespondsto
asingleevent,thoughsomesentencesgeneratemultipleevents.Forexample,thelead
sentenceforJuly23,1990is\IraqinewspapersdenouncedKuwait'sforeignministeras
aU.S.agentMonday."ThiscorrespondstoWEIScategory122,de¯nedas\Denounce;
denigrate;abuse".Inthisevent,Iraqisthesource(actor)oftheactionandKuwaitisthe
target.Together,thesegeneratetheeventrecordthatcorrespondstoaneventinwhich
IraqdenouncesKuwait.
5
TheWEIScodesandassociatedGoldstein(1992)weightsaregivenin
2
forsomeof
theWEIScategories.Goldsteinscoresarepsychometricallydeterminedweights,wherea
positiveweightmeansthattheeventhaspositivea®ect;conversely,anegativeGoldstein
scoreindicatesnegativea®ect.
Table
3
showstheReutersstoriesconvertedtoWEISevents.Eventdataanalysisrelies
onalargenumberofeventstoproducemeaningfulpatternsofinteraction.Theinformation
4
FBISisavailableat
http://199.221.15.211/
,whileReuterscanbecontactedvia
www.reuters.com
.
5
Thisgives\900723IRQKUW122"where\900723"isthedateoftheevent,IRQisastandardcode
forIraq,KUWisthecodeforKuwait,and122istheWEIScategory.
3
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Table1:
ReutersChronologyof1990Iraq-KuwaitCrisis,adaptedfromSchrodt
(http://www.ku.edu/keds/intro.html),withpermission.TheIraqidenunciationofKuwati
onJuly23,1990isatypicalcon°ictevent.
DateHeadlineLeadSentence
July17,1990RESURGENTIRAQSENDSSHOCK
WAVESTHROUGHGULFARAB
STATES
IraqPresidentSaddamHussein
launchedanattackonKuwaitandthe
UnitedArabEmirates(UAE)Tues-
day,chargingtheyhadconspiredwith
theUnitedStatestodepressworldoil
pricesthroughoverproduction.
July23,1990
IRAQSTEPSUPGULFCRISIS
WITHATTACKONKUWAITIMIN-
ISTER
IraqinewspapersdenouncedKuwait's
foreignministerasaU.S.agentMon-
day,pouringoilonthe°amesofaPer-
sianGulfcrisisArableadersarestrug-
glingtosti°ewitha°urryofdiplo-
macy.(I.e.,IraqDenouncesKuwait.)
July24,1990IRAQWANTSGULFARABAID
DONORSTOWRITEOFFWAR
CREDITS
Debt-burdenedIraq'scon°ictwith
Kuwaitispartlyaimedatpersuading
GulfArabcreditorstowriteo®bil-
lionsofdollarslentduringthewarwith
Iran,Gulf-basedbankersanddiplo-
matssaid.
July24,1990IRAQ,TROOPSMASSEDINGULF,
DEMANDS$25OPECOILPRICE
Iraq'soilministerhittheOPECcartel
Tuesdaywithademandthatitmust
chokesuppliesuntilpetroleumprices
soarto$25abarrel.
July25,1990IRAQTELLSEGYPTITWILLNOT
ATTACKKUWAIT
IraqhasgivenEgyptassurancesthat
itwouldnotattackKuwaitintheir
currentdisputeoveroilandterritory,
ArabdiplomatssaidWednesday.
July27,1990IRAQWARNSITWON'TBACK
DOWNINTALKSWITHKUWAIT
IraqmadeclearFridayitwouldtake
anuncompromisingstandatconcilia-
tiontalkswithKuwait,sayingitsPer-
sianGulfneighbormustrespondto
Baghdad's\legitimaterights"andre-
pairtheeconomicdamageitcaused.
July31,1990IRAQINCREASESTROOPLEVELS
ONKUWAITBORDER
Iraqhasconcentratednearly100,000
troopsclosetotheKuwaitiborder,
morethantriplethenumberreported
aweekago,theWashingtonPostsaid
initsTuesdayeditions.
August1,1990CRISISTALKSINJEDDAHBE-
TWEENIRAQANDKUWAITCOL-
LAPSE
Talksondefusinganexplosivecri-
sisintheGulfcollapsedWednesday
whenKuwaitrefusedtogiveintoIraqi
demandsformoneyandterritory,a
Kuwaitio±cialsaid.
August2,1990IRAQINVADESKUWAIT,OIL
PRICESSOARASWARHITS
PERSIANGULF
IraqinvadedKuwait,ousteditslead-
ersandsetupapro-Baghdadgovern-
mentThursdayinalightningpre-dawn
strikethatsentoilpricessoaringand
worldleadersscramblingtodousethe
°amesofwarinthestrategicPersian
Gulf.
4
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Table2:
SelectedWEISactioncategoriesandGoldsteinScores.
Yield(1.0)Surrender(0.6)Retreat(0.6)
Retract(2.0)Accommodate,CeaseFire(3.0)CedePower(5.0)
Comment(0.0)DeclineComment(-0.1)PessimistComment(-0.4)
NeutralComment(-0.2)OptimistComment(0.4)ExplainPosition(0.0)
Consult(1.0)Meet(1.0)Visit(1.9)
Receive(2.8)Vote,Elect(1.0)Approve(3.5)
Praise(3.4)Endorse(3.6)Rally(3.8)
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Kidnap,Jail(-2.5)Spy(-5.0)Force(-9.0)
Non-InjuryDestruction(-8.3)
Non-Military
Destruction(-8.7)MilitaryEngagement(-10.0)
Riot,ViolentClash(-7.0)
Assassinate
Torture
Execute(-9.0)CoupAttempted(-8.0)
providedbyanysingleeventisverylimited;singleeventsarealsoa®ectedbyerroneous
reportsandcodingerrors.However,importanteventstriggerotherinteractionsthroughout
thesystem.ForexamplewhileIraq'sinvasionofKuwaitbyitselfgeneratesonlyasingle
eventwithWEIScode223{militaryforce{theinvasiontriggersanavalancheofadditional
activitythroughouttheinternationalsystemasstatesandinternationalorganizationsde-
nounce,approveorcomment,sothecrisisisveryprominentintheeventrecord.Thiskind
ofimplicittriggeringisanalyzedanddescribedinSchrodtandMintz(1988)andWardand
House(1988).
Table3:
Codingofthe1990Iraq-KuwaitCrisis,usingWEIScodingscheme.Theseevents
appearintextualformatinTable
1
,above.
DateActorTargetWEISActionCodeTypeofAction
900717IRQKUW121CHARGE
900717IRQUAE121CHARGE
900723
IRQ
KUW
122
DENOUNCE
900724IRQARB150DEMAND
900724IRQOPC150DEMAND
900725IRQEGY054ASSURE
900727IRQKUW160WARN
900731IRQKUW182MOBILIZATION
900801KUWIRQ112REFUSE
900802IRQKUW223MILITARYFORCE
Datageneratedinthisfashionareexactlythesamekindofdatathatareusedtorepre-
5
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.sentsocialnetworks.Yet,todate,despitethewidespreaduseofsuchdataininternational
relations,therearenopublishedstudieswhichanalyzethesekindofdatafromasocial
networkperspective.Weturntotheapplicationoflatentspaceanalysisofsocialnetworks
usingthesedatainthefollowingsections.
LatentSpaceModelsofNetworkStructures
Let
y
i;j
denotethevalueofarelationshipbetweenagent
i
andagent
j
;theserelationships
maybemeasureddiscretelyorcontinuously.Thematrix
Y
isvariouslycalleda
transaction
matrix,a
sociomatrix
,ora
spatialweights
matrix.Let
X
compriseobservedcharacteristics
(co-variates)thatcanbespeci¯ctotheagents
i
or
j
,orspeci¯ctotheirinteraction
i;j
.
6
Theobservednetworkisassumedtobeafunctionofallrelevantco-variates,observed
ornotobserved.Thepresenceofimportantnon-observedco-variatesoftenleadstode-
pendenciesinthenetwork
Y
.Themodelsof(Ho®,RafteryandHandcock2002inpress)
assumethedependenciesinthedatacanberepresentedviaalatent,unrealizedposition
orcharacteristic
z
i
foreachnode
i
,andthatthenetworkresponsesareconditionallyin-
dependentgiventhesetoflatentpositions.Giventhisassumption,wecanexpressthe
probabilityofthegivennetworkconditionalonthelatentpositionsoftheagentsandtheir
characteristicsas
P
(
Y
j
Z;X;µ
)=
Y
i
6
=
j
P
(
y
i;j
j
z
i
;z
j
;x
i;j
;µ;¾
2
)
:
(1)
Unconditionalonthe
z
i
's,thedataaredependent.
Ifthedataarebinary,Equation(
1
)canbeparameterizedasalogisticregressionmodel
inwhichtheprobabilityoflinkagedependsonsomeprojectedclosenessbetweentheagents
(
z
i
and
z
j
)andcovariatessuchthat:
´
i;j
=logodds(
y
i;j
=1
j
z
i
;z
j
;x
i;j
;®;¯;¾
2
)=
®
+
¯
0
x
i;j
+
z
i
0
z
j
;
(2)
where
z
i
and
z
j
representtheprojectedpositionsofactors
i
and
j
inthelatentspace.
Supposethateachactor
i
hasanassociatedvector
z
i
ofcharacteristics.Eachvectorcanbe
thoughtofascomprisingapositionona
k
-dimensionalsphereofunitradius(thedirection
ofthe
z
i
),aswellasan\activitylevel"(thelengthof
z
i
).Inthemodelabove,agents
i
and
j
aremorelikelytohavelinkagesiftheyhavesimliarlocationsonthesphere,andtheyare
\active,"thatis,if
z
0
i
z
j
islargeandpositive.
Thisleadstoa(log)probabilityofthesociomatrixspeci¯edas:
log
P
(
Y
j
´
)=
X
i
6
=
j
(
y
i;j
(
®
+
¯
0
x
i;j
+
z
i
0
z
j
)
¡
log
(1+
e
(
®
+
¯
0
x
i;j
+
z
i
0
z
j
)
))
:
(3)
6
Mostofthenotation(butnotnecessarilytheterminology)hereinfollows(Ho®,RafteryandHandcock
2002inpress).
6
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MaximumlikelihoodandBayesianestimatesfortheparametersinthismodelcanbeob-
tainedinastraightforwardway.First,themaximumlikelihoodestimatesoftheparameters
areformedbydirectmaximizationofEquation(
3
).Then,withthisestimateasastarting
valueandwithdi®usepriordistributionsoverthemodelparameters,aMarkovchainis
constructedtogeneratesamplesoftheparametersfromtheposteriordistribution.Such
asampleisgeneratedbydrawingproposalvaluesfromasymmetricproposaldistribution,
andacceptingtheproposalwithanappropriateprobability.Forexample,insamplinga
new
Z
valueatthe
k
thstageofthechain,wesampleaproposalvalue
¸
Z
fromaproposal
distribution
J
(
Z
j
Z
k
),where
Z
k
isthemostrecentlysampledvalue.Theproposalisac-
ceptedasthenewvalue
Z
k
+1
withprobability
p
(
Y
j
¸
Z;®
k
;¯
k
;¾
2
k
;X
)
p
(
Y
j
Z;®
k
;¯
k
;¾
2
k
;X
)
¼
(
¸
Z
)
¼
(
Z
k
)
,where
¼
(
Z
)istheprior
distributionfor
Z
.Iftheproposalisnotaccepted,then
Z
k
+1
issetequalto
Z
k
.This
approachhasbeenusedbyHo®,RafteryandHandcock(2002inpress)toestimateseveral
oftheclassicsocialnetworkanalysisdatasets.
7
Thebasicsetupisquitegeneralandcan
beevenmorewidelyemployed.
EstimationofNetworkLinksinCASIAdatabase
Weusethisframeworktoestimatethenetworkstructureofthepoliticalinteractionsof
theprimaryactorsinCentralAsianpoliticsovertheperiodfrom1989through1999.This
regionhasagreatdealofcon°ictandspottycoverageinEnglishlanguagemedia,despite
itscontemporarysalience.BasedontheCASIAdatabase,thereare113suchactorswhich
havebeendeemedbysubstantiveexpertstobesigni¯cant.Ofthese,thereare51country
levelactorsthathaveinteractionswithoneanotherduringthiselevenyearperiod.We
sumthepairedinteractionsamongthese51countriesacrosstheelevenyearperiod.Alink
isdeemedtooccurforanyinteractionbetweentwocountriesduringthisperiod.Thus,our
dataisa51
£
51sociomatrixinwhichanentryis1ifandonlyifthereisaninteraction
between
i
and
j
intheCASIAdatabasebetween1989and1999;otherwiseitis0.Weuse
asinglecovariateforthisanalysis:
x
i;j
isthedistanceinthousandsofkilometersbetween
thecapitalcityofeachofthecountries.Distanceiswidelyemployedasanindicatorof
interactionininternationalrelations:countriesclosertogetherhavehigherprobabilitiesof
havinglinkages.
Wehaveglossedovertheimportantcontentoftheinteractions.Somewillhavebeen
cooperativeandothershighlycon°ictual.Therearemanydebatesinthenationalsecurity
literatureaboutreciprocity.Itturnsoutthatcountriesthathavehighlevelsofcooperative
interactionsalso
tend
tohavehighlevelsofcon°ictualinteractions.Sothisseemsarea-
sonableapproximation,thoughitiscertainlypossibletodisaggregatethesedatabyevent
type,issues,andtime.
Treatingallyearsinoneaggregationisnotoptimalperhaps,butitdoesreduceconsid-
erablythesparsenessofthedata.Wealsorecognizethatsomepairsofcountrieswillhave
7
Thesearethe
drosophilamelanogaster
ofsocialnetworkanalysis,theso-calledMonkdata(Sampson
1968),aswellasdataonFlorentinemarriagepatternsamongMedicifamilies(PadgettandAnsell1993),
anddataonclassroomfriendshipnetworks(Hansell1983).
7
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.manymoreinteractions.Examinationofthehistogramsoftheactualdatasuggestedtous
thatmostoftheinformationaboutthelinkageswascapturedinthedichotomy;mostof
theresponseswerezeroandthesecondmostlikelyvaluewas1.
Equation
3
wasestimatedusingdirectoptimizationofthemaximumlikelihoodtogen-
eratestartingvaluesfortheMCMC.Onemillioniterationsofthechainwereruntoobtain
estimatesoftheparameters
®
and
¯
aswellasthelatentpositions
Z
andtheirunderlying
variance
¾
2
.Thenegativecoe±cientforthedistancecovariateindicatesalowerprobability
ofinteractionatgreaterdistances,consistentwithmanypublishedresultsfromdi®erent
contexts.TheseestimatesarepresentedinTable
4
.
Table4:
MaximumLikelihoodandMCMCestimatesofparametersforthesociogramofthe
51countriesinvolvedinCentralAsianpoliticsovertheperiodfrom1989-1999.Quantile
basedcon¯denceintervalsareprovidedfortheMCMCestimates.
95%Con¯dence
Interval
ParameterMLEMCMC2
:
5%97
:
5%
®
-4.32-4.20-4.69-3.06
¯
-0.26-0.25-0.40-0.21
¾
2
5.824.4810.53
Figure
1
illustratesthetrajectoriesoftheloglikelihoodandtheparameters^
®
,
^
¯
,and^
¾
2
overthe10
6
scansoftheMarkovchain.Theseplotssuggestthatthechainmixesreasonably
wellforalltheestimatedparameters.Thedensityoftheseestimateddistributionsare
Figure1:
MCMCDiagnosticplotsofparameterestimationvia
10
6
scansofMarkovChain.
(a)MCMC
L
(b)
^
¾
2
(c)^
®
(d)
^
¯
presentedinFigure
2
.Theserepresentthemarginalposteriordensities,withverticallines
representingthemaximumlikelihoodestimate.Eachofthesedensitiespresentsafairly
narrowbandwidth.
8
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Figure2:
MarginalPosteriorDensitiesoftheEstimatedParameters.Verticallinespresent
theMLE.
(a)^
¾
(b)^
®
(c)
^
¯
Asinterestingastheseestimatesanddiagnosticsare,themostinterestingoutputofa
latentspaceanalysisisthepositionoftheactorsinthelatentspace.Figure
3
illustrates
thesepositionsforthe51countriesanalyzed.Figure
4
displaystherelative,latentpositions
ofcountriesprojectedontoacircle.Countriesthatareclosetogetheronthiscirclehave
higherprobabilityofsharingalink.Sincethissetofcountriessharesmanyties,many
countriesareclosetooneanotherinlatentspace.
ImputationofMissingNetworkLinkagesinCASIA
Gaugingwhetheranetworkiscompletelysampledisperhapstheholygrailofnetwork
analysis.Asyetthereisnosimplesolutiontothisperplexingproblem.Weo®erno
completesolutionhere.However,practically,itmaybeusefultouseimputationmethods
alongwiththelatentspaceestimatestogaugewhetherornotalinkthatdoesnotturnup
actuallymaybemissingatrandom.
WeconductanexperimentusingtheCASIAdatabasethroughthefollowingprocedure:
1.
RandomlyassignNAto100
y
i;j
's,keepingtrackofthe100actualvaluesofthese
\missing"data;
2.
Fitthemodelusingthenonmissingdata;
3.
Foreachmissing
y
i;j
,usetheparameterestimatestothecalculatepredictedproba-
bility^
p
i;j
thateachmissingvalue
y
i;j
equalsone,i.e.isahiddenlinks;
4.
Computethenumberofcorrectandincorrectpredictions,usingasa¯rstcuta0
:
5
threshold;
9
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Figure3:
TheLatentPositionsof51Countriesasafunctionoftheirinteractionsin
CentralAsia.TheUnitedStateshaslinkstomanyoftheothercountries,asdoPakistan,
Afghanistan,China,Russia,andIndia.
5.
ComputetheBrierscore(Brier1950):(
n
(
n
¡
1))
¡
1
P
i
6
=
j
(^
p
i;j
¡
y
i;j
)
2
.
6.
Repeattheabovesteps200times;and¯nally,
7.
Comparetheseresultstoastandard,logisticframeworkwiththesamecovariates.
Theresultsofthisexperimentarequitesupportiveofusinglatentspacetopredict
non-sampledorhiddennetworklinkages.Forthe200runs,theaverageBrierscorewas
0
:
087,whichisquitelow.Theproportionofcorrectlypredictedobservationswas0
:
88.
Theoriginalsociomatrixhasaboutfournon-linksforeverylink.Thismeansthatamodal
guessof0wouldresultincorrectlypredictingabout0
:
80oftheobservations.Thus,the
latentspaceapproachimprovessigni¯cantlyuponthatresult,garneringan
additional
8of
theremaining20percent.Speci¯cally,conditionalonthetruevaluebeingnolinkage,the
predictedvalueis0withprobabilityof0
:
95.Giventhatthetruevalueis1(i.e.,linkage),
thepredictedvalueis1withprobabilityof0
:
67.
10
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Figure4:
Thelatentpositionsofcountriesisprojectedonaunitcircle.Becausemanyof
thepositionsareveryclosetooneanother,thepositionshavebeenlooselyjitteredsothat
theoverlapofcountrylabelsisreduced.
Incomparison,alogisticmodelusingthesamegeographiccovariate,theaverageBrier
scoreisalmosttwiceashigh(0
:
17);higherBrierscoresindicatepoorerpredictiveperfor-
mance.Alogisticmodel,asistypicalofthisapproach,willcorrectlypredictallthezeros
andnoneofthelinks,becauseit,likethemodalguess,alwayspredicts0.
Theupshotofthisexperimentistheimportantimplicationthatifwesamplenetwork
tiesatrandom,thenestimatethelatentpositions,thisapproachcanbeusedtopredictthe
y
i;j
thatwerenotsampled.
Althoughquantitativemodelsininternationalrelationsthatmakeactualpredictions
arethemselvesrare(Schrodt2000;KingandZeng2001;WardandGleditsch2002)fora
varietyofreasons(Schrodt2002),theseresultsarestrongincomparison.Morebroadly
thisapproachidenti¯esane®ectivewaytosamplenetworks.
11
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Conclusion
Thelatentspaceapproachtosocialnetworkanalysisseemspromising.Itperformsquite
wellinidentifyingobserved,completenetworksinthenationalsecurityrealm.Itdoessoin
awaythatembracestheinterdependenceofthenetworkdata,ratherthanassumingthat
itisgeneratedrandomly.Moreover,theapproachfacilitatesthepresentationofnetwork
positionsinanintuitivelysatisfyingway,mappedintoasmallnumberofdimensions.These
locationsincorporatemeasuresofuncertainty.Perhapsmostimportantlythisapproachis
quitegeneral,sinceitencapsulatesabroaderclassofmodels.Speci¯cally,avarietyof
discreteandcontinuousspeci¯cationscaneasilybeadapted,dependinguponthedata
generatingprocess.Finally,ourexperimentsonusingthelatentspacepositionstoimpute
missingatrandomnetworklinksprovedtoberemarkablyproductive,especiallygiventhe
absenceofanysubstantivecovariates.Thisleadstotheexcitingresultthatitmaybe
possibletousethisapproachtosamplenetworktiesatrandom,thenestimatethelatent
positionsinordertopredictnetworktiesthatwerenotinitiallysampled.
References
Azar,Edward.1980.\TheCon°ictandPeaceDataBank(COPDAB)Project."
Journal
ofCon°ictResolution
24:143{152.
Berelson,Bernard.1952.
ContentAnalysisinCommunicationResearch
.Glencoe,IL:Free
Press.
Brams,StevenJ.1966.\TransactionFlowsintheInternationalSystem."
AmericanPolitical
ScienceReview
60:880{898.
Brams,StevenJ.1968.\DECOMP:AComputerProgramfortheCondensationofa
DirectedGraphandtheHierarchicalOrderingofItsStrongComponents."
Behavioral
Science
13:344{345.
Brier,G.W.1950.\Veri¯cationofforecastsexpressedintermsofprobabilities."
Bulletin
AmericanMeteorologicalSociety
78:1{3.
Coleman,JamesS.,ElihuKatzandHerbertMenzel.1957.\TheDi®usionofaninnovation
amongphysicians."
Sociometry
20:253{70.
Garreau,Joel.2001.\DisconnecttheDots:MaybeWeCan'tCutO®Terror'sHead,but
WeCanTakeOutItsNodes."
WashingtonPost
September17:C{01.
Gerner,DeborahJ.,PhilipA.Schrodt,
Ä
OmÄurYilmazandRajaaAbu-Jabr.2002.Con°ict
andMediationEventObservations(CAMEO):ANewEventDataFrameworkfora
PostColdWarWorld.AnnualMeetingsoftheAmericanPoliticalScienceAssociation
Boston,MA:.
12
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Gerner,DeborahJ.,PhilipA.Schrodt,RonaldFranciscoandJudithL.Weddle.1994.
\TheAnalysisofPoliticalEventsusingMachineCodedData."
InternationalStudies
Quarterly
38:91{119.
Gleditsch,KristianS.andMichaelD.Ward.2001.\MeasuringSpace:AMinimumDis-
tanceDatabaseandApplicationstoInternationalStudies."
JournalofPeaceResearch
38(6):749{768.
Gleditsch,KristianSkrede.2002.
AllInternationalPoliticsisLocal:TheDi®usionof
Con°ict,Integration,andDemocratization
.AnnArbor,MI:UniversityofMichigan
Press.
Goldstein,Joshua.1992.\ACon°ict-CooperationScaleforWEISInternationalEvents
Data."
JournalofCon°ictResolution
36(2):369{385.
Hansell,Stephen.1983.\CooperativeGroups,WeakTies,andtheIntegrationofPeer
Friendships."
SocialPsychologyQuarterly
47(4):316{328.
Harary,Frank.1959.\Graphtheoreticmethodsinthemanagementsciences."
Management
Science
5:387{403.
Harary,Frank.1969.
GraphTheory
.Reading,MA:Addison-Wesley.
Harary,Frank,RobertNormanandDorwinCartwright.1965.
StructuralModels
.New
York:Wiley.
Ho®,PeterD.,AdrianE.RafteryandMarkS.Handcock.2002inpress.\LatentSpaceAp-
proachestoSocialNetworkAnalysis."
JournaloftheAmericanStatisticalAssociation
tba(tba):tba.
King,GaryandLangcheZeng.2001.\ImprovingForecastsofStateFailure."
WorldPolitics
53(4):623{658.
Knoke,DavidandJamesH.Kuklinski.1982.
NetworkAnalysis
.BeverlyHills,CA:Sage.
Lai,David.1995.\AStructuralApproachtoAlignment:ACaseStudyoftheChina-
Soviet-U.S.StrategicTriangle,1971-1988."
InternationalInteractions
20(4):349{374.
Lofdahl,CoreyL.2002.
EnvironmentalImpactsofGlobalizationandTrade:ASystems
Study
.Cambridge,MA:TheMITPress.
McClelland,CharlesA.andGaryHoggard.1969.Con°ictpatternsintheinteractions
amongnations.In
InternationalPoliticsandForeignPolicy
,ed.JamesN.Rosenau.
NewYork:TheFreePresspp.711{724.
Moreno,JakobL.1934.
WhoShallSurvive?
Washington,D.C.:NervousandMental
DiseasePublishingCompany.
13
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.North,RobertC.1967.\PerceptionandActioninthe1914Crisis."
JournalofInternational
A®airs
21:103{122.
North,RobertC.,OleR.Holsti,M.GeorgeZaninovichandDinaA.Zinnes.1963.
Content
Analysis:AHandbookwithApplicationsfortheStudyofInternationalCrisis
.Chicago:
NorthwesternUniversityPress.
Padgett,JohnF.andChristopherK.Ansell.1993.\RobustActionandtheRiseofthe
Medici,1400-1434."
AmericanJournalofSociology
98:1259{1319.
Sampson,S.F.1968.ANovitiateinaPeriodofChange:AnExperimentalandCaseStudy
ofRelationships,unpublishedPh.D.Dissertation,DepartmentofSociology,Cornell
University,Itaca,NY.
Scho¯eld,NormanJ.1972.\ATopologicalModelofInternationalRelations."
PeaceRe-
searchSociety,Papers
18:93{112.
Schrodt,PhilipA.2000.\Forecastingcon°ictintheBalkansusingHiddenMarkovMod-
els."PresentedattheAnnualMeetingsoftheAmericanPoliticalScienceAssociation,
Washington,D.C.
Schrodt,PhilipA.2002.ForecastsandContingencies:FromMethodologytoPolicy.Annual
MeetingsoftheAmericanPoliticalScienceAssociationBoston,MA:.
Schrodt,PhilipA.andAlexMintz.1988.\AConditionalProbabilityAnalysisofRegional
InteractionsintheMiddleEast."
AmericanJournalofPoliticalScience
32(1):217{230.
Schrodt,PhilipA.,ShannonG.DavisandJudithL.Weddle.1994.\PoliticalScience:
KEDS-AProgramfortheMachineCodingofEventData."
SocialScienceComputer
Review
12(3):561{588.
Scott,John.1991.
SocialNetworkAnalysis:aHandbook
.NewburyPark,CA:Sage.
Signorino,Curtis.1999.\StrategicInteractionandtheStatisticalAnalysisofInternational
Con°ict."
AmericanPoliticalScienceReview
92(2):279{298.
Ward,MichaelD.andAndrewM.Kirby.1987.\Re-examiningSpatialModelsofInterna-
tionalCon°ict."
AnnalsoftheAmericanAssociationofGeographers
77:86{105.
Ward,MichaelD.andKristianSkredeGleditsch.2002.\Location,Location,Location:
AnMCMCApproachtoModelingtheSpatialContextofWarandPeace."
Political
Analysis
10(3):244{260.
Ward,MichaelD.andLewisL.House.1988.\ATheoryofBehavioralPowerofNations."
32(1):3{36.
White,Harrison.1963.
AnAnatomyofKinship:MathematicalModelsfortheStructureof
CumulatedRoles
.EnglewoodsCli®s,NJ:PrenticeHall.
14
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.White,Harrison,ScottBoormanandRonaldBreiger.1976.\SocialStructureFromMul-
tipleNetworks;BlockmodelsofRolesandPositions."
AmericanJournalofSociology
81:730{799.
15
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
Themes, Issues, and Applications
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Linking Capabilities to Needs  Kathleen M. Carley  Institute for Software Research International Carnegie Mellon University  
 Abstract  
Social network analysis is an established field with a wealth of theory, method, and tools for handling network or relational data.  Recent advances have expanded this repertoire to include larger scale more dynamic networks under conditions of uncertainty.  This moves the field closer to the needs of the defense department and intelligence agencies.  However, the needs are not completely met.  This paper briefly outlines where the field is, what it has to offer, and where the needs are not being met.  Acknowledgement The research reported herein was supported by the National Science Foundation NSF IRI9633 662, the NSF IGERT in CASOS, the Office of Naval Research (ONR) Grant No. N00014-97-1-0037 and Grant No. 9620.1.1140071, Additional support was provided by the NSF IGERT 9972762 for research and training in CASOS and by the center for Computational Analysis of Social and Organizational Systems at Carnegie Mellon University (http://www.casos.ece.cmu.edu ). The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of the Office of Naval Research, the National Science Foundation or the U.S. government.  Citation Kathleen M. Carley, forthcoming, ﬁLinking Abilities to Needsﬂ in the Summary of the NRC workshop on Social Network Modeling and Analysis, Ron Breiger and Kathleen M. Carley (Eds.), National Research Council.  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. -  2 - Linking Capabilities to Needs  The increase in concerns with terrorism world wide have led the researchers, policy makers, the defense community and the intelligence community to ask Œ what techniques, tools, methods, findings can help defeat terrorism.  Social network analysis is one area that shows promise.  The recent press on ﬁlinking the dotsﬂ and the ﬁnewﬂ science of networks has brought this area into the limelight.  In attempt to determine whether is a match between capabilities and needs an NRC workshop on Social Network Modeling and Analysis was run.   The purpose of this paper is to juxtapose the work discussed and not discussed at this meeting with the needs of the defense and intelligence community to the extent that is possible at the unclassified level.  This will be done first by describing what the social networks area, broadly defined, has to offer particularly with respect to data collection, analysis, special training, intelligence and policy needs, and effects based operations. This is followed by a short description of what was missed.  Finally, a few concluding comments are provided on what can be done to reduce the mismatch between capabilities and needs. What Social Networks Has to Offer Most work in social network analysis (SNA) has focused on small, bounded networks, with 2-3 types of links (such as friendship and advice) among one type of node (such as people), at one point in time, with close to perfect information.  The research presented here is striving to overcome these limitations.  As such it is increasingly useful to members of the defense and intelligence community.  For in those communities, data is rarely complete, often there are massive quantities of data, relevant relational information is both multi-modal and multi-link, and the networks range in size from smaller command and control teams, to international terrorist networks.  Recent work is helping to reduce this gap between capabilities and needs.  In particular there are four areas where network analysis, such as that described in this workshop, is particularly relevant.  These are data collection, analysis, special training, intelligence and policy needs, and effects based operations.  Cross cutting these areas the work on networks has been done on the micro, meso and macro levels.  At each level, issues of diffusion and so information warfare arise.  At each level, issues of power, influence, control, and the role of technology arise.  And, at each level issues of governance arise.  The upshot is that network tools, techniques and theories can be used at each of these levels and across these levels to inform policy makers. Data Collection Much of the recent work provides some guidance for data collection.  One of the key concerns with SNA is that it is data greedy and requires intensive effort.  The image is of questionnaires to small groups asking each person who interacts with whom generating full information.  However, the work presented herein suggests that full information is not needed, that the data can be collected in a more automated fashion, that it is possible to estimate the whole network from parts of it, and that it is key to collect new types of relational data.   We see here new techniques for collecting data.  For example, by focusing on the paths among the key actors, data can be collected on the core of the network rapidly (Klovdahl, Borgatti).  We can think of this as ﬁsocially informedﬂ search.  Another difference here is the emphasis on new types of data such as the meta-matrix (Carley), role data (Johnson), internet ties (Faloutsos), and multiple types of relations such as finance plus communication (Jensen, Morris, Contractor).  A third difference is the growing emphasis on collecting indicators of the shape and Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. -  3 - nature of networks rather than on collecting the exact networks.  Examples here are the work on spatial and proximity effects (Butts) and temporal issues (Morris).  Another implication of the work on large scale and functional networks is that general demographic data and the nature of the tasks being done place constraints on the resulting networks limiting the forms that they can take on (Jensen, Carley).  These factors pave the way for expanding the area to collect the type of data useful in defense and intelligence contexts.  Nevertheless, there is much to be done.  It is still the case that most data collection techniques are too personnel intensive.  What is needed are additional tools for doing rapid assessment and for collecting vast quantities of data.  In terms of rapid assessment the issue is what high level indicators can be quickly gathered that indicate the overall shape of the network and the key actors within it. Tools for estimating the size, shape and other key dimensions of networks from leading indicators are needed.  The key scientific question is from the space of possible networks, what key indicators suggest which portion of this space the network of interest is in.  A related question is what constraints due institutions, social conventions, cognitive limitations and capabilities, geography, etc. place on the shape and structure of the social networks. As to more automated data collection several things are needed.  New non-invasive tools for data capture need to be developed and deployed so that they can be easily used in organizational and social analysis.  These range from automatic data capturing tools, to automated text analysis (such as KEDDS, automap, etc.), to tools for turning standard data such as web pages, etc. into network data.  Further, an inventory needs to be conducted of standard currently collected data to determine which data can be used and converted into network data.  Examples of such data are web pages, HR reports, personnel records, phone logs.  Then shareable tools need to be developed so that researchers can take the extant data and generate a network from it.  For example, since KEDDS extracts events, techniques for inferring interactions and so networks from these events are needed (Ward, Hoff and Lofdahl). In many cases, there is a need to reason about networks and how they will change where there is little actual data.  To address this problem, two possible approaches were described.  On the one hand, computational techniques can be used to enumerate and analyze classes of networks with specific properties (Bienenstock and Bonacich, Wasserman). Here, statistical models can be used to characterize distributions (Hockman). Then computational techniques can be used to generate sample networks with these characteristics. On the other hand, computational techniques can be used to grow networks from limited data and basic principles about the way networks evolve.  A variety of principles for how networks evolve were discussed including changes in interaction due to changes what is known or owned, relative similarity (homophilly), relative expertise, co-work on same tasks, contributions to the public good, who else is around, changes in status or role (Carley, Contractor and Monge, Freeman, Borgatti, Friedkin).  Given these principles, computational techniques can be used to both generate networks consistent with these principles and then evolve them over time.  Using such techniques it then possible to address questions such as how and to whom information will diffuse (Carley), how contagious diseases will spread (Morris), how cultures will evolve (Macy), how to destroy and preserve networks (Carley, Stanley and Havlin).  From a data collection standpoint, such tools can be used in many ways, including to provide guidance on new data collection efforts, to generate hypothetical data that can be used for planning when actual data is not available (as in the case of biological and chemical attacks), and to supplement real data by filling gaps or suggesting trends. Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. -  4 - Analysis Advances in analysis have been moving on a number of dimensions.  Advances in statistical approaches for analyzing networks are expanding our ability to formally handle relational data and to utilize more realistic network distributions (Hoff, Hockman, Snijders, Wasserman).  Advances in visualization techniques are enabling greater understanding of the shape of networks and the impact of various change strategies (Borgatti, Richards).  Meanwhile work on large-scale networks suggests that there is little information content or variability in existing measures, or that existing tools are computationally slow when faced with large networks.  Thus, leading to a quest for alternative measures, metrics that scale well, increased concern with optimized or parallelizable code, fast algorithms, and estimation techniques (Stanley, Faloutsos).  Work on scale free networks is one possible avenue (Faloutsos) although questions abound on the relevance of such work to traditional social networks such as friendship.  That is, are such networks good enough approximations to be useful? All this being said there are quite a few questions left unanswered that are critical in the current context.  For example, for each of the existing measures, what is its robustness, resistance and sensitivity (Bienenstock and Bonacich, Borgatti, Butts, Carley, Pattison, Snijders, Wasserman).  How do different measures behave for networks drawn from different distributions?  How does the distribution of nodal characteristics relate to the overall structure (Snijders)?  How do the various measures correlate, and how does this change as a function of the error in information, the size and density of the network.  It would benefit the area to identify a few distinct core measures that are consistent and robust indicators of the shape of the underlying network. With the movement to new types of data there is a corresponding movement to apply old metrics in new contexts to see how they behave and to develop new metrics specifically tuned to the underlying type of data.  Measures that link multiple networks together such as cognitive load (Carley) or that indicate specific temporal patterns of ties such as sequences of financial transactions (Jensen) are particularly promising.  A great deal of fundamental work needs to be done in the area of metrics, algorithms and the assessment of metrics. In many cases, computational approaches, particularly simulation is playing a key role in analysis.  Such work is enabling a greater understanding of the way in which networks evolve under standard and attack conditions (Macy, Carley), the way in which influence, ideas, and diseases propagates (Friedkin, Morris). In this sense simulations can be used to put ﬁprobabilitiesﬂ on possible futures Œ suggesting not only that the network might change but how and the likelihood of such change. Further, simulations can be used to suggest areas where data might be missing.  An example of this would be to turn KeyPlayer around (Borgatti) and ask where might there be a key player that we are not observing.  Simulations can also be used to suggest when is it worth gathering more information as in the DyNet model (Carley).  A key avenue that will increase the value of these uses of simulation would be to place the simulation in a decision context and ask what are the cost and benefits of such additional data collection and the chance of being wrong. Special Training, Intelligence and Policy Needs A key need in the defense and intelligence communities is for tools to help with training, intelligence, and policy analysis.  In particular tools that enable the analyst to utilize the bits and pieces of disparate information in a systematic, and if possible, quantitative fashion that moves the analysis beyond informed guess work.  Here, to the extent that network tools are combined Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. -  5 - with computational modeling techniques, simulation tools can be created for doing ﬁwhat ifﬂ scenario analysis and suggesting possibilities.  Such tools are ﬁthinking toolsﬂ for reasoning about events.  The use of such tools would not be to predict specific events but to reduce the likelihood of being ﬁsurprised.ﬂ  Such tools may be particularly useful in reasoning about and planning operations related to the destabilization of networks, the impact of changes in trade or cooperative agreements on inter-national, inter-state, and inter-agency behavior, understanding inter-player coordination in situations other than war, knowledge management within and among agencies, and so on.  Work on governance (Lazer), influence (Friedkin), and network stability (Carley, Stanley, Borgatti, Bienenstock and Bonacich) are key in this context. Combining network techniques with computational techniques can thus promote Effects Based Planning (EBP). Effects based planning is, according to the Joint Forces Command Glossary ﬁan operational planning process to conduct effects based operations within rapid decisive operations. – EBP closely mirrors the current joint planning process, yet focuses upon the linkage of actions to effects to objectives. – It employs virtual, near-simultaneous planning at all echelons of command.ﬂ   Using dynamic network models in effects based planning will require researchers to seriously address the issue of realism.  How real is real enough in these models?  Are simplistic models based on central social science principles sufficient or are social network flight simulators necessary?  If the latter, a core area to address is how the simulation models can meaningfully make use of abstract data, easily available data, and data at varying levels of fidelity. Core concerns in developing such models include the following.  It is imperative for validation, development of metrics, and usefulness of results that the data collected from the computational model and the data collected from the real world are the same kind of data and at the same level of granularity.  Second, the models should be easy to use.  In part this means greater attention to user-interfaces that are rarely developed by academicians.  To facilitate this, funding agencies need to provide funds not just for the basic model but also for the development of the interface, the development of ontologies and the development of links to other programs.  Finally, the computational tools need to include ﬁmeaningfulﬂ variables.  To aid in this, subject matter experts should be consulted to develop a vocabulary for the tool that maps from the academicians ideas to the terms of the user.  Effects Based Operations Network techniques can also enable certain types of effects based operations.  Effects based operations, according to the Joint Forces Command Glossary, is ﬁa process for obtaining a desired strategic outcome or ‚effect™ on the enemy, through the synergistic, multiplicative, and cumulative application of the full range of military and nonmilitary capabilities at the tactical, operational, and strategic levels.ﬂ  Many types of effects are particularly amenable to being planned for using network techniques and models Œ destabilization of the adversaries networks, reducing the ability of the adversary to acquire intelligence or coordinate, decreasing/increasing trust in the adversaries leaders or key operators (information warfare effects), and reduction in the adversaries ﬁreach.ﬂ In order to use network analysis for effects based operations a number of advances are needed.  First, network analysis need to move beyond characterizing the structure to understanding its dynamics and how to influence it.  Further, in this area particularly, it is important to link the social, anthropological and communication approach so common in social networks with the understanding of events and actions coming out of political science.  This will Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. -  6 - enable the analyst to ask, what types of networks can be handled through diplomacy, war, operations other than war and with what effects.  This may be particularly important when the adversary is not a nation-state. Is There Anything Else? While the work covered at this meeting addressed many of the core areas in social networks, there are still areas left uncovered.  It is not my intent to comprehensively review these.  Rather, I will mention only a few where the tools may have direct relevance in the defense and intelligence communities. Network analysis can be used to characterize difference across cultures and to suggest strategies for changing the underlying culture.  One way in which culture can be viewed is as the distribution of knowledge, beliefs, and norms across people Œ i.e., the knowledge network.  Work melding social networks and knowledge networks demonstrates that the underlying culture can be changed through the flow of targeted information.  The basic idea is that as individuals interact through the social network, they learn, thus changing the knowledge network, and so the overall culture.  Basically, the co-evolution of social structure (the social network) and culture (the knowledge network) can be managed.  In this area, individuals interested in communication, organizational knowledge management, and social networks are coming together to ask questions such as Œ how can we identify the culture-change agent in the social network?, what is the core piece of knowledge that needs to be changed?, and how can we rapidly assess the culture?  Such work provides new tools of use in the area of information warfare. Network techniques are also being used to analyze coded texts.  Work is being conducted to create automated tools for analyzing texts as networks of concepts (often called mental models) and for extracting social, knowledge and event networks from texts.  Postprocessors are then storing the coded data in formats that can be analyzed using standard network analysis tools like Mage, Pajek, Ucinet.  One of the key possible uses of these tools is to facilitate rapid first past coding of intelligence reports.  Another use here is to contrast differences in the structural properties of the mental models of experts with novices, or to contrast the reports of different intelligence officers. Another area of advancement is in the area of visualizing networks.  Here research is on-going on how to simultaneously represent nodes and ﬁmeta-nodesﬂ and automatically create meta-nodes.  A meta-node is a node containing a set of other nodes that have some structural property in common.  Simultaneous representation of multiple networks, zooming in and out in extremely large networks, and graphic representation of critical nodes are all key aspects of the new visualization techniques. The final area I want to mention is health.  New epidemiological models now take not only geographic factors but the networks in to account.  This has profound implications for estimating the size of potentially exposed populations and evaluating prevention, containment and treatment policies.  Such models are useful in combating bio-terrorism.  Finally, and it is important to stress this point, tools and techniques for dealing with relational data are currently being developed in a number of fields.  In this workshop there was a small representation of the work in computer science and physics on graphs, networks, and relational data.  In addition to this, there is on going work in other areas of computer science, information science, electrical engineering, biology and chemistry that is of value here.  Major advances may well require linking network analysis to other techniques such as data-mining, data-fusion, and machine learning. The key here, is that there are an increasing number of applications as the field Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. -  7 - moves from standard network analysis to dynamic network analysis, from looking at small to large networks, from looking at static to dynamic networks, from looking at single mode (e.g. people) to multi-mode (e.g., people and knowledge) networks.   Dynamic network analysis and the associated tools and techniques will be useful in addressing both tactical and strategic issues.  Further, it will be useful in looking at both short and long term issues; e.g., in how to destabilize a covert network and in how to alter the underlying culture to reduce the possibility of new recruits. Outreach Œ Connecting the Dots As we have seen, many of the ideas, measures, and tools being developed hold promise relative to the needs of the defense and intelligence community.  However, there is still large gap.  Filling this gap is not simply a straightforward excursion moving the theoretical to the applied.  Rather, it requires fundamental new science on dynamic networks under varying levels of uncertainty.  Further, it requires channel through which the needs of the intelligence and defense community can be better expressed to the scientific community. On the academic side, it would benefit the field, the government and the economy if a larger number of masters and Ph.D. students were trained in formal (statistical, mathematical and computational) network techniques.  In fields where the link between science and government is tighter, roughly 50% of the students graduating go into industry or government positions rather than academics.  In contrast, not only are fewer graduate students produced in the social network area (almost an order of magnitude fewer) but many fewer go into non-academic positions (almost two orders of magnitude). Further the two key factors academics need to consider are scale and communication.  That is, the network community needs to take seriously whether the data collection techniques, measures, methods, algorithms scale with the size of the network.  It is imperative that the issue of scale be addressed so that the academic researcher and government analyst can utilize the ideas, theories, tools etc. regardless of the size of the network.  One thing the community needs to be concerned with is collecting and sharing databases of networks of varying sizes Œ from the tiny, 4 nodes, to the mega, millions of nodes Œ that can be used to test all theories, measures, algorithms, etc. The second key factor is communication.  The way in which academics in this field ask questions are often tied to the body of theory rather than the needs of the time.  It is important when doing research to ask both Œ how do I ask my questions among academic peers Œ and Œ how do I ask my question from an applied angle.  Or in other words Œ ﬁwhy should defense or intelligence agencies care?ﬂ.   On the part of the defense and intelligence community there is also work to be done.  Here, personnel should go to training courses or bring in faculty to run short courses.  In network analysis there are a number of training courses Œ such as that at the ISPCR in Michigan, the CASOS summer institute, the training sessions at the Sunbelt Social Networks Meetings and the Academy of Management.  Having even a rudimentary training would help with communication as more terms of art would be shared.  Another key point is that this applied community needs to provide more detailed guidance as to the level and types of measures needed and to questions of concern.  It is not sufficient to tell the academician Œ well what you have is not quite right.  Rather, ways of discussing needs, without compromising national security, must be found.  This is very possible and is done quite well in other areas, such as technology design, data mining, and engineered systems.  Techniques that might help in this regard include getting academicians Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. -  8 - in the area to help write the broad area announcements, sending personnel to spend one term on a campus as a visitor, creating cleaned or hypothetical datasets that can be shared with the academic community, and of course, workshops like this where the two communities can exchange views.  Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIXESDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A:  WORKSHOP AGENDA
373373AWorkshop Agenda
WORKSHOP ON DYNAMIC SOCIAL NETWORK ANALYSISAGENDANovember 7-9, 2002Thursday, November 7WelcomeAnne Mavor, National Research Council
Rebecca Goolsby, Office of Naval ResearchOpening AddressÒEmergent Themes in Social Network Analysis:  Results, Challenges, OpportunitiesÓ

Ronald L. Breiger, Workshop Chair, University of ArizonaSession I:  Social Network Theory PerspectivesRonald L. Breiger, Moderator and Discussant¥Linton C. Freeman, University of California, IrvineÑFinding Social Groups:  A Meta-Analysis of the
Southern Women Data¥Harrison C. White, Columbia UniversityÑModeling Entrepreneurial Agency within Networks of Mar-kets¥Noah E. Friedkin, University of California, Santa BarbaraÑSocial Influence Network Theory:  To-
ward a Science of Strategic Modification of Interpersonal Influence Systems¥David Lazer, Harvard UniversityÑInformation and Innovation in a Networked WorldDiscussion and Roundtable Themes, Issues, and ApplicationsRonald L. Breiger, Moderator and DiscussantDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.374DYNAMIC SOCIAL NETWORK MODELING AND ANALYSISSession II:  Dynamic Social NetworksStanley Wasserman, Moderator and Discussant¥Jeffrey C. Johnson, East Carolina UniversityÑInformal Social Roles and the Evolution and Stability ofSocial Networks (coauthors Lawrence A. Palinkas, University of California, San Diego, and James
Boster, University of Connecticut)¥Kathleen M. Carley, Carnegie Mellon UniversityÑDynamic Network Analysis¥Tom A.B. Snijders, ICS University of Groningen, The NetherlandsÑAccounting for Degree Distribu-tions in Empirical Analysis of Network Dynamics¥Michael W. Macy, Cornell UniversityÑCulture Wars and Dynamic Networks:  A Hopfield Model of
Emergent Structure (coauthors James A. Kitts, University of Washington, and Andreas Flache, Univer-
sity of Groningen)¥Martina Morris, University of WashingtonÑLocal Rules and Global Properties:  Modeling the Emer-
gence of Network StructureFriday, November 8
Session II:  Dynamic Social Networks (continued)¥H. Eugene Stanley, Boston UniversityÑThreat Networks and Threatened Networks:  Interdisciplinary
Approaches to Stabilization and Immunization (coauthor Shlomo Havlin, Bar-Ilan University)Discussion and Roundtable Themes, Issues, and ApplicationsStanley Wasserman, Moderator and DiscussantSession III:  Metrics and Models
Pip Pattison, Moderator and Discussant¥Stanley Wasserman, University of IllinoisÑSensitivity Analysis of Social Network Data and Methods:Some Preliminary Results (coauthor Douglas Steinley, University of Illinois)¥Andrew J. Seary and William D. Richards, Simon Fraser UniversityÑSpectral Methods for Analyzingand Visualizing Networks:  An Introduction
¥Mark S. Handcock, University of WashingtonÑAssessing Degeneracy in Statistical Models for SocialNetworks¥Stephen P. Borgatti, Boston CollegeÑThe Key Player Problem¥Elisa Jayne Bienenstock, University of California, Irvine, and Phillip Bonacich, University of Califor-nia, Los AngelesÑBalancing Efficiency and Vulnerability in Social Networks¥Christos Faloutsos, Carnegie Mellon UniversityÑFinding Patterns in Large, Real NetworksDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A:  WORKSHOP AGENDA
375Discussion and Roundtable Themes, Issues, and ApplicationsPip Pattison, Moderator and DiscussantSession IV:  Networked Worlds
David Lazer, Moderator and Discussant¥Alden S. Klovdahl, Australian National UniversityÑLarge Social Networks in Contemporary Societies¥David Jensen, University of Massachusetts, AmherstÑData Mining in Social Networks (coauthor Jen-nifer Neville, University of Massachusetts, Amherst)¥Peter D. Hoff, University of WashingtonÑRandom Effects Models for Network DataSaturday, November 9
Session IV:  Networked Worlds (continued)
¥Carter T. Butts, University of California at IrvineÑPredictability of Large-Scale Spatially EmbeddedNetworks¥Noshir S. Contractor, University of IllinoisÑUsing Multi-Theoretical Multi-Level (MTML) Models toStudy Adversarial Networks (coauthor Peter R. Monge, University of Southern California)¥Michael D. Ward, University of WashingtonÑIdentifying International Networks:  Latent Spaces and
Imputation (coauthor Peter D. Hoff and Corey Lowell Lofdahl, SAIC)Discussion and Roundtable Themes, Issues, and ApplicationsDavid Lazer, Moderator and DiscussantSummary of Workshop Themes, Issues, and ApplicationsKathleen M. Carley, Carnegie Mellon UniversityDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BBiographical Sketches
376WORKSHOP CHAIRRonald L. Breiger is professor of sociology at the University of Arizona.  His research is in the areas of social
network analysis, stratification, mathematical models, theory, and measurement issues in cultural and institutional
analysis.  His Ph.D. is from Harvard University.  A list of recent publications is available at 
www.u.arizona.edu/~breiger/.PRESENTERSElisa Jayne Bienenstock is a visiting assistant professor at the Department of Sociology at the University of
California at Irvine.  Her research integrates social networks with game theory and social psychology.  Her current

focus is on developing formal and experimental models of exchange processes and their relation to the emergence
of power, status, inequality, conflict, cooperation, and coalition formation.  She has a Ph.D. in sociology from the

University of California, Los Angeles.  A current vita is available at 
http://hypatia.ss.uci.edu/sociology/Bienenstock/VitaWeb01.htm.Stephen P. Borgatti is professor of organization studies at the Carroll School of Management at Boston College.His research focuses on social networks, most recently with application to knowledge flows in organizations.  He
has a Ph.D. in mathematical social science from the University of California, Irvine.  A current vita is available at

http://www.analytictech.com/borgatti.Carter T. Butts is assistant professor of sociology the University of California, Irvine.  His current research
focuses on methods for network measurement and comparison, spatial models of network structure, and decision-
theoretic models of organizational change.  He received his B.S. from Duke University and his Ph.D. from

Carnegie Mellon University.  A current vita and additional information are available on his Web page, at 
http://hypatia.ss.uci.edu/sociology/Butts/buttsprof.html.Kathleen M. Carley is a professor at the Institute for Software Research International in the School of Computer
Science and director of the Center for Computational Analysis of Social and Organizational Systems at Carnegie
Mellon University.  Her research areas include computational social and organization theory; dynamic social

networks; multiagent network models; group, organizational, and social adaptation and evolution; statisticalDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B377models for dynamic network analysis and evolution, computational text analysis, and the impact of telecommuni-cation technologies on communication and information diffusion within and among groups.  She received an S.B.

in political science and an S.B. in economics from Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and a Ph.D. in sociology
from Harvard University.  Her vita, papers, and abstracts can be found at 
http://hss.cmu.edu/departments/sds/faculty/carley.html, http://www.epp.cmu.edu/people/bios/carley.html, http://www.heinz.cmu.edu/researchers/fac-
ulty/carley.html).Noshir S. Contractor is professor of speech communication and psychology at the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and a research affiliate at the Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology.  His

research applies theories of complexity to communication and knowledge networks within and between organiza-
tions.  He has a B. Tech. (1983) in electrical engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, and a

Ph.D. (1987) in  communication from the Annenberg School for Communication at the University of Southern

California.  For more information and publications, see 
http://www.uiuc.edu/ph/www/nosh.Christos Faloutsos is a professor at Carnegie Mellon University.  His research interests include data mining for
streams and networks, fractals, indexing methods for spatial and multimedia bases, and database performance.  He

has a Ph.D. in computer science from the University of Toronto, Canada.  A current vita is at 
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~christos/short-cv.txt.Noah E. Friedkin is professor of sociology at the University of California, Santa Barbara.  His current research
focuses on the development and application of social influence network theory. He received his B.A. in 1969 and
Ph.D. in 1977 from the University of Chicago. A complete vita and selected reprints are available on his Web site:
http://www.soc.ucsb.edu/faculty/friedkin/.Linton C. Freeman is a research professor of sociology in the Institute for Mathematical Behavioral Sciences and
the Department of Sociology at the University of California, Irvine (UCI).  He has taught at UCI for 24 years and
has served as dean of the School of Social Sciences.  His primary focus is in the area of social network analysis.

His recent work has focused on graphic representations of network structure.  His vita, including publications, is

available online at http://moreno.ss.uci.edu/vita.html.Mark S. Handcock is a professor of statistics and sociology at the Center for Statistics and the Social Sciences,
University of Washington, Seattle.  His work focuses on the development of statistical models for the analysis of

social network data, spatial processes and longitudinal data arising in labor economics.  He received his B.Sc. from

the University of Western Australia and his Ph.D. from the University of Chicago.  His vita is available online at

http://www.stat.washington.edu/~handcock/.Peter D. Hoff is assistant professor of statistics and biostatistics and a member of the Center for Statistics and the
Social Sciences at the University of Washington.  His current research involves dyadic data, latent variable

models, and nonparametric Bayesian methods.  He has a Ph.D. in statistics from the University of Wisconsin,

Madison.  More information on his research can be obtained at 
http://www.stat.washington.edu/hoff.David Jensen is research assistant professor of Computer Science and Director of the Knowledge Discovery
Laboratory at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst.  His research focuses on machine learning, knowledge

discovery, and data mining in large relational databases.  He received his D.Sc. in engineering and policy from

Washington University in St. Louis.  A current vita is available at 
http://kdl.cs.umass.edu/people/jensen/.Jeffrey C. Johnson is a senior scientist at the Institute for Coastal and Marine Resources, professor in the
Department of Sociology, and adjunct professor in the departments of Anthropology, Biology, and Biostatistics at
East Carolina University.  He received his Ph.D. in social science from the University of California, Irvine, and is
Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.378DYNAMIC SOCIAL NETWORK MODELING AND ANALYSIScurrently interested in the evolution and stability of social networks and in network models of complex biologicalsystems. A current vita is available at http://personal.ecu.edu/johnsonje/.Alden Klovdahl is a sociologist at the Australian National University in Canberra.  He has a longstanding interest
in the scientific study of large social networks in the real world, tools for more efficient processing of large
amounts of network data, and harnessing the power of visual representations for analyses of complex networks.  A

focus of much of his research has been the spread of human pathogens and the design of more effective methods
for infectious disease control.  He received his Ph.D. in sociology from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Contact information and a listing of publications can be found at http://arts.anu.edu.au/Arts/SSSchool/Sociology/klovdahl.htm.David Lazer, assistant professor of public policy, teaches courses on management and executive branch politics.He is associate director of the National Center for Digital Government Research and Practice and co-chair of the
Cambridge Colloquium on Complexity and Social Networks.  He is currently completing an edited volume titled

The Technology of Justice:  DNA and the Criminal Justice System
 and is launching an NSF-funded project to study
how a Web-based system might facilitate the sharing of information about this policy area (the dnapolicy.net
initiative).  He holds a Ph.D. in political science from the University of Michigan.  A current vita, with papers, is

available at www.ksg.harvard.edu/davidlazer.Michael W. Macy is professor and chair of sociology at Cornell University.  His current research focuses on
agent-based models of dynamic social networks, with application to diffusion of norms and beliefs.  He has a Ph.D.

in sociology from Harvard University.  A current vita is available at 
http://www.people.cornell.edu/pages/mwm14/.Martina Morris is the Blumstein-Jordan Professor of Sociology and Statistics at the University of Washington.
Her research focuses on social network epidemiology and methods, with a focus on HIV and STI transmission
dynamics.  She has an M.A. in statistics and a Ph.D. in sociology from the University of Chicago.  A current vita

is available at http://faculty.washington.edu/morrism.Philippa (Pip) Pattison is a professor in the School of Behavioural Science at the University of Melbourne.  Hercurrent research focuses on mathematical models for social networks and network-based processes.   She holds a

Ph.D. in mathematical psychology from the University of Melbourne.William D. Richards is professor of communication at the Simon Fraser University in Burnaby, British Colum-
bia.  With Andrew Seary, Richards has been investigating spectral analysis and its application to large complex

networks since 1988.  They have developed the MultiNet program to make these analytic tools available for

network researchers.  He received his Ph.D. in communication research in 1976 from Stanford University.  Infor-
mation about his software and his research is available at http://www.sfu.ca/~richards and 
http://www.scu.ca/insna.Andrew J. Seary is a research associate and Ph.D. graduate student at Simon Fraser University.  His research
topic is application of methods of mathematical physics to large networks, with emphasis on analysis and visual-
ization.  He has a B.Sc. in mathematical physics from McGill University, Montreal.  He has over 25 years

experience in applied mathematics and interactive graphical programming and has developed software for large
networks that is freely available at http://www.sfu.ca/~richards.Tom A.B. Snijders is professor of methodology and statistics at the Department of Sociology of the University of
Groningen, The Netherlands, and scientific director of the research and graduate school ICS (Interuniversity
Center for Social Science Theory and Methodology).  His main research interests are social network analysis andDynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B379multilevel analysis.  He holds a Ph.D. in mathematical statistics from the University of Groningen.  More informa-
tion about his activities is available at http://stat.gamma.rug.nl/snijders/.H. Eugene Stanley is university professor and professor of physics at Boston University.  His research focuses on
complex systems in physics, biology, and social science, including a focus on  complex networks.  He has a Ph.D.

in theoretical physics from Harvard University.  A current vita for him is available at 
http://polymer.bu.edu/hes,which also includes pdf files of all his papers.Michael D. Ward is professor of political science at the University of Washington, Seattle, and holds a Chaire
Municipale in the faculty of economics at the University of Pierre Mendes France in Grenoble, France.  His

research focuses on democratization and international conflict, with emphasis on political geography and econom-
ics.  He has a Ph.D. from Northwestern University. He may be reached at 
mdw@u.washington.edu.Stanley Wasserman is professor of psychology, statistics, and sociology at the University of Illinois, as well asprofessor in the Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology at the university.  His research focuses

on social networks and applied statistics.  He has a Ph.D. in statistics from Harvard University.  A current vita is

available at http://kentucky.psych.uiuc.edu, and a brief overview of his recent research can be found at http://kentucky.psych.uiuc.edu/pstar.Harrison C. White is acting chair, Department of Sociology, and Giddings Professor of Sociology, Columbia
University.  One line of his current research melds economic sociology with mathematical modeling (
Marketsfrom Networks, Princeton University Press, 2002); another meshes social network with discourse analyses.  He has
a Ph.D. in theoretical physics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and a Ph.D. in sociology from
Princeton University.Planning SubcommitteeDaniel R. Ilgen (Chair) is the John Hannah Professor of Psychology and Management at Michigan State Univer-sity.  His background is in industrial/organizational psychology.  His work focuses on work motivation, individual,

and social perspectives and models of small group/team behavior, particularly team decision making.John M. Carroll is the director of the Center for Human-Computer Interaction, and a professor of computer
science, education, and psychology at Virginia Polytechnic Institute in Blacksburg.  He has researched human

learning and problem-solving in human-computer interaction contexts for two decades.  His long-term interests are

in methods of remote collaboration and in team and organizational communications.Martha Grabowski, professor of management information systems at LeMoyne College and research professor atRensselaer Polytechnic Institute, has expertise in management information systems, expert systems, decision
support systems, telecommunications and networking, organizational impact of information technology, technol-
ogy and organizational strategy, use of information systems for competitive advantage, and interface of technol-
ogy with marketing and manufacturing.Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and PapersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.