DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/10730Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A ScopingStudy -- Special Report 27496 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-08555-7 | DOI 10.17226/10730Committee on Freight Transportation Information Systems Security, NationalResearch CouncilCybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRANSPORTATION
RESEARCHBOARDSPECIALREPORT274CYBERSECURITYOF FREIGHT INFORMATION 
SYSTEMSA SCOPING STUDYCommittee on Freight Transportation Information Systems Security 
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
Transportation Research Board
TRANSPORTATION RESEARCH BOARD
Washington, D.C.
2003www.TRB.org
Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Transportation Research Board Special Report 274
Subscriber CategoriesVIII freight transportation (multimodal)

IX marine transportationTransportation Research Board publications are available by ordering individual publications directly
from the TRB Business Office, through the Internet at www.TRB.org or national-academies.org/trb, 

or by annual subscription through organizational or individual affiliation with TRB. Affiliates and 
library subscribers are eligible for substantial discounts. For further information, contact the
Transportation Research Board Business Office, 500 Fifth Street, NW, Washington, DC 20001 

(telephone 202-334-3213; fax 202-334-2519; or e-mail TRBsales@nas.edu).Copyright 2003 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Printed in the United States of America.NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of theNational Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy of
Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the
committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competencies and with regard for
appropriate balance.This report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to the proceduresapproved by a Report Review Committee consisting of members of the National Academy of Sciences,
the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.The study was sponsored by the Research and Special Programs Administration of the U.S.Department of Transportation.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
National Research Council (U.S.). Committee on Freight Transportation Information Systems Security.
Cybersecurity of freight information systems : a scoping study / Committee on Freight Transportation Information Systems Security, Transportation Research Board of the National 
Academies.p.cm.—(Special report)
ISBN 0-309-08555-11. Telecommunication—Safety measures. 2. Freight and freightage—Security measures. I. Title.
II. Special report (National Research Council (U.S.). Transportation Research Board)
TK5103.2.N39 2003
388.044028558—dc222003056526Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciencesis a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of dis-tinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the further-ance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. On the authority of
the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires
it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. Dr. Bruce M. Alberts

is president of the National Academy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineeringwas established in 1964, under the charter of theNational Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. It isautonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the
National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. The
National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting
national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements
of engineers. Dr. William A. Wulf is president of the National Academy of Engineering.
The Institute of Medicinewas established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences tosecure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of pol-icy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The Institute acts under the responsibility
given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to
the federal government and, on its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research,
and education. Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The National Research Councilwas organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916to associate the broad community of science and technology with the Academy’s purposes of
furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. Functioning in accordance with
general policies determined by the Academy, the Council has become the principal operat-

ing agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of
Engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engi-
neering communities. The Council is administered jointly by both the Academies and the
Institute of Medicine. Dr. Bruce M. Alberts and Dr. William A. Wulf are chair and vice chair,

respectively, of the National Research Council.
The Transportation Research Board
is a division of the National Research Council, whichserves the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering. TheBoard’s mission is to promote innovation and progress in transportation through research. In

an objective and interdisciplinary setting, the Board facilitates the sharing of information on
transportation practice and policy by researchers and practitioners; stimulates research and
offers research management services that promote technical excellence; provides expert advice
on transportation policy and programs; and disseminates research results broadly and encour-
ages their implementation. The Board’s varied activities annually engage more than 4,000

engineers, scientists, and other transportation researchers and practitioners from the public
and private sectors and academia, all of whom contribute their expertise in the public inter-
est. The program is supported by state transportation departments, federal agencies including
the component administrations of the U.S. Department of Transportation, and other organi-

zations and individuals interested in the development of transportation. www.TRB.org
www.national-academies.org
Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRANSPORTATION
RESEARCHBOARD2003 EXECUTIVECOMMITTEE*Chair: Genevieve Giuliano,Director, Metrans Transportation Center, and
Professor, School of Policy, Planning, and Development, University of
Southern California, Los AngelesVice Chair: Michael S. Townes,
President and CEO, Hampton Roads Transit,
Virginia
Executive Director: Robert E. Skinner, Jr.,
Transportation Research Board
Michael W. Behrens,
Executive Director, Texas Department of Transportation,
AustinJoseph H. Boardman,Commissioner, New York State Department of
Transportation, Albany
Sarah C. Campbell,President, TransManagement, Inc., Washington, D.C.
E. Dean Carlson,President, Carlson Associates, Topeka, Kansas (Past Chair,
2002)Joanne F. Casey,
President and CEO, Intermodal Association of North America,
Greenbelt, MarylandJames C. Codell III,Secretary, Kentucky Transportation Cabinet, Frankfort
John L. Craig,Director, Nebraska Department of Roads, Lincoln
Bernard S. Groseclose, Jr.,
President and CEO, South Carolina State PortsAuthority, Charleston
Susan Hanson,Landry University Professor of Geography, Graduate School of
Geography, Clark University, Worcester, Massachusetts
Lester A. Hoel,L.A. Lacy Distinguished Professor of Engineering, Department ofCivil Engineering, University of Virginia, Charlottesville (Past Chair, 1986)
Henry L. Hungerbeeler,
Director, Missouri Department of Transportation,
Jefferson CityAdib K. Kanafani,Cahill Professor and Chairman, Department of Civil andEnvironmental Engineering, University of California, BerkeleyRonald F. Kirby,
Director of Transportation Planning, Metropolitan Washington
Council of Governments, Washington, D.C.
Herbert S. Levinson,Principal, Herbert S. Levinson Transportation Consultant, 
New Haven, ConnecticutMichael D. Meyer,
Professor, School of Civil and Environmental Engineering,
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta
Jeff P. Morales,
Director of Transportation, California Department of
Transportation, Sacramento
Kam Movassaghi,Secretary, Louisiana Department of Transportation and
Development, Baton RougeCarol A. Murray,
Commissioner, New Hampshire Department of Transportation,
ConcordDavid Plavin,President, Airports Council International, Washington, D.C.
John Rebensdorf,Vice President, Network and Service Planning, Union Pacific
Railroad Company, Omaha, Nebraska
*Membership as of August 2003.Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Catherine L. Ross,Harry West Chair of Quality Growth and Regional
Development, College of Architecture, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta
John M. Samuels,Senior Vice President, Operations Planning and Support,
Norfolk Southern Corporation, Norfolk, Virginia (Past Chair, 2001)
Paul P. Skoutelas,
CEO, Port Authority of Allegheny County, Pittsburgh,
PennsylvaniaMartin Wachs,
Director, Institute of Transportation Studies, University of
California, Berkeley (Past Chair, 2000)
Michael W. Wickham,
Chairman and CEO, Roadway Express, Inc., Akron, OhioMarion C. Blakey,
Administrator, Federal Aviation Administration, U.S.
Department of Transportation (ex officio)
Samuel G. Bonasso,Acting Administrator, Research and Special Programs
Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation (ex officio)
Rebecca M. Brewster,
President and COO, American Transportation Research
Institute, Smyrna, Georgia (ex officio)Thomas H. Collins(Adm., U.S. Coast Guard), Commandant, U.S. Coast Guard,Washington, D.C. (ex officio)
Jennifer L. Dorn,Administrator, Federal Transit Administration, U.S.
Department of Transportation (ex officio)
Robert B. Flowers(Lt. Gen., U.S. Army), Chief of Engineers and Commander,
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Washington, D.C. (ex officio)
Harold K. Forsen,Foreign Secretary, National Academy of Engineering,
Washington, D.C. (ex officio)
Edward R. Hamberger,
President and CEO, Association of American Railroads,Washington, D.C. (ex officio)
John C. Horsley,
Executive Director, American Association of State Highway
and Transportation Officials, Washington, D.C. (ex officio)
Michael P. Jackson,
Deputy Secretary, U.S. Department of Transportation 
(ex officio)Roger L. King,Chief Technologist, Applications Division, National Aeronautics
and Space Administration, Washington, D.C. (ex officio)
Robert S. Kirk,Director, Office of Advanced Automotive Technologies, U.S.
Department of Energy (ex officio)Rick Kowalewski,Acting Director, Bureau of Transportation Statistics, U.S.
Department of Transportation (ex officio)
William W. Millar,
President, American Public Transportation Association,
Washington, D.C. (ex officio) (Past Chair, 1992)
Mary E. Peters,Administrator, Federal Highway Administration, U.S.
Department of Transportation (ex officio)
Suzanne Rudzinski,Director, Transportation and Regional Programs, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (ex officio)Jeffrey W. Runge,
Administrator, National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation (ex officio)
Allan Rutter,
Administrator, Federal Railroad Administration, U.S. Department
of Transportation (ex officio)
Annette M. Sandberg,Administrator, Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation (ex officio)
William G. Schubert,
Administrator, Maritime Administration, U.S. Department
of Transportation (ex officio)
Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMPUTERSCIENCEAND
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
BOARDDavid D. Clark,Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
ChairEric Benhamou,3Com CorporationDavid Borth,Motorola LabsJohn M. Cioffi,Stanford UniversityElaine Cohen,University of UtahW. Bruce Croft,
University of Massachusetts, AmherstThomas E. Darcie,University of Victoria
Joseph Farrell,University of California, BerkeleyJoan Feigenbaum,Yale University
Hector Garcia-Molina,Stanford UniversityWendy Kellogg,
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
Butler W. Lampson,
Microsoft CorporationDavid Liddle,U.S. Venture Partners
Tom M. Mitchell,
Carnegie Mellon UniversityDavid A. Patterson,University of California, BerkeleyHenry (Hank) Perritt,Chicago-Kent College of LawDaniel Pike,GCI Cable and EntertainmentEric Schmidt,Google Inc.Fred B. Schneider,
Cornell UniversityBurton Smith,Cray Inc.Lee Sproull,New York University
William Stead,
Vanderbilt University
Jeannette M. Wing,
Microsoft Research; Carnegie Mellon University (on leave)Marjory S. Blumenthal,DirectorCybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMITTEEON
FREIGHTTRANSPORTATION
INFORMATION
SYSTEMSSECURITYRobert E. Gallamore,Chair,
Director, Transportation Center, Northwestern
UniversityA. Ray Chamberlain,Vice Chair,
Vice President, Parsons Brinckerhoff, Inc.
Frank J. Anstett,Manager, Infrastructure Security, Raytheon Company
Samuel H. Banks,Senior Vice President, U.S. Customs Modernization
Project, Sandler and Travis Trade Advisory Services
Richard A. Holmes, Jr.,
General Director, Security and Quality Assurance,
Union Pacific RailroadBarry Horowitz,NAE, Professor, Department of Systems Engineering,
University of Virginia
John L. King,Professor and Dean, School of Information, University ofMichiganLars Kjaer,
Vice President, World Shipping Council
Art Kosatka,Chief Executive Officer, TranSecure LLC
Steven J. Lambright,Vice President, Savi Technology
Daniel Murray,
Director of Research, American Transportation Research
InstituteFrank M. Pittelli,President, Navius Technologies, LLC
Alan F. Spear,
President, MRC Investigations (USA), Inc.Karen Ryan Tobia,
Manager, Technology Planning, Port Commerce
Department, Port Authority of New York and New Jersey
NATIONAL
RESEARCHCOUNCILSTAFF
Alan T. Crane,
Study DirectorSteven Woo,
Program OfficerCybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The merger of information system technology and transportation infrastructureis transforming the freight transportation industry in a variety of ways. These
changes are producing new ways to organize companies’ supply chains as well as

military logistics. As the new freight information systems become more fully
integrated, they are expected to have great private and public benefits.These systems, however, may be vulnerable to cyberattack. In accordance
with the national initiative to increase security of critical infrastructure, the U.S.
Department of Transportation (DOT) requested that the National Research

Council (NRC) review trends in the use of information technology in the freight
transportation industry and assess potential vulnerabilities to a cyberattack. In
response, NRC formed the Committee on Freight Transportation Information

Systems Security, under the Transportation Research Board (TRB) and the

Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, to conduct a scoping study

to develop an approach, study, or other process that DOT could use to address

the vulnerabilities of freight information systems.Specifically, the committee was charged with recommending how to conduct
a study that would result in1.A baseline description of the U.S. freight transportation communication and
information systems, including interconnectivity with international carriers, gov-ernment entities (U.S. and non-U.S.), customers, and other business partners;2.A summary of ongoing and emerging efforts in such areas as electronic data
interchange, telecommunications and data transfer, trends in the use of the

Internet, business practices, customs, immigration and agriculture clearance
processes, electronic letters of credit, integrated logistics software, positive
train control, intelligent transportation systems, and all other information-
and communication-based processes and technology improvements that affect
transportation, shipping, and logistics;3.A review of current industry practices addressing security (with emphasis on
information technology–related dimensions); andPREFACE
ixCybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4.An identification and summary of the potential vulnerabilities that may be
created by the interconnection/interface and possible integration of these newsystems.One of the complexities of a project such as this is that developers and oper-ators of the relevant system will be reluctant to discuss or admit to specific secu-rity weaknesses publicly. Thus the committee had to recommend a process that

would permit the problems to be identified and addressed.The committee held its first meeting on November 25–26, 2002. The project,from committee formation to final report, took 7 months. During that time the
committee met twice at NRC headquarters in Washington, D.C. In addition, its

members and staff held numerous telephone conferences to discuss their findings.After the start of the study, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS),
which incorporates many of the relevant functions formerly performed by DOT,

was created. Hence the committee directs many of its recommendations and
comments to DHS as well as to DOT.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals selected for their
diverse technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the
NRC’s Report Review Committee. The purpose of this independent review is

to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in mak-
ing the published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets
institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study

charge. The review comments remain confidential to protect the integrity of the
deliberative process.The reviewers of this report were Noel D. Matchett, Information Security,
Inc.; Steven B. Lipner, Microsoft Corporation; Peter Martin, Lakeville Motor

Express; and David Zanca, Federal Express. The committee is grateful for the
many constructive comments and suggestions the reviewers provided. The
reviewers were not, however, asked to endorse the findings and conclusions, nor

did they see the final draft before its release. Responsibility for the final contentof this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and NRC.The review of this report was overseen by Lester A. Hoel, University ofVirginia, Charlottesville. He was appointed by NRC to ensure that an indepen-
dent examination of this report was carried out in accordance with institutionalprocedures and that all review comments were carefully considered. SuzanneCYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY
xCybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Schneider, Associate Executive Director of TRB, managed the report review
process. The committee appreciates the speed and efficiency of this review.
This study was managed by Alan T. Crane under the direction of the com-
mittee and the supervision of Stephen Godwin, Director of TRB’s Studies and

Information Services.The report was written by the committee members and the NRC staff. Thecommittee also appreciates the vital contributions of Jocelyn Sands, Frances 
E. Holland, and Amelia B. Mathis. Joedy W. Cambridge and Joseph A. Breen

provided valuable suggestions while the committee was being formed. This report
has been edited by Norman Solomon under the supervision of Nancy Ackerman,
Director of Publications.Robert E. Gallamore, ChairA. Ray Chamberlain, Vice-Chair

Committee on Freight Transportation Information Systems Security
PREFACE
xiCybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ABI  Automated Broker Interface.ACE  Automated Commercial Environment.
ACS  Automated Commercial System.
AES  U.S. Bureau of Customs and Border Protection’s Automated Export
System.Airbill  Receipt for carriage of air freight.
AMS  U.S. Bureau of Customs and Border Protection’s Automated Manifest
System.ANSI X12  Voluntary standards, maintained by the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI), defining the structure, format, and content of
business transactions conducted through electronic data interchange
(EDI). ANSI X12 is produced by the committee ASC X12, supported by

the Data Interchange Standards Association, Inc. (DISA). APIS  Advanced passenger information system.
ATIS  
Advanced traffic information system.
ATRI  
American Transportation Research Institute.

ATS  
Advance targeting system.
AVI  
Automatic vehicle identification.
BASSC  Business Anti-Smuggling Security Coalition.
Bill of lading  A statement of the nature and value of goods being transported,
especially by ship, along with the conditions applying to their transport.
Drawn up by the carrier, this document serves as a contract between the

owner of the goods and the carrier.
CAMIR  Customs Automated Interface Requirements.CHCP  Cargo Handling Cooperative Program.CRM  Customer relationship management.CSTB  Computer Science and Telecommunications Board of the National
Academies.CSI  Container Security Initiative.Cyberterrorism  Terrorism related to computer and information systems.

DASD  Direct-access storage device.ACRONYMSAND
GLOSSARY
xiiCybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Denial-of-service (DOS) attack  An attack on a computer network effectedby overloading the access points, so that further access is slowed or stoppedaltogether.
DHS  Department of Homeland Security.

DNS  Domain name service.
DOT  Department of Transportation.

Drayage  Generally, carriage of freight, often by truck. 

EA  Enterprise architecture.
EDI  Electronic data interchange.
ERP  Enterprise resource planning.
ESCM  Electronic supply chain manifest.
ExpressLink  Proprietary system for interconnecting the corporate-level sys-tems of four regional trucking companies.FAA  
Federal Aviation Administration.

FAST  
Free and Secure Trade.

FBI  Federal Bureau of Investigation.
FHWA  
Federal Highway Administration.
Firewalls  Hardware and software systems intended to isolate a local area net-work from access. FIRST  Freight Information Real-Time System (for Port Authority of New
York and New Jersey).
Forwarder  A company that ships cargo for hire.
Freight brokers  A company that arranges or consolidates freight shipments.
Freight forwarder  See “forwarder.”

GPS  Global Positioning System.
Hazmat  Hazardous material.
IBIS  Interagency Border Information System.
INS  Immigration and Naturalization Service.
ISAC  Information Sharing and Analysis Center.

ISO  International Standards Organization.
IT  Information technology.

ITDS  International Trade Data System.

ITS  Intelligent transportation systems.
Jones Act  The Merchant Marine Act of 1920 and related statutes, requiringthat vessels used to transport cargo and passengers between U.S. ports be
owned by U.S. citizens, built in U.S. shipyards, and manned by U.S.-citizen
crews. ACRONYMS AND GLOSSARY
xiiiCybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Just-in-time (JIT)  A business system of supplying to each process what isneeded at the time it is needed, and in the quantity needed, to minimizeproduction lead times and reduce inventory.
LIA  Logistics Integration Agency.

Load bidding  For carriers, the practice of negotiating for freight.
Merchant haulage  Transport of cargo in shipping containers arranged by the
owner or possessor of the goods.
MTMC  Military Traffic Management Command.

NHS  National Highway System.
NOA  Notice of arrival.
NRC  National Research Council of the National Academies.
NVMC  National Vessel Movement Center.

NVOCC  Non–vessel operating common carrier.

OSC  Operation Safe Commerce.
Positive train control  The use of digital data communications, automaticpositioning systems, wayside interface units (to communicate with switches
and wayside detectors), onboard and control center computers, and other
advanced display, sensor, and control technologies to manage and control

railroad operations.Red teaming  Acting as an adversary for the unauthorized access to a physicalor computer system to expose the system’s vulnerabilities.
RFID  Radio frequency identification.
R&D  Research and development.
SCADA  Supervisory control and data acquisition.
Sim-Tag   
Simulator for RFID tags.
SSTL  Smart and Secure Trade Lanes.

TECS  Treasury Enforcement Communications System.

Third-party logistics provider (3PL)  Provider of logistics services for hire.
TRB  Transportation Research Board of the National Academies.

TSA  Transportation Security Administration.

TSWG  Trucking Security and Anti-Terrorism Working Group.

TWIC  Transportation worker identification card.

USDOT  U.S. Department of Transportation.

VHF  Very high frequency.

VPN  Virtual private network.

Waybill  
Shipping document.
WCO  World Customs Organization.

XML  Extensible markup language.CYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY
xivCybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Executive Summary. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
1The Evolving Freight Industry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
How Efficient Transportation Creates Economic Growth . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Differences Among Modes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2Freight Information System Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Existing IT Applications. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20

IT Trends and Emerging Technologies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3Planning a Full Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Assessing Security Issues. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40

Study Plan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Appendixes
AInformation Management Systems in the 
International Liner Shipping Industry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
47BSecurity Initiatives and Programs with 
Cybersecurity Relevance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
55CProtecting International Trade Corridors: 
The Operation Safe Commerce Initiative. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
63DU.S. Bureau of Customs and Border Protection 
Use of Information Technology. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
69Study Committee Biographical Information  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
CONTENTSCybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVESUMMARY
The potential vulnerability of freight transportation information systems to ter-rorist attacks is a serious concern for homeland security. In this report the
groundwork is laid for a study of the cybersecurity of the information systems on
which freight transportation depends to facilitate efﬁcient delivery of the goods
and materials that drive the economy.The development of computer security system designs and strategies for thefreight transportation industry must be accomplished within a framework that
is sensitive to the following important attributes of the industry:1.It consists of different carrier modes (i.e., truck, rail, sea, air, and pipeline). Its
companies cover a wide range of characteristics, including size, economiccondition, technical know-how, cargo types, and geographical location. This
diversity makes it difﬁcult to develop a uniform security design concept with
managed implementation schedules. Instead, evolutionary steps tailored to
the different parts of the industry on a case-by-case basis must be developed
to address identiﬁed vulnerabilities.2.The existing freight transportation information system is a confederation of
company-to-company information system integrations constructed to per-
mit more efﬁcient operation. The design is not uniform, not speciﬁed, not
documented, not evaluated, not tested, and not under conﬁguration control.
These features make security design analysis and evaluation extraordinarily
difﬁcult.3.Many potential cyberattacks on the freight transportation industry would
result in consequences to stakeholders other than the industry itself. For
example, (a) customers that depend on the freight industry for tightly man-aged supply delivery schedules can suffer signiﬁcantly when deliveries are
delayed; (b) safety-related attacks, such as an attack on a hazmat freight vehi-cle, would affect the general public directly; and (c) political attacks, such asthreats to import a nuclear weapon into the United States, would affect the1Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.government’s policies on imports. Consideration of possible measures toaddress such scenarios, and their costs, should reﬂect these facts.As a result of this situation, a focused, evolutionary process for identifyingand prioritizing security enhancements will be required. Development and
implementation of such a process are likely to be slower than one might like, so
there is a need to focus efforts on the most critical areas. Otherwise, unneces-
sary expense will be incurred, and, under some conditions, the efforts might
even be counterproductive—every change to the system introduces the risk of
new vulnerabilities.TYPESOF
THREATSCyberattacks on transportation and logistics networks could take several differ-
ent forms, with varying consequences and probabilities. Reducing vulnerability
requires consideration of all plausible types, including those discussed here. The
ﬁrst one is a direct attack on the information systems, while the latter two use
information technology (IT) to enable or amplify a physical attack. It should be
noted that a physical attack on the IT systems coordinated with a cyberattack
could cause far more damage than either type alone. This report, however, is con-
cerned only with cyberattacks, which would not differ much if they were accom-
panied by physical attacks. The full study should consider all types of threats
involving cyberattacks, and their consequences.Denial of service:Cyberattacks, whether by terrorists or hackers, might bringdown information systems with what is known as a “denial-of-service” attack. Forexample, the perpetrator might gain entry to a large number of unprotected com-
puters on the Internet and program them to access selected websites simultane-
ously. The computers controlling these websites might then crash. Companies in
other industries have been subjected to denial-of-service attacks on their web-
sites and servers, which were probably perpetrated by individual hackers. Such
attacks are not the subject of this report, which focuses on large-scale, organized
attacks intended to inﬂict maximum economic damage over a long period of
time. No massive, coordinated attacks have yet been launched on any network,
but if directed at freight information systems, such attacks could disrupt freight
service, causing signiﬁcant damage to the economy.1A related concern is delib-CYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY21Economic damage from the 12-day shutdown of West Coast ports in October 2002 due to labor–management issues probably exceeded $1 billion (Anderson and Geckil 2002). Damage was limitedbecause the shutdown was widely anticipated. A cyberattack might have different consequences.Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.erate disruption of a military mobilization during a national crisis. Although indi-vidual freight companies may not be unusually vulnerable to such attacks, the
interconnections of the industry’s information systems and the increasing role of
the Internet suggest the potential for widespread damage. One individual system
whose loss could result in signiﬁcant economic harm is that of the Bureau of
Customs and Border Protection (Customs; formerly the U.S. Customs Service),
because it is vital for the orderly ﬂow of imports and exports.2The full study sug-gested by this report should also consider how quickly the system could recover
from an attack and how well the freight system could operate in the interim. Of
the three types of attacks, denial-of-service attacks probably are the easiest to per-
petrate but the least damaging.Hazardous material shipments:More than 800,000 hazmat shipments occurdaily in the United States. Some are potential targets for terrorists trying to harm
people or seeking materials for making weapons. Terrorists could hack into and
misuse information systems to identify and track such shipments in order to
attack them at high-consequence locations. Under some conditions, the male-
factors might actually cause an accident resulting in the release of hazardous
materials purely through a cyberattack, for example by seizing control of railroad
switches or signals. Alternatively, terrorists might commandeer the supervisory
control and data acquisition (SCADA) system of a pipeline network carrying
dangerous material to maximize the damage following a physical attack.Weapons of mass destruction:Terrorists trying to bring a weapon of massdestruction (chemical, biological, or nuclear) into the United States could dis-
guise it as ordinary freight. They could exploit vulnerabilities in transportation
information systems to mask and track their shipments, thus reducing the risk
of detection. This approach is likely to become more attractive to terrorists as
physical security requirements become more stringent. Terrorists also might use
unauthorized access to freight information systems to move weapons around in
the United States or export them to other countries. This type of attack could
have extremely serious consequences, but it also may be the least likely, and the
IT role in the attack may not be central. Information systems could, however,
play a role in reducing physical vulnerability to such use of the freight trans-
portation system.All major industries are vulnerable to cyber- and physical attacks. Thefreight transportation industry appears to offer unusual potential forbothEXECUTIVE SUMMARY32Loss of the air trafﬁc control system could be even more devastating, but that is not included in thisstudy because it is not an interconnected system and does not rely on the Internet. Therefore, it is muchless vulnerable to terrorist cyberattacks than are freight information systems.Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.economicandphysical damage from terrorist cyberattacks.3These concernsmay grow because freight transport is increasingly dependent on IT. As long asthe threat of terrorism remains, cybersecurity in the freight transport sector will
be an important issue, although it is impossible to deﬁne the threat exactly or
quantify it.KEYCHARACTERISTICSOFTHE
FREIGHTTRANSPORTATIONINDUSTRYA cyberattack could come at any time and hit any point of vulnerability in the
system. A variety of measures to reduce vulnerability are being implemented or
considered. The factors discussed here and in more detail in Chapters 1 and 2
should be taken into account when such measures are considered.INDUSTRYSCALEAND
COMPLEXITYFreight transportation is handled by a great many individual companies operat-
ing different modes of transport (e.g., ship, truck, train, air) in a large and com-
plex global system. The industry uses millions of trucks, rail cars, containers, and
so forth and employs millions of people to move billions of tons of freight annu-
ally. Some modes (e.g., air, rail, pipelines) are concentrated, with relatively few
companies. Others (e.g., trucking, international shipping) include many com-
panies, ranging from large and highly sophisticated organizations to “mom and
pop” operations using manual or low-technology systems. The fragmented and
changing nature of the industry, the diversity of the modes, and the lack of over-
all system security coordination can lead to vulnerability. Intense competition
keeps proﬁt margins low for companies in all modes, which limits their ability
to fund new infrastructure, technology, and procedures if the return on invest-
ment is not readily apparent.PUBLIC–PRIVATEINTERACTIONSFreight operations in the United States are essentially all in the private sector,but they are intimately connected with the public sector. In addition to usinggovernment-owned facilities such as highways, ports, and airports, the freightCYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY43For example, large parts of the electric network could be shut down by cyberattacks, but these proba-bly would not cause much physical damage to system components. The system could then be restartedquickly. See Making the Nation Safer: The Role of Science and Technology in Countering Terrorism(NRC2002). It also should be noted that as systems become more automated, it may become easier for cyber-
attackers to cause physical damage.Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.transportation industry is affected by many aspects of government regulation—federal, state, local, and regional. Government monitoring (e.g., customs clear-
ance, truck weighing, and even ﬁrst responder monitoring of hazmat shipments)
provides opportunities for unauthorized access to information systems, includ-
ing the electronic cargo declarations submitted to Customs, because any entry
point provides a potential vulnerability for cyberterrorists.INFORMATIONSYSTEMSCOMPLEXITYFreight information systems are a signiﬁcant factor in the steadily improving efﬁ-
ciency of the industry. These systems also help provide highly reliable delivery,
which, among other beneﬁts, permits customers to operate with lower invento-
ries, including “just-in-time” inbound materials strategies. The transport/logistics
system functions globally, but it is made up of discrete and varied subsystems
among the different modes and even among the companies within a mode.
The system is not integrated; instead, the subsystems are only interconnected
at many different points and in different ways. Many transport and logistics
firms also connect with their customers and government agencies such as
Customs. Each interconnection represents a point of potential vulnerability
to attack. In addition, the ever-changing mix of carriers, shippers, distributors,
and freight forwarders who are or can be connected to the “system” makes it
very difficult to identify and authenticate users. The complexity and diversity
of these systems are a serious challenge in the development and implementa-
tion of a comprehensive cybersecurity strategy for freight transportation infor-
mation systems.OVERALLCOORDINATIONCoordination of efforts to reduce cybervulnerability is a major challenge. No
single government agency, private ﬁrm, or association is in a position to con-
sider the whole transportation/logistics continuum as a complex system. Instead,
many different organizations have inﬂuence over fragments of the system. They
act where they can, but that is not necessarily at the point of highest priority.VULNERABILITIES, SECURITY, ANDTECHNOLOGIESMany factors create potential vulnerabilities to cyberattacks on freight trans-portation information systems, including the interconnection of systems, the
increased reliance on the Internet for communications, and the emergence ofEXECUTIVE SUMMARY5Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.decentralized systems. These potential vulnerabilities and associated technolo-gies are discussed here. A fundamental issue is whether the improvement in
security is adequate to justify the cost.INTERCONNECTIONSThe interconnection of systems across large transportation sectors allows carriers,shippers, and manufacturers alike to increase the efﬁciency of their operations. As
the web of interconnected information systems grows, however, it can become
more susceptible to denial-of-service attacks, improper use, and unauthorized
access.Large organizations in the transportation sector have interconnected theirown information systems to create systems spanning the enterprise. Smaller
companies have interconnected their systems to create “federated” or “cooper-
ative” systems that allow them to compete more effectively with larger organi-
zations. In addition, regulatory forces (some motivated by post–September 11
homeland security concerns) are driving the interconnection of commercial and
government systems by requiring carriers, importers, exporters, and manufac-
turers to submit more information electronically to the government. For exam-
ple, Customs’ Automated Manifest System represents a vital link in the ﬂow of
information about imported goods.Documents such as bills of lading and letters of credit are essential for theshipments of goods. They are increasingly sent in electronic form, but electronic
documents can easily be altered or counterfeited if they are not appropriately
protected. Electronic data interchange standards exist for the transportation
sector, but the sector has generally not incorporated authentication technolo-
gies into its emerging systems and standards to ensure the authenticity of the
document author and that the document can be exchanged privately with
another party.INTERNETCOMMUNICATIONSThe Internet is used increasingly as the primary communication method among
transportation partners or transportation carriers and their customers. Freight
transportation has beneﬁted from a revolution in logistics based largely onimproved communications through the Internet. In supply chain managementand the optimization of logistics, the ability to transmit data across the Internetreliably is critical. Improvements in supply chain efﬁciency have been an impor-tant factor in economic growth, as discussed in Chapter 1. The most criticalsecurity concern of the Internet is that attacks can come at any time and fromCYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY6Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.virtually anywhere in the world. It is inherently difﬁcult to prevent such attacksor to identify the perpetrators afterwards, as noted in Chapter 2.The Internet itself provides only minimal levels of access control and protec-tion against eavesdropping. Virtual private network technology incorporates
encryption and other security mechanisms to provide enhanced security for
remote user-to-system and system-to-system communications over the Internet,
but only for prearranged situations involving a small number of systems. In gen-
eral, the lack of a widely accepted encryption infrastructure signiﬁcantly impedes
improved security.DECENTRALIZEDSYSTEMSSince the introduction of Web-based application techniques in the early 1990s,
system architects have been shifting the design of information systems from pri-
marily centralized systems toward decentralized systems (networks that—like
the Internet—operate without central control).The most signiﬁcant challenge for the use of wide-scale decentralized systemsis that of developing the infrastructure needed to authenticate all of the users in
the system. In the decentralized model, no central authority can resolve such
issues, which makes security control more difﬁcult, though still possible.OTHERDEVELOPMENTSMany technologies now being implemented or tested for potential use in the
freight transportation industry may have cybersecurity implications.Embedded processors are, to varying degrees, being used or tested by the trans-portation sector, primarily for the identiﬁcation and monitoring of shipments.
Radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) tagsautomatically identify an asset or itsdeclared contents, or both. E-sensorsdetect and document environmental changesto a shipment along its route. E-sealsare the electronic version of mechanical seals;they can be placed on shipments or structures to detect an unauthorized entry or
deter intrusions because of the fear of detection. These devices are being studied
in pilot programs (see Appendix B). They are intended to address aspects of phys-
ical security, not cybersecurity, but their links to transportation information
systems suggest that they should be part of a study of IT vulnerability. For exam-
ple, terrorists might hack into e-seals to conceal tampering with a container.Several enabling technologies may become part of the transportation sector’sIT infrastructure. Wireless communications(i.e., RF, infrared, terrestrial, satellite-based) can transmit information with mobile units. Wireless tracking systems
already are used in the trucking industry, often for critical, high-value ship-EXECUTIVE SUMMARY7Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ments. Almost all of the embedded devices that may be used in the transporta-tion sector rely on wireless communications. Cryptographyis intended to main-tain the privacy and integrity of information exchanged between two entities
over a network and contributes to the veriﬁcation of sender authenticity. Smartcards(or smart tokens) and digital certiﬁcates help to authenticate users.Biometric deviceshelp to authenticate human beings through a physical attributesuch as a ﬁngerprint or voice pattern.ASSESSINGPOTENTIALPOLICYOPTIONSGiven the damage potential from cyberattacks on freight transportation IT sys-
tems, public and private options for enhancing cybersecurity should be identi-
ﬁed and developed. The actual vulnerabilities, risks, and consequences of such
attacks have not yet been determined, analytically or otherwise, for the various
modes. Furthermore, no mechanism now exists for determining how much secu-
rity is enough or which steps could be identiﬁed as having the highest priorities.
Additional study as suggested here is intended to lead to a strategy for these issues.A strategy to reduce vulnerability must account for the company compositionand structure in each mode and the operations the companies perform. It must be
based on an analysis of security gaps, the costs and beneﬁts of current and emerg-
ing technologies and processes that could be implemented to enhance cybersecu-
rity, and the ability of transport companies to implement them. The analysis that
would permit such a strategy to be developed has not yet been conducted.Some security measures may improve the efﬁciency of operations and pay forthemselves as normal investments. Although they may not necessarily be a com-
pany’s investment of choice, such measures would at least be of interest and
should be a special focus of the proposed study. Other measures are expensive but
may be effective in reducing the likelihood or consequences of a cyberattack. In
such cases, the main beneﬁciary may be the public rather than the company that
implements the measure. Since the risk of an attack cannot be speciﬁed and fac-
tored into the costs and beneﬁts of preventing it, prioritizing potential steps to
reduce vulnerability to cyberattacks is important.The purpose of this report is to determine how such a study should be struc-tured and the issues that it should address. It does not present a plan for imple-
menting cybersecurity measures. As far as possible within the limited scope, the
measures that might be considered and how they might apply to the freight trans-
portation system are reviewed. Several concepts for further study are then sug-
gested in order to develop a strategy for possible steps to reduce the sector’sCYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY8Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.potential vulnerability to cyberattacks in the least costly and disruptive way. Moredetail can be found in Chapter 3.Task 1. Determine the chief vulnerabilities of freight transportation informa-tion systems.The ﬁrst step is to identify and describe the main informationsystems used in the transportation sector and to understand the role they playin normal operations. These systems should then be analyzed for potential
cybervulnerabilities. Much of this analysis would reﬂect IT vulnerability stud-
ies in general, but the speciﬁc use of the technologies in the freight industry
would have to be reviewed in depth. Detailed information might be obtained
with a series of interviews and perhaps a survey (if consistent with current
administration requirements). The objective would be to develop a sufﬁciently
detailed system description in a format appropriate for security analyses.A variety of plausible attack scenarios would then be used to assess thesystems as they exist now and as they may evolve, and the consequences
should they be attacked successfully. The purpose would be to develop a full
understanding of the kinds of vulnerabilities that should be accorded the
highest priority. Analyses are then required of the expected costs (includ-
ing interference with normal operations) in countering these speciﬁc types
of potential vulnerabilities within each modal setting. Prioritization might
be determined by combining the consequences of a successful exploitation
of a vulnerability, the likelihood that such an attack could be mounted, the
costs of reducing the vulnerability, and the impact on normal operations.
While this prioritization could be done subjectively, it might also be possi-
ble to develop a methodology to do so more analytically. In either case, it
is important that a system-level perspective be used to identify, assess, and
compare the security issues at the level of components, subsystems, and the
overall system.Task 2. Review current industry and government practices addressing ITsecurity.Security practices will be difﬁcult to obtain in detail. Most compa-nies will be understandably reluctant to discuss their practices and protec-tive hardware and software because of concerns that any revelations couldcompromise security. It may be possible, as in Task 1, to obtain the infor-mation by interviews conducted under stringent assurances of nondisclosure.
Companies and government agencies might be presented with a menu of
security options and asked what they use. The effectiveness of these options,
however, often lies in the stringency with which they are implemented. ThatEXECUTIVE SUMMARY9Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.information will be even more difﬁcult to procure. Interviewers must be wellversed in the technology and its use, and they must be prepared to probe for
details. The main purpose of this effort is to determine how the vulnerabili-
ties and risks identiﬁed in Task 1 are being addressed.Task 3. Determine the potential for IT-related security enhancements in thesector.This task is, in part, a follow-up to Task 2. Current and emerging tech-nologies and practices should be examined to determine what role, if any,
they could play in addressing identiﬁed security gaps and deﬁciencies. Integral
to this assessment should be an understanding of the characteristics of the
industry and an analysis of how realistic and attractive these technologies and
practices would appear to decision makers. A key part of the study should be
to research the costs and beneﬁts of security measures as they might be imple-
mented in the freight transportation sector. Other concepts might require
government support because the beneﬁts do not outweigh the costs to the
company. Because IT costs may decline over time and with increasing scale
of deployment, this task should also consider the feasibility of strategies that
might make promising security measures more attractive.Task 4. Analyze policies to reduce cybervulnerability.The U.S. governmentcould play a useful role in disseminating information on new security options
and best practices. It also might evaluate the extent to which these options
were being implemented. This task could include the development of a set of
cybersecurity guidelines and recommendations and consideration of how to
promote their use most effectively in the freight transportation industry.4Partof the task might be to cooperate with companies in performing security
audits, perhaps including “red teaming” to test security, and in other joint
private–public initiatives. The same tests should be applied to the govern-
ment’s connections to the private-sector IT systems.Task 5. Assess the economic impact of cost increases in the freight trans-portation industry.Some cybersecurity measures may supply economic ben-eﬁts as well as security, as illustrated in Figure ES-1. For example, the use ofdigital signatures might reduce costs related to fraud detection and manage-CYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY104The Administration released a national cybersecurity plan in February 2003 (see news.com.com/2100-1001-984697.html).Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY11(a)(b)SecurityEconomics
  
  
 
 
 SecurityEconomics
  
 
   FIGURE ES-1Relationship between security and economic beneﬁts: (a) little or no economic beneﬁt to security enhancements; (b) signiﬁcant economic beneﬁt to security enhancements.ment and increase customer conﬁdence. Other measures might protectagainst low-likelihood but very high-consequence events—for example,
involving weapons of mass destruction. Such measures may have a high pub-
lic value without signiﬁcantly beneﬁting the company that implements
them, which could result in economic inefﬁciency for the industry and the
national economy.This task should deal with but not be limited to the following issues:1.At what levels and distribution of costs for security does the economic
impact become a concern, both for the freight industry itself and its users?2.On the basis of existing models for relating economic inputs and outputs,
what changes in economic outputs might result from varying levels ofinvestment in security?Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3.Given the tight proﬁt margins associated with the freight industry, is
there a signiﬁcant possibility of economic damage to the companies thatconstitute this industry?4.For investments that may be needed for national security purposes but
that provide little or no advantage to the company implementing the
measures, what form of government participation (e.g., tax credits) would
be most effective?Results should be quantitative and be developed for a wide set of assumptionsin order to permit consideration of a signiﬁcant range of possible outputs.REFERENCESABBREVIATIONNRCNational Research Council
Anderson, P.L., and I.K. Geckil. 2002. 
Flash Estimate: Impact of West Coast Shutdown.Anderson Economic Consulting Group, Lansing, Mich., Oct. 15.NRC. 2002. Making the Nation Safer: The Role of Science and Technology in CounteringTerrorism.National Academies Press, Washington, D.C.CYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY12Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.131THEEVOLVING
FREIGHTINDUSTRY
The nation’s freight industry moves agricultural products and raw commoditiesto factories and ﬁnished goods to domestic and international markets. A major
role is the handling of huge volumes of imported ﬁnished goods, much of it in
containers. The industry’s weight in the modern economy is only hinted at by
its size—hundreds of billions of dollars in revenues and millions of employees
(BTS 2002, Appendix A). The various modes carried more than 15 billion tons
of merchandise, valued at more than $9.4 trillion, in 1998 (Figure 1-1). Freight
transportation has enabled the rise of new logistics and supply chain systems.The new systems have led to explosive growth of world trade in the past decade,
from which all consumers have beneﬁted. Cheap and responsive transportation
makes it possible to acquire parts and components from geographically diverse
sources, manufacture and distribute goods without the need for expensive ware-
houses, and give customers wider choices of products and services. Overall, theseadvances have fueled economic growth.HOWEFFICIENTTRANSPORTATIONCREATESECONOMICGROWTHCommerce is an increasingly information-intensive process. Today’s lean
production methods and modern supply chain management require compa-
nies to forecast customer demand accurately; coordinate multiple suppliers
(perhaps thousands); manage distribution of products and services; track andtrace items in transit; and otherwise control the flow of materials through the organization, from raw materials to finished goods. These systems can bequite complex, and they all hinge on managing information (Chopra and
Meindl 2001).Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUPPLYCHAINMANAGEMENTAND
WORLDTRADEManufacturers, retailers, and other users of transportation have grown accustomedto thinking of their supply chains (networks of manufacturers, wholesalers, dis-tributors, and retailers, which turn raw materials into ﬁnished goods and services
and deliver them to consumers) as important sources of competitive advantage.
Supply chains increasingly are treated as integrated entities, and closer relation-
ships between the organizations throughout the chain can produce competitive
advantage, reduce costs, and help attract and maintain a loyal customer base.Companies manage their supply chains to achieve strategic advantage, whichoften requires detailed models of the movements of goods and the ﬂow of infor-mation between the organization and its suppliers and customers. The process
of supply chain management is often called “logistics.”Today’s supply chains are increasingly multinational, as companies seek theleast costly suppliers consistent with efﬁcient production. This shift has driven aremarkable rise in international trade. Merchandise trade worldwide has doubled
in the past decade (Figure 1-2). The United States accounts for nearly one-ﬁfth
of the world market by value and a corresponding share of the demand for trans-
portation. The Federal Highway Administration of the U.S. Department of
Transportation (DOT) forecasts a further doubling by 2020 (FHWA 2002). This
growth will offer economic opportunity but will strain the capacity of the nation’sports, other intermodal freight terminals, and highways.CYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY147,428849
163
1,089
10,858
2,311
1,219
18854
02,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
10,000

12,000
TruckRailWaterAirOther 
Value (billion $)
Tons (millions)
FIGURE 1-1Value and tonnage of U.S. domestic freight shipments by mode; “other” ismainly pipelines, for which value is not available (FHWA 2000).Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The growth in foreign trade is even more striking in comparison with grossdomestic product (GDP). Since 1970 U.S. merchandise trade has more thandoubled as a proportion of GDP. The world as a whole has also seen healthy
increases in this measure (Figure 1-3).GROWINGRELIANCEON
INFORMATIONInformation is obviously a vital contributor to supply chain management. An
automobile manufacturer, for example, must assemble all the parts and sub-
assemblies for a run of a particular make and model. In doing so, it must coordi-
nate the production schedules of perhaps hundreds of suppliers to ensure that the
correct parts and subassemblies ﬂow toward the ﬁnal assembly plant as needed.
With today’s lean inventories, there is little “buffer stock” to make up for a sup-
plier’s shortfall and, often, nowhere to store buffer inventories if they existed. To
manage its inventories, the company must forecast in real time its production of
that model and communicate with all of its suppliers and transportation providers
so that they may speed up or slow down their activities. These information ﬂows
are critical to industrial operations and proﬁtability, and any threat to their
integrity becomes a real concern.For larger companies, supply chain management is a component of enter-prise resource planning models. These models may include transportation aswell as human resources, ﬁnance, and other core functions. Specialized logisticsTHE EVOLVING FREIGHT INDUSTRY15$0$1,000$2,000$3,000$4,000$5,000$6,000
$7,000199119921993
19941995199619971998199920002001Year
Merchandise Exports (billion US$)World
United States
Western Europe
Asia
Africa/Mideast
FIGURE 1-2Merchandise exports by region, 1991–2001. (Source: World TradeOrganization.)Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.management companies have proliferated in recent years to serve this need forsmall and medium-sized companies.DIFFERENCESAMONGMODESHIGHWAYFREIGHTThe nation’s highway system is the giant of American transportation, carrying
71 percent of the total tonnage and 80 percent of the total value of U.S. shipments

in 1998 (FHWA 2002). More than 550,000 separate trucking establishments
carry freight locally, nationally, and internationally, according to the 1997
Economic Census survey of the transportation and warehousing sector. These
companies shared total revenue estimated at $342 billion (including local and
long-distance trucking and courier services) (Bureau of the Census 2001a).The companies range from tiny concerns with one or two employees to majornational networks with revenues of $2 billion to $3 billion or more (and the
biggest of all, UPS, with 2001 revenues of more than $20 billion). In all, their
4.7 million employees were responsible for more than 1 trillion ton-miles of
freight movement. Highway freight movement grew robustly in the late 1990s
(BTS 2002).CYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY160%5%10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
19601970198019902000
Year
PercentageFIGURE 1-3U.S. trade in goods and services (exports plus imports) as a percentage ofGDP, 1960–2000 (Bureau of the Census 2001b).Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AIRFREIGHTAll of America’s 100 scheduled airlines carry freight to some extent. Scheduledairlines’ revenues for domestic and international freight and express services
totaled about $12 billion in 2001, and carriage of mail added another $1 billion.
The airlines were responsible for nearly 22 billion revenue ton-miles in 2001.
Freight and express specialists were among the few airlines to report consistent
proﬁts in recent years.All of these activities declined substantially between 2000 and 2001, how-ever, reﬂecting the uncertain security environment and the worldwide eco-
nomic slump. The decline followed a period of very healthy growth (more than
10 percent per annum for several years).RAILFREIGHTRailroad freight revenues in 2001 totaled $35 billion. The nation’s railroads were
responsible for nearly 1.5 trillion ton-miles of freight trafﬁc. Nearly half of the
tonnage (46 percent) was coal, which was followed by chemicals and allied prod-
ucts (8.7 percent), farm products (7.9 percent), nonmetallic minerals (7.0 per-
cent), and food and kindred products (5.6 percent), according to the Association
of American Railroads (2003).The railroad industry is in a long-term process of consolidation. The UnitedStates has 571 railroads, but only eight are large (Class I railroads that have cor-
porate revenues exceeding $266.7 million). Statistics for this group show a total
employment of 178,000 in 1999. In that year the eight companies shared revenues
of just over $32 billion. The Association of American Railroads (2003) reports
that the top two (Union Paciﬁc and Burlington Northern) accounted for more
than two-thirds of that revenue in 2000 ($23 billion).WATERBORNEFREIGHTThe U.S. maritime shipping industry is diverse and complex. It includes a wide
variety of vessel types offering many different kinds of service, calling on hun-
dreds of ports on all of the seacoasts and the Great Lakes, as well as transiting
inland waterways.The volume of container freight moving through the nation’s ports has dou-bled in the past decade and is expected to continue growing rapidly (BTS 2002;
The Economist1997). More than 15 million containers are in use globally; theyaccount for about 90 percent of the world’s internationally traded cargo by value
(The Economist2002). Virtually all oceangoing vessels that serve U.S. commerceare operated under foreign ﬂags.THE EVOLVING FREIGHT INDUSTRY17Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Measured by value, the cargo transported by the international liner shippingindustry constitutes about two-thirds of the total U.S. foreign waterborne trade.In 2002, the liner shipping industry carried roughly 6 million containers of
imported cargo to the United States and approximately 3.3 million containers
of export cargo being shipped from more than 202,000 American businesses.
The total is roughly $500 billion worth of goods, or more than $1.3 billion worth
of goods per day through U.S. ports (World Shipping Council 2002). Some
details on the information technology used by the international liner shipping
industry are offered in Appendix A.Data from DOT’s Bureau of Transportation Statistics indicate revenues in1999 of $24.5 billion for domestic and international freight (coastal waterways,
Great Lakes, locks and channels, and inland waterways) (BTS 2002).REFERENCESABBREVIATIONSBTSBureau of Transportation Statistics
FHWAFederal Highway Administration
Association of American Railroads. 2003. Fact About Railroads.Policy and EconomicsDepartment, Jan. 10.www.aar.org/PubCommon/Documents/AboutTheIndustry/Statistics.pdf.Bureau of the Census. 2001a. 1997 Economic Census: Transportation and Warehousing.EC97T48S-SM. March. www.census.gov/prod/ec97/97t48-sm.pdf.Bureau of the Census. 2001b. Statistical Abstract of the United States.Washington, D.C.BTS. 2002. National Transportation Statistics 2001.BTS02-06. U.S. Department ofTransportation, Washington, D.C. www.bts.gov/publications/nts/index.html.Chopra, S., and P. Meindl. 2001. Supply Chain Management: Strategy Planning andOperation.Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, N.J.The Economist.1997. Delivering the Goods. Nov. 13.www.economist.com/displayStory.cfm?Story_id=352733.The Economist.2002. Container Trade: When Trade and Security Clash.www.economist.com/displaystory.cfm?story_id=1066906.FHWA. 2002. The Freight Story: A National Perspective on Enhancing Freight Transportation.U.S. Department of Transportation, Washington, D.C.World Shipping Council. 2002. Partners in America’s Trade.Brochure. Washington, D.C.CYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY18Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.192FREIGHTINFORMATION
SYSTEMTECHNOLOGIESMost freight transportation information technology (IT) is the same as in otherindustries. Differences arise because of the nature of the industry and the con-
sequences of terrorist exploitation of potential vulnerabilities, as noted in the
Executive Summary. The freight transportation industry uses IT in several ways:•Backroom management and integration.Companies use a range of general-purpose business applications to manage internal processes and to link themby sharing information internally and with suppliers and customers (see, for
example, Chopra and Meindl 2001; McDougall 2003; Radding 2000).•Mobile communications and tracking.To keep track of the locations of trailers,trucks, rail cars, and other mobile assets and their contents, companies useeverything from bar codes to Global Positioning System (GPS) receivers.•Internet applications.The Internet plays a growing role for all freight compa-nies. Electronic commerce of all kinds uses the Internet because of its wideaccessibility and its ﬂexibility in allowing companies to link various kinds of
Web, client-server, and legacy systems. These properties make it easier for
companies to develop distributed applications that can exchange various
types of formatted data (Kiely 1999).All of these technologies have cybersecurity implications. As companies maketheir operations more efﬁcient by integrating their systems and those of their cus-
tomers and suppliers, they also raise cybersecurity concerns. The purpose of this
chapter is not to deﬁne speciﬁc information technologies into or out of the war
on cyberterrorism. Rather, it is to provide a basic understanding of the range andCybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.character of possible technology tools that might become valuable in that con-text. The committee believes that this will help the Department of Homeland
Security (DHS) and the Department of Transportation (DOT) in the develop-
ment of their cybersecurity strategies.EXISTINGIT APPLICATIONSMany kinds of IT are used by the freight transportation industry. The various
modes (air, truck, rail, pipeline, and water), to varying degrees, use specialized,
sector-speciﬁc technologies, but the ultimate goal is to get the shipment from
its origin to its destination, which may involve multiple modes. The challenge
is to get the shipment to its destination on schedule, with the appropriate degree
of tracking en route; to minimize delays in transferring from mode to mode; and
to do all of this at a competitive price without damage to the product shipped.For most companies, transportation is a strategic asset. Large companies todayare likely to have sophisticated models of their operations, known as enterprise
resource planning (ERP) systems. ERP systems may include scheduling modules
for manufacturing plants, which would allow the company to automate major
portions of the decision processes in transportation or other aspects of the value
chain for that plant. The use of such modules (in ﬁnance, logistics, manufactur-
ing, human resources, or supplier management) helps the company improve the
way it does business by increasing efﬁciency and reducing human error.Freight transportation planning and operation decisions are often assisted bysoftware that is designed to help analyze and determine how, where, when, and
in what quantity materials should be transported. These systems also compare
different carriers, modes, routes, and freight plans; include supply chain man-
agement software; and rely on sophisticated algorithms to analyze options and
generate solutions that increase proﬁtability. These applications can respond in
real time to problems and emergencies—for example, by instantly rescheduling
if a machine breaks down.For any mode, freight operations can generally be categorized into the follow-ing tasks, each of which can be assisted or improved by the use of IT:•Matching a load with a carrier.The cargo owner, or shipper, must identify andengage a carrier—truck, train, ship, air, or a combination of modes. Freightbrokers, agents, and freight forwarders may be involved in this task. The
technology involved can span the range from telephone and fax on the low
end to Internet-based load bidding. If a multimodal shipment is involved,CYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY20Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the shipper or broker (agent) will either have to arrange each leg of the tripor request a carrier to arrange the entire intermodal movement.•Order acceptance.It is necessary to establish a dated record of the carrier towhich the load is assigned. This record is typically called a bill of lading (air-
bill or waybill). It is a statement of the nature and value of goods being trans-
ported and the conditions and terms applying to their transport. It serves as
or evidences a contract of transport between the owner of the goods and the
carrier. It may be paper, or it may take various electronic forms.•Routing/dispatching.Choosing a course and directing the vehicle to its des-tination can be a matter of strictly human effort (for a simple truck trip) or
it can be automated to nearly any extent desired.•Pickup conﬁrmation, en route tracking, and delivery conﬁrmation.Shippers andfreight companies often desire to track the progress of their shipments. A vari-ety of processes and technologies—depending on the transportation modes—can be used for this purpose, including GPS satellites, digital or analog
wireless telephones, and bar code scanning. Some carriers use all of these
devices, so customers may monitor the locations of their shipments in near
real time by using the Internet.•Transmitting shipping documentation.Paper documents are traditional here,but many carriers use electronic communications [e.g., the Internet and
electronic data interchange (EDI)].•Cargo manifesting.This step often uses special information software andsystems.The various transportation modes use different technologies, which reﬂecttheir recent histories. All, however, are moving toward greater computer-assisted
systems and reliance on communication, frequently using EDI and the Internet.
Yet they have far to go before truly intermodal transportation communications
are possible.HIGHWAYFREIGHTThe trucking industry is a component in nearly every company’s supply chain.
Trucking companies use computing and communications technologies heavilyFREIGHT INFORMATION SYSTEM TECHNOLOGIES21Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.to improve their own efﬁciency and to meet the demands of their customers forcost-effective, efﬁcient, and easily tracked logistics. The proliferation of small
trucking companies over the past 20 years has been built on the use of low-cost
IT such as mobile phones, fax machines, and the Internet.Trucking companies and freight brokers increasingly use the Internet tomatch loads with the most appropriate carriers. Both independent brokers and
some larger truck freight companies have websites on which drivers can bid for
loads or use EDI, which is also commonly used by railroads and waterborne
freight companies. Phone and fax, of course, are still vital, especially for the tens
of thousands of smaller ﬁrms (i.e., those with fewer than 10 trucks).To document the agreement to carry a shipment, many shippers use electronicmeans [such as the well-established EDI or the emerging and more ﬂexible
Extensible Markup Language (XML)], but smaller shippers use paper records.Except for extremely time-sensitive operations, such as sophisticated logisticssystems serving just-in-time manufacturing operations, the driver or human dis-
patcher is responsible for routing and dispatching the truck. The technology is
available for automating these operations to nearly any extent desired (including
special software for generating maps and trip schedules).For conﬁrming the pickup, en route tracking, and delivery conﬁrmation,truckers use a variety of technologies, including GPS (satellites), digital or ana-
log wireless telephones, and bar code scanning. New electronic automatic vehi-
cle identiﬁcation systems, much like those used in the electronic collection of
tolls on highways, are used increasingly in busy ports and other intermodal trans-
fer points. Some carriers use all of these devices, so customers may monitor the
locations of their shipments in near real time by using the Internet.In transmitting shipping documentation, paper documents are the norm, butsome carriers use digital communications such as EDI.AIRFREIGHTThe rapid growth of air freight in the past decade was made possible by advances
in communications as much as anything else. Coordinating the worldwide
movement of time-sensitive freight, from business documents to garments tofresh ﬂowers, is a challenging and complex task.Air cargo companies gain their competitive edge from technology innovation.They pioneered the generation and use of large databases that can be queried atwill to monitor each of the millions of items that a large air freight company may
have in transit at any moment. A vital part of the problem is to ensure that inter-
modal communication is efﬁcient (Air Transport Association 2002).CYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY22Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RAILFREIGHTRail freight is increasingly supported by information systems and communica-tions technologies. Typical trains a decade or so ago had a crew of four, compared
with two today. Rail companies have made growing use of onboard computers,
local area networks, automated equipment identiﬁers, GPS tracking, automatic
reporting of work orders to headquarters, car scheduling and train order systems,
and two-way wireless connections (Association of American Railroads 2003).Signaling and monitoring systems are also more automated, taking advantageof commercial ﬁber-optic communications cable that has been laid along rights-
of-way. The rails themselves are used as communications channels for signal con-
trollers and trackside signals. Wayside “hotbox” detectors take infrared readings
on the bearing boxes of passing rail cars and automatically report overheated
journals over VHF voice networks. In arranging transfers to and from other
modes, railroads have long used EDI.To help track shipments, nearly all locomotives and rail cars are tagged withautomatic identiﬁcation transponders, which automatically record car locations.
This technique allows automatic veriﬁcation of the standing order of cars in each
train and faster, more accurate reporting of car locations to railroad service cen-
ters and customers.WATERBORNEFREIGHTWaterborne freight has many of the same information needs as other modes. Thecarrier must identify cargo, make intermodal handoffs efﬁciently, and get the cargo
to the agreed destination as quickly and securely as possible. The types and sizes
of typical cargo (mainly containerized freight, petroleum and other ﬂuids, motor
vehicles, and various bulk cargo) are somewhat different from those of other
modes, but the types of information needed are essentially the same.The focus of the remainder of this section is on the international liner shippingindustry (that is, ocean carriers that offer scheduled services on ﬁxed routes), since
this type of shipping activity involves the greatest need to manage information
and communicate with others. Further detail can be found in Appendix A.Business Data SystemsThe heart of a company’s information and communication processes is usually alegacy mainframe computer system, which is generally accessible over the Internet(with various levels of access to users inside and outside the company). Access issecured by passwords or a virtual private network with different levels of securityFREIGHT INFORMATION SYSTEM TECHNOLOGIES23Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.for, and access to, the centralized mainframe systems. Many global carriers alsohave company intranets.Central Dispatch/RedirectionCentral to liner shipping companies’ activities in this area is keeping track of con-tainers and truck chassis. Shippers (cargo owners) must arrange with the line for
the speciﬁc types and numbers of containers needed, the pickup date, and which
vessel is to carry the containers. To do this, the shipper either directly contacts
the line’s booking agent or enters the necessary information (including origin, des-
tination, port of loading, commodity description, shipper’s name, and type of con-
tainer) using the appropriate transaction section of the line’s website. In either
case, the information goes into the company’s mainframe system and becomes
available to dispatchers of containers and to vessel operators and terminal opera-
tors, who make the necessary preparations for the movement, loading, and
stowage of containers on the vessel and for the availability of needed equipment.
At the destination port, the terminal operations staff—also working from the
company’s mainframe system—will access information needed for off-loading the
containers and handing them off for the next leg of the journey.Information Flow Among CollaboratorsMultiline alliances and other vessel-sharing arrangements are central to liner
shipping. Because a vessel may carry the cargo of various container lines, it is nec-
essary to exchange signiﬁcant amounts of information among alliance members.
Most of this information exchange is handled via EDI, which in turn requires
that each alliance partner’s information system be programmed to accept data
from the other partners’ systems.They also must share information with truckers and rail carriers to ensure efﬁ-cient intermodal transfers. The EDI protocol or Web tools, or both, are gener-
ally used with “house” truckers or railroads; with smaller trucking companies,
the transactions are handled by fax or e-mail.Information Flow to GovernmentsThe freight industry has innumerable electronic links, mandated or voluntary,with local, state, and federal agencies. These include manifest ﬁlings, operatingauthorities and permits (e.g., permits to carry hazardous materials), route ﬁlings,
electronic funds transfers, and personnel ﬁles, to name a few. For example, ocean
carriers must post information on imported cargo with the Automated Manifest
System (AMS) of DHS’s Bureau of Customs and Border Protection (formerlyCYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY24Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.U.S. Customs Service). The Customs databases and systems are discussed in moredetail in Appendix D. Customs recently promulgated the so-called 24-hour rule
(see Box 2-1), which requires that advance cargo declarations be submitted
24 hours before loading of U.S.-bound cargoes in foreign ports. AMS and the

Customs’ Automated Targeting System are becoming the preeminent central-
ized government data management system for security prescreening of import
cargoes to the United States. In addition, many ocean carriers and shippers are
participating in Customs’ Automated Export System for electronic submission ofFREIGHT INFORMATION SYSTEM TECHNOLOGIES25Box 2-1NEWCARGOSECURITYREGULATIONSFROM
CUSTOMSAND
BORDERPROTECTIONThe U.S. Bureau of Customs and Border Protection in late 2002 issued the so-called “24-hour rule,” which requires ocean carriers to submit advance cargo
declarations (CF 1302) 24 hours before loading U.S.-bound cargo in foreign
ports. Under this rule, Custom’s Automated Manifest System (AMS) is becoming
the main federal data management system for security screening of waterborne
imports.The carrier sends data on inbound cargo to Customs via AMS, and Customsmakes the appropriate checks using AMS and its Automated Targeting System,
according to an established list of risk factors. Customs can thereby determine
whether a container should be held pending further investigation at the for-
eign port and whether containers should be physically inspected. Containers
for which no hold has been issued can be loaded 24 hours after submission of
the data.Section 343 of the recent Trade Act of 2002 (P.L. 107-210) requires thatinformation on all imports and exports be submitted electronically to Customs.
Customs will promulgate ﬁnal regulations under the act by October 1, 2003. It
is expected that more foreign jurisdictions will require electronic submission of
cargo manifest information in the future.Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.export cargo information; other ocean carriers provide that information today inpaper (fax) form. The Advanced Passenger Information System, which has been
used by airlines since 1986 to report airline passengers, has now become manda-
tory for other modes, under the Enhanced Border Security Act of 2002. It will
soon require mandatory advance electronic crew member information from ves-
sels. As with information technology in other applications, the use of systems and
databases in public–private partnerships is subject to the cybersecurity implica-
tions previously mentioned in this chapter.Information Flow Between Carriers and CustomersEstimates in the trade press suggest that about 75 percent of shippers’ transactionswith ocean carriers are handled by telephone or fax, 20 percent through individ-
ual carriers’ websites, and 5 percent via the three Web-based portals (e.g., GT
Nexus, Inttra, and CargoSmart) that provide access to multiple carriers at one site.
In electronic transactions between ocean carriers and their customers, user regis-
tration and assignment of passwords is a common security measure. Encryption of
data is primarily used in situations in which the parties are passing data related
to title to goods, as, for example, with remote printing of bills of lading. Some
companies in the liner shipping industry are moving to customer relationship
management software, which allows them to more ﬂexibly manage customertransactions through a simpler linking of all the company’s individual business sys-
tems. Customers can obtain information on the status of particular cargo move-
ments from the ocean carrier’s customer service department or track the cargo’s
position in a secure section of the carrier’s website using coded information from
the bill of lading.IT TRENDSAND
EMERGINGTECHNOLOGIESA variety of approaches using new technologies may be linked to IT systems in
the future. Some are intended to improve cybersecurity. Others would be imple-
mented for efﬁciency reasons but may have secondary implications, positive or
negative, for IT vulnerability. The topics discussed are still developmental, and
there is no assurance that they will be (a) appropriate for freight transportationsecurity or (b) available at an acceptable cost. The technologies discussed hereare intended as examples of technology that the full study should consider.
Determining which are likely to be widely implemented was beyond the scope of
this study.CYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY26Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ELECTRONICSUPPLYCHAINMANIFESTDEMONSTRATIONDOT, working with freight shippers, has tested a variety of ways to improve inter-modal transfers of freight under the Intelligent Transportation Systems program.
For example, at O’Hare International Airport, the Electronic Supply Chain
Manifest system was tested in a 2-year demonstration that focused on the air–truck
interface, but it is being considered for other modes as well.FREIGHTINFORMATIONREAL-TIMESYSTEMFOR
TRANSPORTThe Freight Information Real-Time System for Transport (FIRST), being devel-
oped by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey (https://www.ﬁrstnynj.com/), is an Internet-based system for trucking companies, railroads, terminal
operators, ocean carriers, brokers/freight forwarders, and others to use in speed-
ing the ﬂow of cargo through the area (one of the busiest and most congested inthe country). It allows cargo brokers, shipping agents, freight forwarders, andsteamship companies, as well as trucking companies and railroads, to check thestatus of cargo and vessel arrivals, arrange pickups, and conﬁrm deliveries. The
FIRST website includes alerts of bridge and tunnel problems and trafﬁc conges-
tion (and Webcams of the busiest container terminals).FIRST consolidates in one place on the Web various existing sources ofcritical cargo transfer and carrier information (including near real-time infor-mation on truck, ship, and train arrivals), real-time video feeds to monitor
congestion at seaport entry gates and road conditions on arterial roads leading
to the port, and enhanced intermodal connectivity by improving the in-transit
visibility of cargo.INTERCONNECTIONSOF
SYSTEMSACROSSLARGESECTORSThe interconnection of systems across the freight transportation sector, properly
implemented, signiﬁcantly increases the ability of participants to communicate
effectively and efﬁciently by reducing mundane tasks and increasing accuracy.
Various forces are currently driving the interconnection of information systems
across the entire transportation sector. Economic forces, among other consider-
ations, are causing large organizations in the transportation sector to intercon-
nect their own systems to create enterprise-spanning systems. For example, all of
the large overseas shippers now have interconnected systems that are used to
control most aspects of the shipping process within their organizations. The sys-
tems have many of the same characteristics as those developed by FedEx to
handle all of its various operations, including overnight, freight, and customFREIGHT INFORMATION SYSTEM TECHNOLOGIES27Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.deliveries. Furthermore, customers are being granted electronic access to thosesystems to gain “visibility” of shipments, which allows the customers to make
their own operations more efﬁcient.As some large organizations develop interconnected systems for their ownpurposes, they also provide the resulting computer-assisted services to a largernumber of smaller organizations who otherwise would not have their own sys-
tems. For example, the system used by Union Paciﬁc to control its networkwide
operations is also used by many short-line carriers to control local and regional
operations. Such sharing of information systems helps large and small operators
alike to increase efﬁciency, reduce overall costs, and amortize investments in IT.Smaller operators also are interconnecting their existing systems to create“federated” or “cooperative” systems that allow them to compete more effec-
tively with larger organizations. For example, four regional trucking carriers
have formed the ExpressLink system to interconnect their own corporate-level
systems. ExpressLink gives each carrier national coverage while allowing it to
maintain a relatively small infrastructure.In addition, policy and regulatory forces are driving the interconnection ofgovernmental systems and the interconnection of commercial and governmen-
tal systems. The Bureau of Customs and Border Protection has several new IT
systems (described in Appendix D) under development that—once they become
operational—could serve more government agencies than originally envisaged
as a result of homeland security initiatives and requirements. In many respects,the interconnection of government systems parallels the interconnection ofcommercial systems because regulatory agencies must streamline their operationsto keep pace with increased efﬁciencies provided by commercial systems.Regulatory forces are also driving the interconnection of commercial andgovernment systems by requiring more information to be submitted electroni-
cally to the government by carriers, shippers, and manufacturers. For example,
effective December 2002, Customs has been requiring the submission of sea
cargo manifests 24 hours before loading of export cargoes destined for the
United States (see Box 2-1). Customs, acting under statutory authority, is poised
to propose that all sea cargo manifests be electronically submitted for both
import and export cargo. Customs is likely to propose that similar electronic sub-
mission requirements for cargo descriptions be implemented for the other trans-
portation modes.Many of the economic, business, policy, and regulatory forces describedabove have existed for quite some time, although the pace of development in
many of these areas has quickened as a result of homeland security initiatives.CYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY28Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Accordingly, pilot programs have been started or are being planned in varioussectors to gain practical experience with various existing and emerging techno-
logical and procedural applications and processes before decisions are made on
their adoption. Pilot programs (see Appendices B and C) such as Operation Safe
Commerce, Sim-Tag, Cargo Handling Cooperative Program, and Smart and
Secure Trade Lanes involve the testing of, and comparison between, different
monitoring and identiﬁcation systems of shipments as well as the handling of
those shipments through the intermodal transportation chain. Each pilot pro-
gram is intended to provide insights that may be relevant to determining future
economic, policy, and regulatory priorities and requirements.For all of the reasons stated above, the interconnection of information systemsacross large transportation sectors is likely to develop further. Transport carriers,
shippers, and manufacturers will likely ﬁnd economic value in increasing the efﬁ-
ciency of their operations by development and deployment of multifunctional
and multiﬁrm intelligent management systems. Similarly, government systems
and the interconnection of commercial and government systems are likely to be
used increasingly in satisfying complex policy and regulatory requirements.
However, as the web of interconnected information systems increases to fulﬁll
these requirements, it is likely to become more susceptible to unauthorized
access, improper use, and denial-of-service attacks.1That is, the natural solu-tion for the current set of economic and regulatory problems could become the
cause of a host of cybersecurity problems if it is not implemented properly
(CSTB 2002a).Various architectural and technical mechanisms can be used to maintain secu-rity across interconnected systems, such as ﬁrewalls and different access control
levels. However, regardless of the speciﬁc mechanism, they all essentially rely on
authentication, the identiﬁcation of every person or computer that accesses the
system. The stronger the mechanism of identiﬁcation, the stronger the overall
security of the system. For example, most stand-alone and interconnected sys-
tems, including PCs, departmental servers, mainframes, and enterprise-spanning
Web-based services, rely on a simple username and password combination to
identify each person who should be allowed to access the system. Although many
techniques have been developed to “increase the security” of the simple passwordFREIGHT INFORMATION SYSTEM TECHNOLOGIES291This theme was reﬂected in “Continued Review of the Tax Systems Modernization of the InternalRevenue Service” (CSTB 1994) with the strong condemnation of the extremely weak security archi-tecture, which had 55,000 members able to access a taxpayer’s ﬁle over unsecured circuits using only a
ﬁxed password.Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.scheme (e.g., stamping additional numbers on the back of credit cards or requir-ing at least six characters in a password), most security experts agree that pass-
words are a weak authentication mechanism because it is relatively easy for an
intruder to acquire such information. In an interconnected system, the potential
problems caused by weak authentication mechanisms are ampliﬁed signiﬁcantly
because of the increased number of entry points into the system. Furthermore,
access to one part of the system could lead to access to other parts of the system,
if not to the entire system. As important as the authentication of individuals in
an interconnected system is the authentication of every system that accesses
another system.The importance of credible authentication in interconnected systems hasbeen well known for more than 20 years. Moreover, various competing theories
and technologies have evolved over that time to address these concerns, pri-
marily through the use of cryptographic techniques that rely on mathematical
approaches to ensure that the authentication information cannot be stolen or
forged (CSTB 1996). Credible authentication is based on a set of “digital cer-
tiﬁcates” (i.e., credentials) that have been “digitally signed” (i.e., authenticated)
by a “trusted entity.”2The use of digital certiﬁcates and signatures went a long way toward solvingthe wide-scale software authentication problem. Support for digital certiﬁcates,
which were ﬁrst developed in a widespread manner in the mid-1990s with the
Netscape Web browser, has since been added to most e-mail software for the
authentication and encryption of e-mail, although it is not yet widely used.
Digital certiﬁcates and signatures are often used in conjunction with hardware
devices such as smart cards and smart tokens to further strengthen the authen-
tication scheme used by a system.EMBEDDEDPROCESSORSAND
ENABLINGTECHNOLOGIESHistorically, the primary interface between the real world and the cyberworld has
been a human being: someone interprets real-world activities and enters data into
the computer system, or someone is provided tasking by the computer and per-
forms a real-world chore. Embedded processors transfer information directly
between the real world and the cyberworld. They are already used in the trans-
portation sector, primarily for the monitoring and identiﬁcation of shipments, andCYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY302Having a single “trusted entity” is only one approach. The study that is outlined should look at alter-native approaches such as having multiple roots [e.g., SDSI/SPKI (simple distributed security infra-structure/simple public key infrastructure)] and other beneﬁts of digital signatures such as the protection
of certiﬁcate integrity.Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.that use could grow. Radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) tags, e-sensors, and e-seals, together with their electronic readers at all relevant points, are examples
of embedded processors.RFID tags are used to provide an automated means of identifying an asset orits declared contents, or both. These tags can be either active or passive. Active
RFID uses an internal power source (e.g., battery) within the tag to continu-
ously power the tag and its RF communication circuitry, whereas passive RFID
relies on RF energy transferred from the reader to the tag to power the tag.
Passive RFID operation requires strong signals from the reader, and the signal
strength returned from the tag is low because of the limited energy. As with any
RFID system, one of the vulnerabilities to cyberattack occurs at the point where
the tag communicates with the reader. The simplicity of passive RFID tags
makes them relatively easy to “spoof.” Active RFID systems, on the other hand,
can include authentication and encryption techniques similar to those of any
computer network. Some of their cybersecurity challenges are therefore similar
to those of other IT systems, as discussed above.E-sensors make use of embedded processors to detect and document environ-mental characteristics or changes to a shipment along its route. For example,
temperature sensors can be used on refrigerated containers to detect whether the
internal temperature was maintained within proper limits over the entire route.
Certain types of sensors have been used for some time in various applications in
the transportation sector but are now, to some degree, being integrated with
embedded processors. For example, a temperature e-sensor can record the actual
temperature of the shipment over the entire route, and the temperature data
can be stored in a tamper-indicative manner by using a variety of hardware and
software techniques. E-sensors also can be conﬁgured to document container
intrusions.Seals, whether electronic or mechanical, are placed on shipments or struc-tures to detect an unauthorized entry (thereby alerting ofﬁcials to the need for
further inspections) or deter intrusions because of the fear of detection. They
can be designed for different applications. For example, e-seals on a container
door might store information about the container, the declaration of its con-
tents, and its intended route through the system. E-seals can document when
the seal was opened. In combination with digital certiﬁcates and signatures, an
e-seal also could document whether the individuals sealing and unsealing the
container were authorized.While these technologies are intended to enable monitoring of shipments andphysical security, they all use IT and are linked to IT systems. Thus the additionalFREIGHT INFORMATION SYSTEM TECHNOLOGIES31Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.connection points (e.g., electronic readers) may increase cybervulnerability. Afull assessment of the potential cybersecurity vulnerabilities that would be cre-
ated through the widespread adoption of these technologies in the freight trans-
portation industry is needed (see Task 1 in Chapter 3), perhaps as part of the
larger study that is the focus of this report.In addition to the embedded devices described above, enabling technologies,including public-key cryptography, biometrics, and wireless communication
tracking, are of potential use in the transportation sector’s IT infrastructure and
are relevant from a cybersecurity perspective.Cryptography has been used across a range of application areas for more than25 years to ensure that information is exchanged privately between two enti-
ties over a network. Cryptography is the basis for most “secure” Web-based
activities and “secure” e-mail applications, and it is supported by all major soft-
ware applications. The need for strong cryptographic techniques in electronic
commerce has led to its widespread availability beyond traditional military
applications.Biometric devices are used to authenticate human beings on the basis of oneor more physical attributes such as a retina or iris pattern, a ﬁngerprint, digital
face recognition, or voice pattern. As such, this limits access to a specific per-
son, not just to someone who knows certain information (i.e., a password) or
holds certain credentials (e.g., a digital certificate). Biometric devices can be
used in conjunction with a smart card (or smart token) and a digital certifi-
cate to improve authentication. [The report Who Goes There? AuthenticationTechnologies and Their Privacy Implications(CSTB 2003b) has a more in-depthdiscussion of biometrics as an authentication technology, commonsense rules
for the uses of biometrics, and potential privacy and other social implications of
their use.]Wireless communication tracking systems are used in the domestic trans-portation sector to monitor the location of shipments along their route. In some
cases, the shipment reports its location using wireless communication to a con-
trol system, while in other cases the shipment simply records its location along
its route, and those data are gathered at a control point.It will be important to closely monitor ongoing and planned pilot programs(e.g., Operation Safe Commerce and Smart and Secure Trade Lanes) intended
to test these technologies to determine what role, if any, they might have in
enhancing supply chain security. Standardization efforts of various national and
international organizations and institutions (e.g., the Auto-ID Center at theCYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY32Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the International Organization forStandardization) and the degree to which such efforts would address recognized
cybersecurity vulnerabilities of the technologies and their possible commercial
deployment are also worth monitoring.ELECTRONICDATAINTERCHANGEProper paperwork, including the bill of lading, work order, and letters of credit, is
essential to the movement of shipments. The electronic exchange of documents
required throughout the shipping process is becoming more and more common.
Mature EDI standards exist for the transportation sector, and operational systems
are already in use by large and small organizations within the sector.The ﬁrst electronic documents to be exchanged were those directly related tomoney, such as purchase orders, work orders, invoices, and payments. For exam-
ple, 96 percent of all invoices generated by Union Paciﬁc are exchanged elec-
tronically. The electronic exchange of other documents in the shipping process
is increasing, to the extent that no paper document is ever generated in some
cases. For example, 80 percent of all FedEx orders are placed electronically over
the Internet, and corresponding electronic invoices and credit-card receipts are
sent to the consumer.Historically, the validity of a shipping document was veriﬁed by human beingsalong the route who physically examined the document itself and any attached
seal. Some fraudulent or forged documents would routinely be detected, but some
would not. In general, the system was designed to limit the number of improper
documents to an acceptable level across the entire transportation sector. The
steady move toward electronic documents, however, could signiﬁcantly alter that
delicate balance because electronic documents are easily reproduced, altered, or
forged if they are not implemented properly. More important, it is practically
impossible for a human being to detect such a forgery, let alone monitor the
rapidly increasing number of documents being exchanged.The use of a cryptographically generated signature on a sensitive documentthat is exchanged between two information systems helps ensure the authen-
ticity of the document author and that it can be exchanged privately with
another party. As discussed above, such technology has been used extensively
in many application areas and is widely available. An effective digital signature
would reduce the vulnerability of a document to tampering and fraudulent use.The transportation sector in general and system developers in particular havenot to any large degree incorporated digital signatures into emerging systemsFREIGHT INFORMATION SYSTEM TECHNOLOGIES33Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and standards. To date, forgeries in the freight transportation industry have hadfew implications beyond ﬁnance. If weapons of mass destruction were to be
smuggled, however, forgery might be an integral part of the deception. The study
that is outlined here should analyze the use of digital signatures on electronic
documents and determine whether steps could be taken to encourage more
widespread use.In many cases, the worst cybersecurity problems result from the ﬁrst wave ofproductivity enhancements gained by computer-assisted systems. That is, whencomputerized systems are ﬁrst deployed to increase productivity, they naturally
cause a change in the business processes and procedures followed by human
beings to do their job. If the consequences of those human-oriented changes are
not considered by the system designers, a wrongdoer could take advantage of
those changes and cause more difﬁcult problems than were possible before
(CSTB 2003a, 80–81). Similarly, equipping electronic documents with digital
signatures based on strong cryptography might create an environment in which
the electronic documents would replace paper-based documents, thus possibly
altering normal business processes and procedures.The productivity enhancements provided by electronic documents come at aprice. Widespread use of electronic documents would require development of an
electronic infrastructure to support the authentication of individuals and orga-
nizations, document standards across a range of transportation sectors, and a set
of auditing processes to ensure that the system is working properly. Such infra-
structure elements are being developed across a wide range of business sectors and
are starting to evolve in the transportation sector. The study that is outlined here
should consider the value of pilot programs to identify the various issues and chal-
lenges surrounding the creation of such an electronic infrastructure throughout
the transportation sector.As in the deployment of any technology, the deployment of EDI could resultin new or additional vulnerabilities and consequences. They could result from
alteration of existing business practices (e.g., the involvement of one less person
in a check-and-validation process) and the development of infrastructure ele-
ments across various business sectors (e.g., two incompatible systems are “united”
by a third “mediating” system), among other causes.INCREASEDRELIANCEONTHE
INTERNETFOR
COMMUNICATIONEconomic forces are pushing most systems toward Internet communications as
the result of widespread, near-universal access. Consumer-oriented carriers han-
dle a signiﬁcant portion of their business over the Internet, keeping pace withCYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY34Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the general push toward online commerce in all sectors. Similarly, business-to-business carriers are also starting to use the Internet for a signiﬁcant portion of
their transactions.With the increased use of the Internet has come an increased awareness of theneed for secure communications and stronger authentication techniques in most
information systems, especially those using the Internet. Hardware-based authen-
tication tokens, which are issued to users who need to access a system over the
Internet or by use of some other remote access technology, either replace or aug-
ment a conventional password system to strengthen the remote authentication
process. For example, FedEx uses 20,000 tokens to provide system access at vari-
ous levels to remote users. Virtual private network (VPN) technology has been
developed to provide extra levels of security for remote user-to-system and system-
to-system communication over the Internet. VPN technology creates a virtual
network on top of the Internet that allows access only to a speciﬁed set of users
and systems. The VPN technology has well-established hardware and software
standards. VPN works for prearranged situations involving a small number of
systems.One of the challenges still facing Internet developers is that of availability. Asthe Internet is increasingly used as the primary communication method between
transportation systems, the ability to transmit data reliably across the Internet
becomes more critical. Internet availability is a double-edged sword. On one
hand, the Internet is vast, with many redundant paths between all points—local
and even regional breakdowns in one part of the Internet are healed relatively
quickly by rerouting trafﬁc around the problem areas (CSTB 2002b, 2). On the
other hand, key resources on the Internet depend on standard software compo-
nents that are under continuous attack from a variety of sources constantly look-
ing for ways to make them fail. For example, attacks on the Domain Name
Service and Sendmail servers have demonstrated the susceptibility of these wide-
spread components.As stated previously, the most difﬁcult security aspect of any large networkedsystem such as the Internet is that the attacks can come from virtually anywhere
in a nearly anonymous manner (using current authentication methods). Denial-
of-service attacks have been conducted for a long period of time by a wide range
of people located around the world. More important, such attacks are inherently
difﬁcult to prevent, and it is difﬁcult to track down the perpetrators. Owners of
key transportation systems that use the Internet for communication purposes
should be aware of the risk of such attacks. Protective measures are often used
as a normal part of the business process.FREIGHT INFORMATION SYSTEM TECHNOLOGIES35Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMERGENCEOF
DECENTRALIZEDSYSTEMSSince the introduction of Web-based application techniques in the early 1990s,decentralized information systems have emerged as an alternative system archi-
tecture to the prevalent centralized systems. That is, instead of having a small
number of servers that provide services to a large number of users (the centralized
approach), systems are now designed with a larger number of servers that com-
municate directly with each other to provide services (the decentralized
approach). Decentralized systems have an inherent ability to work around local
and regional network outages, communicating whenever possible, but otherwise
not preventing local users from continuing to work. Early applications such as
Napster allowed music ﬁles to be exchanged between peer systems, while main-
stream software applications such as Groove allow peer-to-peer processing of typ-
ical business documents. The security implications of decentralized systems
include the lack of a centralized “authority” to authenticate that all the users and
computers in the system are who they purport to be.REFERENCESABBREVIATIONCSTBComputer Science and Telecommunications Board
Air Transport Association. 2002. Annual Report.Washington, D.C.Association of American Railroads. 2003. Facts About Railroads.Policy and EconomicsDepartment, Jan. 10. www.aar.org/PubCommon/Documents/AboutTheIndustry/Statistics.pdf.Chopra, S., and P. Meindl. 2001. Supply Chain Management: Strategy Planning and Operation.Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, N.J.CSTB. 1994. Continued Review of the Tax Systems Modernization of the InternalRevenue Service. National Research Council, Washington, D.C.
www.cstb.org/pub_irscontinuedreview.html.CSTB. 1996. Cryptography’s Role in Securing the Information Society.National AcademiesPress, Washington, D.C.CSTB. 2002a. Cybersecurity Today and Tomorrow: Pay Now or Pay Later.NationalAcademies Press, Washington, D.C.CSTB. 2002b. The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11.NationalAcademies Press, Washington, D.C.CSTB. 2003a. Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and FuturePossibilities.National Academies Press, Washington, D.C.CSTB. 2003b. Who Goes There? Authentication Technologies and Their Privacy Implications.National Academies Press, Washington, D.C.CYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY36Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Kiely, D. 1999. XML: More Than Just a Quick Fix, Extensible Markup Language Is Seen asa Universal Object Model That Will Enhance Web Development and SimplifyApplication Integration. Information Week,Feb. 8.McDougall, P. 2003. Nissan’s I.T. Road Map: Integration and Security Top Automaker’sProject List. Information Week,Feb. 10.Radding, A. 2000. A New Approach to Integration: E-Commerce Requires Companies toIntegrate Processes at Many Levels with Multiple Partners. Information Week,Aug. 28.FREIGHT INFORMATION SYSTEM TECHNOLOGIES37Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.393PLANNINGA
FULLSTUDYAs discussed in previous chapters, the freight transportation industry’s informa-tion systems may be vulnerable to cyberattacks. The consequences of a cyber-
attack could be serious, both economically and physically. Further study is needed
to identify speciﬁc vulnerabilities and risks and develop possible strategies to
address those vulnerabilities while minimizing the costs of doing so. Such studies
are warranted for the following reasons:•Information technology (IT) is becoming increasingly central to freight
transportation.•With all IT come cybersecurity issues that should be carefully considered,
in particular in the post–September 11 environment.•Addressing cybersecurity issues presents the same conundrum as other secu-
rity issues: a trade-off between risk reduction and the costs of implementation.•No mechanism exists for determining analytically how far to go in reducing
vulnerability or which steps should have the highest priorities.•Not enough is yet known about cybersecurity as related to freight IT or the
impact of potential measures to enhance security.Therefore, the committee concludes that a need exists for a comprehensivestudy to assess the current challenges in cybersecurity in freight transportationinformation systems and to identify possible strategies to mitigate identiﬁed vul-nerabilities. Such strategies must account for the company composition andstructure in each mode, the operations the companies perform, and the infor-mation systems they use. They must be based on an analysis of security gaps, theCybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.advantages and disadvantages of current and emerging technology and processesthat could be implemented to enhance cybersecurity, and the ability of trans-
port companies to implement them. The analysis that would permit such strate-
gies to be developed has not been conducted. The committee discusses some
elements of the required analysis below.ASSESSINGSECURITYISSUESIt is generally understood that achieving cybersecurity requires a two-step riskassessment. First, an analysis must be performed to identify overall system vul-
nerabilities, the threats that might exploit those vulnerabilities, and the con-
sequences if the threats were indeed carried out. Figure 3-1illustrates the

interrelationship of these factors. Second, a risk management analysis must be
conducted to evaluate possible measures to enhance cybersecurity, their costs,
and their benefits. As discussed in Chapter 2, the nature of the coordinated
information system that serves the nation’s freight transportation system makes
this risk analysis extraordinarily difﬁcult compared with other computer secu-
rity assessments. Nonetheless, this analysis of the overall interconnected sys-
tem, as well as the individual subsystems, could be an important factor in
reducing vulnerability to terrorist attacks.Actions to mitigate threats should depend on the speciﬁc threats consideredplausible, the natures of the systems involved, and their owners. For example, abroad denial-of-service attack on the Bureau of Customs and Border Protection’s
Automated Manifest System could shut down this necessary interaction point
for all international shipments into the United States (see Appendix D).40CYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDYVulnerabilities ThreatsConsequences FIGURE 3-1Factors involved in cybersecurity assessments.Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Without this system, international transportation activities could grind to a halt,with signiﬁcant economic consequences for U.S. manufacturers and businesses
and, ultimately, the U.S. economy. The U.S. government is responsible for coun-
tering such threats. Alternatively, a disabling attack on the dispatch system of a
large carrier could bring that operation to a halt (and, correspondingly, all trans-
portation activities linked to it). When potential targets are individually owned
and operated systems, the design and implementation of the solution move to
the companies that own these systems.Diversity characterizes the freight transportation sector. Achieving informa-tion system security demands a certain continuity of system design, implementa-
tion, and security procedures that does not readily permit the ﬂexibility that might
be desirable in accommodating such a diverse range of participants. As a result,
careful identiﬁcation of possible measures is required.The choice of measures to counter cyberterrorism must consider economic aswell as security issues. Ignoring cost could have serious economic consequences,
handing terrorists one of their stated objectives. It is difﬁcult to estimate economic
impacts across a broad sector such as freight transportation. Nonetheless, it must
be recognized that this sector operates on tight proﬁt margins. Implementation of
cybersecurity measures is unlikely to be optimal unless economic beneﬁts accom-
pany the security solutions. Figure 3-2provides a visualization of the overlap

between measures to improve security and measures to improve economic perfor-
mance; some security initiatives may improve economic performance, and others
may not. Prioritization of possible measures for a diverse consortium of partici-
pants must be sensitive to this point as a speciﬁc aspect of the risk management
analysis. Another example of the tension between the diversity of the community
and the continuity required for cybersecurity concerns evaluation of cybersecurity
capabilities. Important questions must be addressed, including who would perform
the monitoring role, how it would be accomplished (for example, whether pene-
tration tests would be conducted), how frequently evaluations would occur, and
how they would be reported.In view of these points, the process of evaluating possible measures and even-tually selecting some for implementation must be an integrated effort that is based
on a risk prioritization methodology and a cost–beneﬁt methodology that are
shared and understood by all affected members of the freight transportation com-
munity. The prioritization methodology should account for the consequences of
potential attacks; the availability, efﬁcacy, and cost of possible measures; their
side beneﬁts; and the distribution of costs and beneﬁts to community members
and the nation as a whole. At present, no such methodology is in use or underPLANNING A FULL STUDY41Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.development. In addition, no single organization has a mandate to develop andmanage the use of such a methodology. This report provides a set of recommen-
dations that, if followed, would be the start of a process for selecting, implement-
ing, and managing measures for countering potential terrorist cyberattacks.The study suggested here is intended to provide a strategy for approachingthese issues. It might be necessary to involve several entities in the conduct ofthe study. The National Academies could do some of the work, but this is not a
proposal for an Academies study. Industry consultants might collect data. One
or more federally funded research and development centers could do the detailed
analysis. Various academic research programs also could be involved.In all these tasks, it will be necessary to impose strict conditions on the infor-mation collected and on the way it is processed. Not only is company conﬁ-
dentiality a major concern, but so is the possibility that the information might42CYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDYSecurityEconomics
(a)SecurityEconomics
(b)FIGURE 3-2Relationship between security and economic beneﬁts: (a) little or no economicbeneﬁt to security enhancements; (b) signiﬁcant economic beneﬁt to security enhancements.Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.be compromised by the terrorists that the study is intended to combat. Also, forall these tasks, it will be important to study not only private freight information
systems, but also those government information systems that interface with the
freight transportation sector (e.g., the various information systems operated by
Customs and Border Protection).STUDYPLANTask 1. Determine the chief vulnerabilities of freight transportation informa-tion systems.No complete system description exists of the use of IT in thetransportation sector. The ﬁrst step of this task is to identify at least the majorcomponents that can affect cybersecurity and their interconnections. Part of
this task would be to understand the role that these IT components play in
normal operations so that the consequences of their loss to cyberattacks can
be understood. Information on backup systems should also be sought.This information might be obtained with a survey (if consistent with cur-rent administration requirements) and then a series of interviews. A variety of
companies in each mode must cooperate to ensure adequate coverage and
mask company-speciﬁc data. In many cases, the information will be already
available. It will not be necessary to have great detail as to which company uses
which technology. Rather, information concerning the general prevalence of
different types of systems in each mode and their interconnections is desired.Then the systems—and the intermodal, interconnected system—can beexamined for vulnerabilities and the potential consequences if those vul-
nerabilities should be exploited. Much of this work would reﬂect generic IT
vulnerability studies, but the speciﬁc use of the technologies in the freight
industry would have to be reviewed. A variety of plausible attack scenarios
would then be tested on the different modes to assess the systems as they exist
now and as they are evolving in order to understand the likelihood of suc-
cess and the extent of the consequences. The purpose would be to develop
a preliminary list of the vulnerabilities that should be considered in the tasks
below. As shown in Figure 3-1, priority should be a function of the plausi-
bility of the type of threat that could exploit the vulnerability, the ease of
exploiting the vulnerability, and the consequences. Of particular interest
would be the ease of shutting down large parts of the system and the possi-
bility of malicious use of the system.This task might identify or develop a methodology to determine theprioritization analytically on the basis of these factors. The great diversity
of transportation modes and company characteristics suggests that a largePLANNING A FULL STUDY43Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.number of cases must be considered and that potential remedial measurescould differ widely. However prioritization is determined, it will be important
to maintain a system-level perspective to identify, assess, and compare the
security issues at the level of components, subsystems, and the overall system.Task 2. Review current industry and government practices addressing ITsecurity.Security practices will be difﬁcult to obtain in detail. Most compa-nies will be understandably reluctant to discuss their practices and protective
hardware and software because of concern that any revelations could com-
promise security. It may be possible, as in Task 1, to obtain this information
by interviews conducted under stringent departmental assurances of nondis-
closure. As in Task 1, an exhaustive list of which companies use which mea-
sures is not necessary, just a general sense of the level of security in each mode.Representative companies and government agencies might be presentedwith a menu of security options and asked what they use. This information
could then be compiled without identifying the source.One concern, however, is that the effectiveness of these options oftenlies in the stringency with which they are implemented. For example, if anemployee forgets his smart token but can log on anyway through a back door,
security will be compromised to some degree. That information will be even
more difﬁcult to procure and may even be unknown to most company ofﬁ-
cials. Interviewers must be well versed in the technology and its use and pre-
pared to probe for details. Another possibility might be for the government
to fund a series of pilot studies of various technologies and processes to see
how well they work in speciﬁc contexts.Task 3. Determine the potential for IT-related security enhancements in thesector.This task is, in part, a follow-up to Tasks 1 and 2 and could lead toa prioritization of possible measures to reduce vulnerability. The purposewould not be to identify which measures speciﬁc companies should take, but
to provide a general sense of the important identiﬁed cybervulnerabilities
that could be addressed and the approximate costs of doing so.Possible measures to address the vulnerabilities identiﬁed in Tasks 1 and2 should be identiﬁed for each mode and for the overall freight transportation
system, because of its pervasive intermodal nature, as well as for technologies
and processes as they are now and as they may evolve. Analyses should be
made of the expected costs (including potential interference with normal
operations) in countering these vulnerabilities.44CYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDYCybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Then an additional factor can be added to the prioritization of Task 1:the costs of reducing vulnerability. This reﬁnement may change the list of pri-orities. For example, a vulnerability that might result in only a moderate-consequence incident could rise on the list if the cost of remedying it were
small and could actually involve signiﬁcant improvements in operational efﬁ-
ciency. Alternatively, a vulnerability subject to a high-consequence attack
that can only be addressed with very expensive ﬁxes might drop in priority.In connection with this task, emerging technologies and practices shouldbe examined to determine what role, if any, they could play in addressing
identiﬁed cybersecurity gaps and deﬁciencies. Integral to such an assessment
should be both an analysis of various modes of the industry and an analysis of
the overall, intermodal freight transportation system, along with an assess-
ment of how realistic and attractive these technologies and practices would
appear to decision makers—that is, their economic and operational incen-
tives and disincentives. Companies must believe that the beneﬁts of their
investments are commensurate with the costs. If a measure improves both
security and efﬁciency at a reasonable cost, it may be implemented as a mat-
ter of course (although these measures must compete for a place above the
cutoff point on the list of potential investments that all companies consider).
Other concepts might require government support because the beneﬁts to the
company are insufﬁcient. In addition, IT may decline in cost with increasing
scale of deployment. This pattern may or may not apply to cybersecurity
technology. Therefore, this task should examine potential cost changes and
the possibility that targeted deployment strategies might make prioritized
cybersecurity measures more attractive. What might now be impractical
could become cost-effective within a few years.In addition, there should be study of “upstream” scientiﬁc and techno-logical developments that may result in new opportunities for IT application
in the future.Task 4. Analyze policies to reduce cybervulnerability.The U.S. governmentcould play a useful role in disseminating information on new security
options and best practices. For example, the pilot studies listed in Appendix
B may identify promising measures to enhance cybersecurity, but unless
they are recognized by companies that can use them, they will not be imple-
mented. The study could identify likely means, such as an annual sympo-
sium to discuss innovations or a series of training sessions.The study also might identify follow-up studies to determine the extent towhich these options were being implemented. For example, it might suggestPLANNING A FULL STUDY45Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.government–industry cooperation in performing cybersecurity validations,perhaps including “red teaming” to test security. It should apply the same tests
to government’s connections to the private-sector IT systems.Finally, this task might develop a set of cybersecurity guidelines and rec-ommendations, or at least suggest a methodology to determine how much
security is enough. It could analyze how to promote the use of such guide-
lines most effectively.Task 5. Assess the economic impacts of cost increases in the freight trans-portation industry.Some cybersecurity measures may bring with them cor-responding economic beneﬁts. For example, the use of digital signatures might
reduce costs related to errors and fraud detection and management. The result-
ing improved service could also increase customer conﬁdence. However, cer-
tain measures might protect against low-likelihood but very high-consequenceevents, such as those that may help enable the transport of weapons of mass
destruction. Such measures are less likely to have ancillary beneﬁts but could
result in signiﬁcant additional costs. The public might beneﬁt from a reduc-
tion in the risk of a catastrophe, but the companies making the investment
may not. Even cost-effective measures may be problematical for companies
that are making no proﬁt. The costs of increased cybersecurity could ulti-
mately affect all companies that rely on the transport industry. This task
should deal with the following issues:
1.At what levels and distribution of costs for security does the economic
impact become a concern, for the freight industry itself, its users, and the
U.S. economy?2.On the basis of existing models for relating economic inputs and outputs,
what changes in economic outputs might result from varying levels of
investment in security?3.Given the tight margins associated with the freight industry, is there a
signiﬁcant possibility of economic damage to the companies that consti-
tute this industry?4.For investments that may be needed for national security purposes but
that provide little or no advantage to the company implementing the
measures, what form of government participation (e.g., tax credits) would
be most effective?Results should be quantitative and be developed for a wide set of assumptionsin order to permit consideration of a signiﬁcant range of possible outputs.46CYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDYCybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.47APPENDIXAINFORMATION
MANAGEMENTSYSTEMSINTHE
INTERNATIONAL
LINERSHIPPINGINDUSTRY
A detailed description of information systems in one sector of the freight trans-portation industry is provided in this appendix. It is included for illustrative pur-
poses only and is not intended to suggest that the information systems of the
liner shipping industry are particularly vulnerable to cyberattacks or are more
lacking in protection against such attacks than the information systems in other
transportation sectors.In general, liner shipping companies manage their information and businessprocesses with an array of technologies, including mainframe computer systems,
electronic data interchange (EDI), Web tools connected to mainframe systems,
customer relationship management software, fax, and e-mail. Individual lines’
information management or communication systems vary. They include main-
frame computer systems that allow worldwide access to a common central data-
base and information management processes, as well as regional databases.International liner shipping is not a concentrated industry. For example, themarket share for the major linesserving the U.S. trade (imports and exports com-bined) for the ﬁrst 8 months of 2002 is shown in Table A-1.Each liner shipping company owns and operates its own information systems,which are in different locations. This reduces the potential for cyberterrorists to
target all liner shipping companies’ information systems at the same time in one
coordinated attack. Furthermore, because shipping is a global business, a com-
pany’s computer systems generally have backup and redundant capacity and
operational centers in order to facilitate 24 ×7 business operations.These features of the industry suggest that a cyberattack directed against anindividual liner company’s information systems is unlikely to disrupt the ocean
transportation system as such.Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.On the other hand, a more signiﬁcant disruption and greater economic dam-age to the U.S. freight transportation system could result if a centralized govern-ment information management system used by all U.S.-bound carriers, importers,
brokers, and so forth were to be targeted [e.g., the Bureau of Customs and Border
Protection’s (Customs’) Automated Manifest System (AMS)].1Another example of a centralized government information management systemis the Coast Guard’s National Vessel Movement Center, which receives notices of
arrival (NOAs) from all vessels originating from outside the United States 96 hours
prior to arrival at the ﬁrst U.S. port of call. The information in the NOAs is
used for U.S. government agencies’ monitoring of vessel movements. Similarly,
Customs’ Advanced Passenger Information System (APIS) receives and screens
information on persons coming to the United States, and effective later this year
it will receive electronic crew manifests from vessels 96 hours prior to arrival in a
U.S. port. Both Customs and the Immigration and Naturalization Service use theCYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY48LineMarket Share (%)Maersk-Sealand13.1Evergreen7.1APL6.7Hanjin6.0Cosco5.1P&O Nedlloyd4.4OOCL4.1Hyundai4.0K-Line3.8NYK Line3.7MSC3.7Yang Ming3.7Hapag Lloyd3.5MOL2.5TABLE A-1Market Share of Major Lines 
Serving U.S. Trade (January–August 2002)Source: Journal of Commerce,Dec. 9–15, 2002, pp. 28–34(from the top 50 lines serving the U.S. trade).1See “Information Flow Between Carriers and Governments” on page 51.Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.information in APIS to screen visitors to the United States; it is expected thateventually the Coast Guard will also use APIS for its prescreening purposes.BUSINESSDATASYSTEMSThe heart of a liner company’s information and communication processes is usu-
ally a legacy mainframe computer system that provides the critical “behind the
scenes” processing and storage of data for various aspects of the business. By link-
ing Web-based technologies to its mainframe computer, an ocean carrier can
create a near real-time information-sharing system that is accessible by all its
geographically diverse ofﬁces. Thus, for example, information could be input
using a Web tool, put into a large relational database, and fed into the company
mainframe—giving the various specialty business functions in ofﬁces across the
globe (sales, customer service, operations, etc.) access to common data sets,
standard report formats, and activity records.The databases thus made available typically would include ﬁnancial databases,such as those for invoicing, billing, and trade lane pricing; terminal operations
databases,which are key to vessel management; container yard inventories;andcustomer support dataused in taking bookings, creating bills of lading, tracingcargo, changing “trip plans” (from, say, rail to truck), and distributing, divert-
ing, or consolidating cargo.There are, of course, different levels of security for, and access to, such cen-tralized mainframe systems. That is also the case with liner companies’ public
websites, which typically combine (a) a “general site” that can be accessed by
anyone using the Internet and (b) a “business transaction site” that requireswould-be users (mainly customers) to provide identiﬁcation and be cleared for
speciﬁc levels of access. A general site might include general background infor-
mation about the line, company news, descriptions of available services, a com-
pany history, hiring information, contact information for ofﬁces worldwide, and
links to other sites. The business transaction site requires customer registration
and would provide speciﬁc access for activities such as making bookings, sub-
mitting bills of lading, tracking shipments, creating customer reports, and view-ing accounts. The business transaction feature will typically involve “specialprivileges” (customized access) depending on the nature of the customer’s busi-
ness and available carrier services.In addition to public Internet sites, many global carriers have company intranetsystems for internal communications. However, because liner companies oftenhave overseas ofﬁces in countries with communications infrastructure of variableINFORMATION MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS IN THE INTERNATIONAL LINER SHIPPING INDUSTRY49Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.quality, Internet connections may be less than reliable at some locations. In thosecases, intracompany communications may depend more on e-mail. In general,
however, Web-based systems are preferred.CENTRALDISPATCH/REDIRECTIONIn liner shipping, vessels operate on ﬁxed schedules in speciﬁc trade lanes—and,
except in the case of serious unforeseen circumstances, those schedules are revised
as part of a broader company planning process. So the most common dispatching/
redirection activities in the industry are those for containers and chassis.When a container or group of containers is booked with a carrier, arrangementsare made as to the size and type of containers needed, the container pickup date
(from the company’s container yard), and which vessel is scheduled to carry the
containers. This can be done by the shipper either by (a) directly contacting theline’s booking agent or (b) inputting the required information (origin, destination,port of loading, commodity description, shipper’s name, type of container, etc.)
using the appropriate business transaction section of the line’s website.Under either approach, that information goes into the company’s mainframesystem and becomes available to, for example, the equipment dispatcher, whomust determine whether the container yard has the necessary inventory and make
arrangements to have the containers available for use; and the marine terminal
and vessel operators, who ensure that appropriate preparations are made and that
needed equipment (e.g., reefer plugs for refrigerated containers) is available.The ocean carrier takes control of the cargo either (a) at the terminal gate,in cases where the shipper handles the drayage of the container (known as “mer-chant haulage”) from its facility to the port of loading; or (b) at the customer’s
premises, called a “store door” move, when the ocean carrier provides for the
trucking service (known as “carrier haulage”) using a “house” trucking ﬁrm that
operates under an agreement with the ocean carrier. Carrier haulage is common
in the United States and Europe but limited in Asia and Latin America, where
merchant haulage is more common.In the port of departure, the terminal operator will typically have access, viathe line’s mainframe system, to reports on arriving containers and the bookinginformation needed to arrange loading by stevedores and plan the arrangement(“stowage”) of containers in the vessel. That information would include, in addi-
tion to the identity of the vessel against which the cargo was booked (and there-
fore the sailing date), details about the type of cargo, special storage requirements,
and destination port.CYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY50Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Once the vessel has completed its voyage and arrived at the destination port,the terminal operations staff at that port typically will be working from anotherreport containing the relevant information for off-loading the containers and
handing them off for the next leg of their journey. If the next leg is by truck, the
move could again be merchant haulage or carrier haulage. If a rail move is
involved (say for cargo arriving at the Port of New York and New Jersey and
scheduled for a rail move to Chicago), the terminal operator will contact the
rail partner by EDI with details about which containers need to be moved and
when. For example, if 10 boxes need to be moved by rail to Chicago, the termi-
nal operator will know that its rail partner has ﬁve trains running to Chicago in
the next 3 days and will inform the rail planning staff which of the 10 boxes
have the highest priority (i.e., need to go on the earliest of the trains), or which
may require special handling (e.g., hazmat cargo).INFORMATIONFLOWAMONGCOLLABORATORSBecause multiline alliances and other vessel-sharing arrangements are such a
central part of liner shipping today, a given vessel operating in the U.S. trade
may be carrying the cargo of different container lines. Consequently, a signiﬁ-
cant amount of information must be exchanged among alliance members. Most
of this information exchange is handled via EDI, which in turn requires that
each alliance partner’s information system be programmed to accept data from
the other alliance partners’ systems.Carriers’ dealings with house truckers are generally handled via EDI or Webtools, if available (and bigger lines generally require such capabilities from their
house truckers). Otherwise, trucking arrangements are handled by fax or e-mail.
Arrangements for freight movement by rail are also generally made via EDI.INFORMATIONFLOWBETWEENCARRIERSAND
GOVERNMENTSCustoms’ AMS represents a vital link in the ﬂow of information about imported
goods. With Customs’ recent promulgation of the so-called “24-hour rule,” which
requires that advance cargo (CF 1302) declarations be submitted 24 hours before
loading of U.S.-destined cargoes in foreign ports, AMS—in combination with
Customs’ Automated Targeting System (ATS)—is becoming the preeminent
centralized government data management system for security prescreening of
import cargoes to the United States.INFORMATION MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS IN THE INTERNATIONAL LINER SHIPPING INDUSTRY51Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Many shipping lines provide cargo manifest information electronically viaAMS.2In addition, a number of ocean carriers and most shippers are partici-pating in Customs’ Automated Export System for the electronic submission ofexport cargo information; other ocean carriers provide that information today
in paper (fax) form.3Inbound cargo manifest data are sent to Customs’ AMS through one of twodata formats: (a) ANSI X12 or (b) CAMIR (Customs Automated InterfaceRequirements). Each ocean carrier is limited to using only one of those two sys-
tems, with ANSI X12 being predominant. Each ocean carrier is also limited to
a single source with an electronic interface with AMS. So, for example, ABC
Line’s Rotterdam ofﬁce ﬁrst will provide cargo manifest information for con-
tainers scheduled to be loaded in Rotterdam for a voyage to the United States
internally to the ABC Line’s designated single point of contact with AMS (per-
haps an ofﬁce in New Jersey) to be forwarded to AMS. Thus, all cargo manifest
information for cargo to be loaded at any port in Asia, Latin America, Europe,
onto a vessel bound for, or calling at, a U.S. port must ﬁrst go to each shipping
line’s single AMS contact entity.When the line’s central source for inbound manifest information contactsAMS, a return receipt is automatically generated conﬁrming the number of bills
of lading that were received and accepted and the number of bills of lading that
were received and rejected because of incomplete data. The lines then know
that further information is required on the rejected bills of lading.Security prescreening checks are done by using AMS and ATS. An assessmentof risk factors results in point scores that allow Customs to determine whether a
container should be subject to a so-called security “hold” pending further investi-
gation at the foreign port and whether the container should be physically
inspected. Containers for which no hold messages have been communicated by
Customs can be loaded, but not until 24 hours after submission of the advance
cargo manifest information.Ocean carriers also produce inbound cargo manifests to foreign governments.However, such manifests are usually paper reports, not electronic ﬁlings. Some
foreign jurisdictions also request ﬁling of export cargo manifests.CYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY522The 24-hour rule does not formally require that the CF 1302 cargo declarations be submitted elec-tronically via AMS, but electronic submission is strongly encouraged.3It should be noted that Section 343 of the recently enacted Trade Act of 2002 (P.L. 107-210) requires,for all modes,that “not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary [of theTreasury] shall promulgate regulations providing for the transmission to the Customs Service, through anelectronic data interchange system,of information pertaining to cargo destined for importationinto the UnitedStates or exportationfrom the United States, prior to such importation or exportation” (emphasis added).Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.It is expected that more foreign jurisdictions will require electronic submis-sion of cargo manifest information in the future. There are already indicationsthat governments that have signed Container Security Initiative agreements
with Customs for prescreening of containerized shipments bound for the United
States may be in the process of implementing electronic (export) cargo manifest
requirements. Also, the World Customs Organization is developing an inter-
national Customs Data Model that assumes the electronic submission of data ele-
ments to—and exchange of data elements between—exporting and importing
Customs administrations.INFORMATIONFLOWBETWEENCARRIERSAND
CUSTOMERSEstimates in the trade press suggest that about 75 percent of shipper transactions
with ocean carriers are handled by telephone or fax, 20 percent through individ-
ual carriers’ websites, and 5 percent via the three Web-based portals (GT Nexus,
Inttra, and CargoSmart) that provide access to multiple carriers at one site. The
portal systems are designed to allow customers (usually larger shippers) easy access
to multiple carriers when they make rate requests or book cargo.In business transactions between ocean carriers and their customers, user reg-istration and assignment of passwords is a common security measure, but actual
encryption of data tends to be limited to situations in which the parties are pass-
ing data related to title to goods, as, for example, with remote printing of bills
of lading.Carriers communicate with customers, whether cargo owners, consolidators,or logistics management companies, in a similar fashion. As mentioned in anearlier section (“Central Dispatch/Redirection”), ocean carriers typically have
“business transaction” functions as part of their public websites. When cus-
tomers use the business transaction portion of a carrier’s site, the information
input into the system typically goes through an EDI transformation and is for-
warded to the (global or regional) mainframe system.Some companies in the liner shipping industry are moving to customer rela-tionship management (CRM) software, which allows them to more ﬂexibly man-age customer transactions through a simpler interlinking of all the company’s
individual business systems. For example, CRM software can, by allowing all the
separate systems to “talk to each other,” permit a line’s sales representatives, cus-
tomer service representatives, and various operational staff to access a given cus-
tomer’s complete transactions history and account information. When a salesINFORMATION MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS IN THE INTERNATIONAL LINER SHIPPING INDUSTRY53Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.representative signs a service contract, for example, the detailed information(e.g., the number of containers to be moved in each trade lane) would go into the
CRM system in a way that facilitates the creation of sales management reports;
allows customer service representatives access to the sales representative’s detailed
notes on the contract discussions; and indicates to system users factors such as the
relevant vessel booking, loading date, and when the trucker is to be contacted.
CRM also facilitates contract management activities and simpliﬁes contract com-
pliance reviews.When customers want to check on the status of particular cargo movements,they can contact the line’s customer service department or use the line’s website.
On the website, in a secure section, the customer can track the cargo’s position
by using coded information from the relevant bill of lading.CYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY54Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.55APPENDIXBSECURITYINITIATIVESAND
PROGRAMSWITH
CYBERSECURITYRELEVANCEThe following programs and initiatives are connected with improving freightsecurity and use or affect a range of technologies, systems, and technology
protocols.Note: Customs =Bureau of Customs and Border Protection (formerly U.S.Customs Service); DHS =U.S. Department of Homeland Security; DOT =U.S.Department of Transportation; FAA =Federal Aviation Administration; FHWA=Federal Highway Administration; GIS =geographic information system; NHS=National Highway System; TSA =Transportation Security Administration;WMD =weapons of mass destruction.Project:Electronic Supply Chain Manifest (ESCM)Operational TestDescription:Intermodal research project that uses biometricﬁngerprint readers, smart cards, and encryptedInternet transactions to enhance the security and
efﬁciency of freight supply chain activities. The
project, which initially focused on air cargo trans-actions, is being incorporated into other freight
modal testsStakeholders:Trucking, manufacturing, air cargo industries,DOT, TSA/DHSTechnology implications:Full integration of personnel, cargo, and tracking
data using a range of cutting-edge technology
systemsCybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Project:Transportation Worker Identiﬁcation CardDescription:Proposed government initiative to develop andtest a technology-based secure identiﬁcation sys-tem for transportation workersStakeholders:TSA/DHSTechnology implications:May use two or more biometrics on a smart-card
platformProject:Surface Transportation Information Sharing andAnalysis Center (Rail/Waterways ST-ISAC)Commercial Vehicle Operations ISACDescription:Public–private system for sharing/transferringsecurity-sensitive information between safety andsecurity agencies and modal interestsStakeholders:Railroads, trucking companies, domestic water-way carriers, U.S. intelligence agencies, public
safety agencies, law enforcement agenciesTechnology implications:Multijurisdictional data-transfer systems. Data
formatting and encryption issuesProject:TSA Airport Biometric Research SolicitationDescription:TSA and FAA are developing and releasing asolicitation to develop and install aviation per-
sonnel identiﬁcation systems throughout the
United States (20+airports). The focus is onaccess and perimeter control using existing andemerging technologiesStakeholders:Aviation personnel (possibly including air cargopersonnel), TSA/FAA, law enforcement agenciesTechnology implications:Large-scale systems integration using personnel
data and government information. Biometric dataand readers integrated with personnel manage-
ment applicationsCYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY56Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Project:Cargo Handling Cooperative ProgramDescription:Public–private consortium to pursue industry-driven enhancements to cargo handling thatsupport a sustainable and seamless transporta-
tion systemStakeholders:Ocean carriers, railroads, port authorities, termi-nal operators/stevedores, trucking companies,
government organizationsTechnology implications:Currently performing assessments of electronic
seal technologies in support of the Operation Safe
Commerce initiativeProject:Freight Performance Measures (Satellite-BasedVehicle Tracking)Description:Research project that uses satellite tracking systems to develop real-time freight performance
measures for the NHS (e.g., travel speeds, 
travel times)Stakeholders:FHWA, state departments of transportation, metropolitan planning agencies, NHS usersTechnology implications:New applications for vehicle tracking and 
analysisProject:American Transportation Research InstituteData Privacy Study (Data Sharing Protocols
and Strategies)Description:ATRI will begin a study to analyze data privacyissues, data-sharing opportunities, and tools for
protecting dataStakeholders:DOT, freight industries/business communities,Department of JusticeTechnology implications:The study will likely identify industry data that
exist in electronic form and offer data protection
strategiesSECURITY INITIATIVES AND PROGRAMS WITH CYBERSECURITY RELEVANCE57Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Project:Port Security Grants ProgramDescription:Congressionally mandated and funded port secu-rity program that provides funding for proposalsthat test technologies and programs for improving
port security. The program is focused on the
largest U.S. ocean ports and strategic portsStakeholders:Ocean carriers, trucking companies, port authori-ties, railroads, shippers, Customs, DOT, TSATechnology implications:Enhanced security infrastructures. Major systems
integration between port systems, carrier systems,
and public agencies. Likely to use new and emerg-
ing technologies and integration software appli-
cations. May require the development and
collection of new data setsProject:Trucking Industry Anti-Terrorism Operations CenterDescription:The expanded Highway Watch Program hasfour elements: (a) a nationwide antiterrorismtraining program to maintain a 3 million–person
cadre as “America’s Trucking Army”; (b) a CallCenter to take, route, and record security and
safety reports from the industry; (c) an Operations
Center to perform analysis, planning, and com-
munications functions for the industry on a
comprehensive, integrated platform; and 
(d) an Information Sharing and Analysis Center to serve as the intelligence bridge
between industry and government. Scope is
directly linked to the level of federal financial
support for this effortStakeholders:The program is open to the entire trucking indus-try and is coordinated by the Trucking Securityand Anti-Terrorism Working Group, which consists of 19 national trade and professional
organizationsCYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY58Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Technology implications:The Call Center will utilize a national-capability
contractor to conduct this activity. TheOperations Center will use a technology platform
to integrate industry data, GIS simulation, and
open source dataProject:National Hazmat Tracking and Security Test
Description:DOT-sponsored research program to install and
test a suite of existing and emerging technologiesthat may improve the security and efﬁciency of
hazmat shipments in the United StatesStakeholders:Hazmat carriers, DOT safety and highway agen-
cies, law enforcement, safety regulatory agenciesTechnology implications:Uses existing and emerging wireless technologies
including satellite tracking and communications,
new biometric authentication systems, and elec-
tronic cargo data systemsProject:Operation Safe Commerce
Description:Coordinated research and testing of supply chain
security systems using existing and emerging tech-nologies, systems, and processes through the ports
of Seattle/Tacoma, Los Angeles/Long Beach, andNew York/New JerseyStakeholders:Coordinated by Customs, DOT, and TSA; all
research and testing via partnerships among theports and the supply chains that use those points
of entryTechnology implications:Existing and new technologies and systems in
tracking, management, information interchange,physical security, and risk assessmentProject:Washington E-Seal Program
Description:Track commercial inbound containers to deter-
mine whether container integrity has been com-promised and facilitate border-clearance activitiesSECURITY INITIATIVES AND PROGRAMS WITH CYBERSECURITY RELEVANCE59Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stakeholders:Customs, Washington State Department ofTransportation, Washington State TruckingAssociation, ports of Seattle and TacomaTechnology implications:Test technology to enhance security while
improving efﬁciency of inspection and clearancesProject:Safe and Secure Trade LanesDescription:Industry-funded initiative to demonstrate anddeploy automated tracking and security technol-
ogy for containers entering U.S. portsStakeholders:Hutchison Whampoa, Ltd., PSA Corporation,P&O Ports, Port of Seattle, Port of Tacoma,
Port of Los Angeles/Long Beach, Qualcomm,
Savi Technology, SAIC, PB Ports & Marine,
many othersTechnology implications:Testing technology and concepts developed for
the U.S. Department of Defense in monitoring
and tracking containersProject:West Coast Tracking InitiativeDescription:Industry-funded expansion of the ESCM projectthat will install and test biometric smart cards forcontainer access and tracking purposes. Will
likely tie into Port of Los Angeles/Long Beach for
expanded functionalityStakeholders:Trucking industry, shippers/manufacturers, portauthorities, container stakeholdersTechnology implications:Driver authentication through biometrics; facility
access control and event notiﬁcation via smartcard (and prox card) systemsProject:Customs Trade Partnership Against Terrorism(C-TPAT)Description:Customs initiative to certify companies whoagree to conduct a comprehensive self-assessmentCYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY60Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of supply chain security on the basis of guidelinesdeveloped by Customs and the trade communityStakeholders:Shippers, port authorities, importers/exporters
Technology implications:Will vary depending on speciﬁc C-TPAT 
agreementProject:Container Security Initiative

Description:Customs initiative to prescreen cargo at desig-
nated foreign “megaports” before export to theUnited StatesStakeholders:Foreign ports, shippers, importers, 
and ocean carriersTechnology implications:Use of the information provided on the
Automated Manifest System to target 
“high-risk” shipments for further screening 
via X-ray, gamma ray, WMD detection 
technologiesProject:Chicago Intermodal Data Transfer Initiative
Description:FHWA-sponsored research to identify data-
sharing opportunities among maritime shipping,rail, and trucking—with an emphasis on con-
tainer movements to and from ports. The study
will propose a technology system for expediting
the ﬂow of data between the modesStakeholders:Freight industries, shippers/manufacturers, DOT
Project:Port Authority of New York and New Jersey’s
FIRST SystemDescription:Internet-based port community system that 
consolidates cargo data and integrates vessel,highway, and rail dataStakeholders:Port community participants (terminals, truckers,
freight forwarders, brokers, ocean carriers, etc.)SECURITY INITIATIVES AND PROGRAMS WITH CYBERSECURITY RELEVANCE61Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Technology implications:Potential use as a nationwide platform for consol-
idated cargo dataProject:Cargo*Mate Project
Description:Multitechnology, multiphased system for tracking
container chassis across the United States.Recently expanded to connect system to
tractor/container trackingStakeholders:PAR Logistics Management Systems, maritime
shipping industry, trucking industry, Customs,
DOTTechnology implications:Real-time satellite/cellular tracking of chassis to
provide end-to-end cargo visibilityProject:Free and Secure Trade (FAST) Initiative
Description:A joint program between the United States and
Canada, the FAST initiative is now operationalat Detroit, Michigan/Windsor, Ontario; Port
Huron, Michigan/Sarnia, Ontario; and Buffalo,
New York/Fort Erie, Ontario. In early 2003, the
FAST lane program will be extended farther west
along the border to Blaine, Washington/Douglas,
British Columbia, and to the east, at Champlain,
New York/Lacolle, QuebecStakeholders:Customs, trucking companies, DOT
Technology implications:Electronic data sharing/transfer between public-
and private-sector entities using several technologiesCYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY62Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.63APPENDIXCPROTECTINGINTERNATIONAL
TRADECORRIDORS: THEOPERATION
SAFECOMMERCEINITIATIVE
1Operation Safe Commerce (OSC) is an innovative public–private partnershipdedicated to enhancing security throughout international and domestic supply
chains while facilitating the efﬁcient cross-border movement of legitimate com-
merce. The object is to prevent terrorists or their weapons from gaining access to
the United States to cause catastrophic harm, while sustaining the viability of
the global transportation lifelines that support international commerce. The way
to accomplish this is to move away from primary reliance on a system of control
at the borders that lie within U.S. jurisdiction and toward point-of-origin con-
trols. Point-of-origin controls are to be supported by controls developed within
international supply chains and accompanied by a concentric series of checks
built into the system at points of transshipment and at points of arrival. In return,
the nation’s world trade partners rightfully expect reciprocity and controls on
U.S. exports to aid the security of their imports.Effective international trade corridor security must rest on a foundation ofcredible risk management—that is, a regime that can reliably identify the peo-
ple, goods, and conveyances that are legitimate, so their movements can be facil-
itated. This would allow shippers, importers, regulators, and inspectors to focus
on the smaller number of entities about which they know little or have speciﬁc
concerns. Achieving this goal requires a layered public–private approach.OSC will validate security at the point of origin and will demonstrate what isneeded to ensure that parties associated with commercial shipping exert reason-able care and due diligence in packing, securing, and manifesting the contents of1The material in this appendix is based on government-supplied information not independently veriﬁedby the committee.Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.a shipment of goods in a container. In addition, OSC will demonstrate variousmethods to ensure that the information and documentation associated with these
shipments are complete, accurate, and secure from unauthorized access. The proj-
ect will ultimately gauge the security of the supply chain with these new proce-
dures in order to determine their viability.OSC will provide validated recommendations and workable solutions to leg-islators, regulatory agencies, the International Maritime Organization, and the
World Customs Organization on how best to address the critical issue of cargo
security.The following are some of the major objectives of OSC:•Ensure the integrity of the supply chain by encompassing the entire trans-
action between an importer and a supplier. This includes validating security
at the point of origin, ensuring the contents of containers, and tracking the
container in transit with the intent of identifying methods and evidence of
possible tampering.•Pilot the use of off-the-shelf technologies and conduct proof-of-concept
projects to demonstrate other technologies to monitor the movement of
legitimate cargo in transit before it reaches the U.S. border and all the way
to its ﬁnal destination.•Provide a tangible prototype that can inform post–September 11 efforts—by
federal and international authorities—that aim to enhance the security asso-
ciated with all types of cargo, conveyances, and people moving across borders
and within international trade corridors, by proving the feasibility of various
industry and government proposals for layered cargo security strategies.To achieve these objectives, OSC proposes the following:1.Apply a common set of standard security practices to govern the loading
and movement of cargo throughout the supply chain. The goal is to ensure
that an authorized packer of a container knows what is in that container
and can report those contents accurately.2.Ensure that the container’s electronic documentation is complete, accurate,
and secure against computer hackers and is provided to law enforcement
agencies in a timely manner.CYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY64Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3.Reduce the risk of a container being intercepted and compromised in
transit.OSC will work initially with three major ports: Seattle/Tacoma, New York/New Jersey, and Los Angeles/Long Beach. Seventy percent of the containermovement in the United States originates or terminates with these entities. To
achieve these objectives, the three load centers will use several methods that
may include all or some of the following:•Validating and assessing the entire delivery system through examination of
the discrete stages of the product ﬂow (supply chain):1.Product origination (the factory and subcontract manufacturing),
2.Product shipping to export facility (transportation company),

3.Export stage repackaging and shipping (export broker),

4.International transport (freight company),

5.Export arrival and storage (transportation company, warehouses, cus-
toms facilities, port, ocean carrier),6.Vessel voyage (ocean carrier),

7.Import arrival and storage (port, transportation company, warehouses,
customs facilities),8.Cargo conveyance (rail, truck),

9.Cargo breakup into multiproduct facilities (drop centers, distribution
warehouses), and10.Product arrival and storage at the buyer’s facility.
•Complying with Business Anti-Smuggling Security Coalition or similar
procedures and standards.•Requiring secure packing procedures for loading intermodal containers
along the lines of ISO9000 quality assurance rules.•Maintaining secure loading docks at manufacturing plants or at shipping
facilities that restrict access to authorized individuals and that use cameras
to monitor the loading process. Loading docks would be subject to periodic,
random, independent inspections to ensure compliance.•Using third-party veriﬁers to augment the capability of government enforce-
ment authorities to audit, certify, and validate shipments and supply chain
service providers.PROTECTING INTERNATIONAL TRADE CORRIDORS: THE OPERATION SAFE COMMERCE INITIATIVE65Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.•Providing and checking proper import vouchers before loading cargo on
vessels.•Using technology to secure and monitor containers and their movement
through the intermodal supply chain.•Outﬁtting containers with theft-resistant mechanical and electronic seals.
•Installing light, temperature, or other sensors in the interior of the con-
tainer, which would be programmed to set off an alarm if the container isopened illegally at some point of transit.•Conducting background checks of truck drivers who deliver goods to the
port and outﬁtting them with biometrically based identity cards.•Attaching an electronic transponder (such as those used for the “E-ZPass” toll
payment system in the northeastern United States) and Global Positioning
System devices to the truck cab and chassis or rail car carrying containers and
using intelligent transportation system technologies to monitor in-transit
movements to and within the port terminal.•Maintaining the means to communicate with operators from their pickup
to their off-load destinations.•Providing tracking information to the appropriate regulatory or enforce-
ment authorities within the jurisdictions through which the cargo will be
transported.•Leveraging the Port of New York and New Jersey’s Freight Information
Real-Time System for Transport vessel and cargo information system, or
other similar information portals, by requiring all participants in the supply
chain cycle to provide advance notice of the details about their shipments,
operators, and conveyances in accordance with agreed-upon protocols. This
early notice would give government inspectors the time to assess the valid-
ity of the data and check the data against any watch lists they may be main-
taining, and would provide timely support to a ﬁeld inspector deciding what
should be targeted for examination.CYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY66Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The following may be among the major project tasks:1.Forming regional task forces that will include the law enforcement com-
munity and other regulatory authorities, as well as appropriate academicand technical experts.2.Enlisting private business-sector partners involved with all stages of prod-
uct ﬂow in the construction of a process ﬂow map for the physical move-
ment of each container/supply chain that has been identiﬁed. The chain of
custody as well as the information ﬂow will also be mapped out to identify
security gaps and how they can be redressed.3.Tasking the regional task force members to examine the following for secu-
rity gaps: (a) the entire design-to-delivery product ﬂow; (b) the means ofconveyance—maritime, rail, truck, and air; and (c) the “who and how” con-nected with the operators who move the products.4.Conducting ﬁeld visits to witness the actual supply chain process.
5.Having the regional task force prepare recommendations they believe
might redress the gaps they identify. A recommendation should fall underone of three groupings: (a) off-the-shelf technologies for securing and track-ing shipments, (b) improvements to existing data collection and sharingarrangements, and (c) process changes that would close opportunities forcompromise at the point of origin or in transit.6.Enlisting a support group made up of academic and private-sector partners to
develop technological applications for testing as the regional task force iden-
tiﬁes gaps. An outreach effort will be made to other government-sponsored
R&D programs that are ﬁeld-testing tracking and sensor technologies that
support a demonstration of how secure in-transit visibility and accountabil-
ity can be achieved.7.Conducting trials of new technologies, data arrangements, or process
changes using volunteer manufacturers, importers, surface shippers, freight
forwarders, maritime shipping lines, and terminal operators.8.Testing the integrity of systems with “red-team” exercises.
PROTECTING INTERNATIONAL TRADE CORRIDORS: THE OPERATION SAFE COMMERCE INITIATIVE67Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.9.Preparing reports to capture and quickly relate lessons learned from the secu-
rity gap analyses and the testing and reﬁnement of technological applications.The reports will aim to provide guidance for a layered, multitiered approach
for replication and standardization of policy approaches to securing trade
corridors. The audience includes legislators and policy makers involved in
the U.S.–Canada “Smart Border” Agreement and participants in counter-
terrorism initiatives under consideration by the International Maritime
Organization, the World Customs Organization, the International Standards
Organization, and other relevant multilateral and international bodies.CYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY68Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.69APPENDIXDU.S. BUREAUOF
CUSTOMSAND
BORDERPROTECTIONUSEOF
INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY1The U.S. Bureau of Customs and Border Protection (Customs) has developed anextensive array of information systems that support the collection, processing,
and analysis of data on goods, people, and conveyances entering and exiting the
United States. These systems were developed over the past three decades with
the involvement of many government agencies and the international business
and transportation communities. The following statistics are intended to provide
a brief picture of the magnitude of two of these systems:•The Automated Commercial System (ACS) currently processes more than
99 percent of the $1.8 trillion in imports and exports in all modes of trans-portation.•The ACS database has 4 terabytes of electronic storage and 6.2 billion
records accessed 578 million times daily.•The Treasury Enforcement Communications System (TECS) currently
processes more than 475 million travelers entering the United States by air,
land, and sea.•The TECS database has 3 terabytes of DASD and a database of 5.3 billion
records accessed 766 million times daily.1The material in this appendix is based on government-supplied information not independently veriﬁedby the committee.Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.•ACS and TECS support or have interfaces with more than 100 U.S. gov-
ernment agencies and foreign countries, nearly all international trans-portation carriers, and thousands of international businesses and service
providers.In August 2001, Customs embarked on a Modernization Program, a 15-yearinitiative to modernize and integrate its information technology infrastructure
to support the government’s oversight of import and export trade compliance,
border enforcement, and international passenger processing. Modernization
will enable Customs and all participating government agencies to collect, ana-
lyze, collaborate on, and disseminate the right international trade and traveler
information to internal and outside users in advance or in real time—to the
right people, at the right time, and in the right place. Furthermore, the pro-
gram will enable border-related government agencies and the international
trade and travel private sector to transform the way they do business by imple-
menting new processes that support future trade growth and changing business
requirements.BASELINEDESCRIPTIONOF
EXISTINGSYSTEMSToday, Customs has information systems in place at the 300 U.S. ports of entry
to process all inbound and outbound cargo and passengers. Although these sys-
tems are antiquated, they still provide the platform for air and sea carriers to
transmit cargo and passenger manifests in advance of arrival and enable importers
to ﬁle their entries electronically. Customs interfaces with virtually every entity
in the international supply chain process—importers, exporters, carriers, and a
multitude of intermediaries and service providers.Currently, Customs uses multiple systems that process international tradeand travel and support a multitude of agencies and commercial businesses. The
following are examples:•ACS tracks and monitors all imports of goods entering the United States.

•The Automated Broker Interface is the central government system for the
ﬁling of commercial declarations on imported cargo.•The Automated Manifest System is a multimodular international cargo
inventory control and release notiﬁcation system for sea, air, and rail carriers.CYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY70Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.•The Automated Export System is the central point through which export
shipment data required by multiple agencies is ﬁled electronically for allmethods of transportation.•The Advance Targeting System assembles and screens commercial, trans-
portation, and passenger data to identify high-risk imported cargo and arriv-
ing international passengers.•TECS is a megadatabase of law enforcement information shared by the
Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Immigration and Naturalization Service,
and Customs. It is used to screen all persons entering the United States.•The Interagency Border Information System meets the data-sharing, ana-
lytical, and processing needs of a multiagency (State, Treasury, Justice,
Agriculture) border effort for international passengers and conveyances.•The Advance Passenger Information System receives and analyzes biograph-
ical data on international air passengers before their arrival in the United
States. It covers about 85 percent of the 67 million passengers arriving.The communications backbone is the Treasury Communications System WideArea Network (Frame Relay) with multiple levels of protection and multiple
remote access methods and controls.CURRENTAND
PLANNEDDEVELOPMENTSThe Customs Modernization Program will integrate all Customs information
systems that encompass imports and exports, conveyance and shipment track-
ing, passenger enforcement, investigative and intelligence support, human
resources, and ﬁnancial management.The ﬁrst components currently under development are the AutomatedCommercial Environment (ACE) and the International Trade Data System
(ITDS) programs, which focus on cargo import and export operations. ACE and
ITDS form a coordinated system that provides a “single window” allowing the
international business community to interact with Customs and all government
agencies on import/export requirements.ACE will lay the technology foundation for all Modernization programs anddeliver enhanced “cradle-to-grave” support of the cargo control and enforce-U.S. BUREAU OF CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY71Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ment process. All related functions in ﬁeld operations and enforcement will besupported from a single common user interface, a single window for ofﬁcers to
perform their work. ACE will process both imports and exports and will be
linked seamlessly to enforcement, revenue management, and mission support
systems to enable integrated ﬁeld operations and nationwide collaborative team-
ing among ofﬁcers. Delivery of ACE functions will begin in the ﬁeld in January
2004 and will continue in phases extending through April 2006.The following are the major business functions of ACE that directly link tothe freight transportation sector:•Portal—a universal, secure Internet “window” for all authorized system users(Customs, other government agencies, and the international transportation
community) to transmit, analyze, and collaborate on supply chain data.
Projected for spring 2003.•Account Management—provides a single comprehensive, nationwide account-
based picture of all reported activity and relationships for an importer, an
exporter, an international carrier, or a logistics/service provider. Projected
beginning spring 2003 through 2005.•e-Release—provides for advance receipt of transportation data via transpon-
ders/electronic seal transmissions resulting in inspection or release infor-
mation at the earliest point in the supply chain. Projected for truck
transportation in 2004 and all other modes beginning in 2005.•Multimodal Manifest—provides for advance transportation data at the earli-
est point in the supply chain. Projected for truck transportation in 2004 and
all other modes beginning in 2005; will track cargo across modes in 2007.•Cargo and Conveyance Tracking—provides for tracking shipments (includ-
ing in-bond) and conveyances, and provides release or status of shipment
subject to government agency control.ITDS supports 101 agencies with information and actual operational inter-action on shipments, crew, and conveyances crossing the border.As stated by the ITDS multiagency Board of Directors:ITDS is a federal government information technology (IT) initiative to imple-ment a secure, integrated, government-wide system for the electronic collection,CYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY72Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Client
Web &
Interface Tier 
Data Tie
rEAI TierApplication
TierSecurity/Systems Management
External
Syst
emExternal
System
Browse
rBrowser
EAILayer
Modern
Legacy/
Pervasive
Computin
g Pervasive
Computing
Enterprise
Portal
Servlet
XML
XML
HTML
HTML
Legacy
Modern
Application
Business
Logic
Adapters
Integration
Logic
Firewall, Intrusion Detection, VirusFirewall, Intrusion DetectionRDBMS
Legacy
DBMS
External System
Interface
FIGURE D-1ACE architecture: conceptual view.Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY74use and dissemination of international trade and transportation data ... The
ITDS Board of Directors has oversight responsibility and serves as a forum for
harmonization of requirements and dispute resolution among federal agencies.
The Board insures that ITDS goals and functionality are integrated with the
needs of the public, the participating agencies and Customs modernization plans.CUSTOMSINFORMATIONTECHNOLOGYSYSTEMSSECURITYCustoms’ new Enterprise Architecture (EA) for ACE and the Modernization isestablished to support all ﬁeld activities and align information technology with
the strategic objectives of Customs and all agencies. The EA provides for a multi-
layer security management system. The information Customs has made public is
represented in Figure D-1.POTENTIALVULNERABILITIESThe Customs Modernization and ACE programs will be state of the art but are
subject to cyberattacks, as are all information systems. The reality of connec-
tivity with the international trade and transportation community and the elec-
tronic exchange of massive amounts of data and database queries add to the
potential vulnerability.Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.75STUDYCOMMITTEEBIOGRAPHICALINFORMATION
Robert E. Gallamore,Chair,is Director of the Transportation Center andProfessor of Managerial Economics and Decision Sciences in the Kellogg Schoolof Management at Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois. Before joining
Northwestern University, he was Assistant Vice President, Communications
Technologies, and General Manager of the North American Joint Positive Train
Control Program at the Transportation Technology Center, Inc., while on exec-
utive loan from the Union Paciﬁc Railroad. Before this assignment, he was
General Director, Strategic Analysis, for the Union Paciﬁc Railroad in Omaha
and an executive with UP Corporation in New York City. Dr. Gallamore has also
served as Deputy Federal Railroad Administrator, Associate Administrator for
Planning with the Urban Mass Transportation Administration, and System Plan
Coordinator with the United States Railway Association. He received an A.B.
from Wesleyan University and an M.A. in public administration and a Ph.D. in
political economy and government from Harvard University.A. Ray Chamberlain,Vice Chair,is Vice President of Parsons Brinckerhoff. Hehas previously held positions as Vice President, Freight Policy, and ActingManaging Director of the American Trucking Associations Foundation; Chief
Executive Ofﬁcer of the Colorado Department of Transportation; and President
of Colorado State University. He has served as President of the American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Ofﬁcials (AASHTO), as Chair,
TRB Executive Committee, and as Chairman, Board of Directors, National
Association of State University and Land Grant Colleges. Dr. Chamberlain
received a B.S. in engineering from Michigan State University, an M.S. in
engineering from Washington State University, and a Ph.D. in engineering from
Colorado State University.Frank J. Anstettis Manager, Infrastructure Security, at Raytheon Company.Mr. Anstett’s experience includes management of diverse functional groups,Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.including U.S. Department of Transportation security and infrastructureteams; information technology (IT) evaluation and implementation; perfor-
mance of risk assessments; and the development of International Organization
for Standardization–compliant procedures. As Engineering and Installation
Manager, he was the primary interface between Raytheon and the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) in support of the Transportation Security
Administration’s installation of explosive detection equipment. He led a diverse
team in the evaluation and improvement of Raytheon/FAA management
information systems (MIS). He then led a team in testing and implementing
the new MIS tools, including the development of new functional policies and
procedures. Mr. Anstett has successfully managed numerous FAA infrastruc-
ture upgrade projects across the United States. They include vulnerability and
risk assessment requirements so that improvements do not interfere with the
safety or effectiveness of FAA’s air trafﬁc control system.Samuel H. Banksis Senior Vice President of the U.S. Customs ModernizationProject and resident at Sandler and Travis Trade Advisory Services, specialists ininternational trade. His experience in customs and international trade includesmore than 28 years at the U.S. Customs Service. Mr. Banks began his career at
Customs as a uniformed inspector in San Francisco and rose to become the 
highest-ranking career ofﬁcial in the agency, Deputy Commissioner, for 4 years. He
also served as the Acting Commissioner of Customs for 1 year. Throughout his
tenure with U.S. Customs, Mr. Banks worked on a number of major initiatives,
including the Customs Modernization Act, the landmark legislation that signiﬁ-
cantly altered the rules governing the entry of imported merchandise into theUnited States. He represented the United States at international forums and nego-
tiated numerous international agreements, including signiﬁcant portions of the
North American Free Trade Agreement. Mr. Banks received many awards during
his career at the Customs Service, including the Distinguished Government
Executive Award—the highest award given to career public servants—granted to
him by President Bush and the Excellence in Government Award from the Joint
Industry Group. In the private sector, Mr. Banks worked as a consultant for vari-
ous international trade businesses including the Air Transport Association, United
Parcel Service, and Lockheed Martin. Most recently, Mr. Banks served as a corpo-
rate ofﬁcer for an international trade information technology ﬁrm.Richard A. Holmes, Jr.,is the General Director of Security and QualityAssurance for Union Paciﬁc Railroad and is responsible for information security,CYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY76Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.disaster recovery, change management, development methodologies, and qual-ity assurance functions at the company. He has been involved in information
assurance activities for more than 16 years at Union Paciﬁc. Currently he is a
board member of the Partnership for Critical Infrastructure Security. He is past
President of the Nebraska chapter of InfraGard. Most recently he led the
Information Sharing and Analysis working group of the Association of American
Railroads and participated in the development of the rail industry’s risk analysis
and security management plan. Mr. Holmes teaches information assurance
courses for the Institute of Internal Auditors and is a Senior Technical Associate
for the Nebraska University Consortium on Information Assurance. Before
transferring to the Information Technologies Department, he performed ﬁnan-
cial, operational, and information systems audits of Union Paciﬁc Corporation’s
railroad, trucking, oil and gas, mining, hazardous waste, and logistics companies.
He earned an MBA from Creighton University and a bachelor’s degree in man-
agement information systems from Iowa State University.Barry Horowitz(NAE) is Professor of Systems Engineering at the University ofVirginia. Formerly he was Chairman and founder of Concept Five Technologies,an e-business solutions provider specializing in applying enterprise application
integration and security technologies to B2B systems. He served as President and
CEO of The MITRE Corporation and President and CEO of Mitretek Systems.
He received the highest civilian award of the U.S. Air Force for his contributions
to the Gulf War related to locating, tracking, and destroying SCUD missiles.
Dr. Horowitz is a member of the National Academy of Engineering. He holds a
BSEE from City College of New York and an MSEE and Ph.D. in electrical engi-neering from New York University.John L. Kingis Professor and Dean of the School of Information at theUniversity of Michigan. His research is in the development of large-scale infor-mation systems in complex organizational and institutional problem domains,
including logistics. He is a member of the Advisory Committee of the National
Science Foundation’s Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering and the Board of Directors of the Computing Research Association.He previously served in faculty and administrative roles in the University ofCalifornia at Irvine and as Marvin Bower Fellow at the Harvard Business School.
From 1993 to 1998 he was editor-in-chief of the INFORMS journal Information
Systems Research.He has been coeditor or editorial board member of many otherjournals, including Information Infrastructure and Policy, ACM Computing Surveys,STUDY COMMITTEE BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION77Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the Journal of Organizational Computing and Electronic Commerce,and the Journalof the Association for Information Systems.He holds M.S. and Ph.D. degrees inadministration from the University of California at Irvine.Lars Kjaeris Vice President of the World Shipping Council. He has been work-ing closely with industry leaders and government agencies to enhance the secu-rity of containerized cargo at all points of the intermodal supply chain. His
previous position was Washington Representative for the Council of European
and Japanese Shipowners Associations from 1999 to 2000. Before that, Mr. Kjaer
was counselor at the Royal Danish Embassy in Washington, D.C., from 1993 to
1998. During that tenure he was also chairman of the Cotton Club of foreign
transportation counselors in Washington. At the Royal Danish Embassy, 
Mr. Kjaer was responsible for transportation matters, in particular shipping pol-
icy, and for bilateral and regional trade issues, including the GATS (services)
negotiations in the World Trade Organization. He joined the Danish Ministry
of Foreign Affairs in 1983. While with the Foreign Service of Denmark, his posi-
tions included principal head of section in the Middle East Political Department
and chair of various working groups of the European Union’s Foreign Policy
Cooperation. His foreign postings included a 4-year term as First Secretary at the
Danish delegation to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in Brussels.Art Kosatkais CEO of TranSecure LLC, an aviation consulting ﬁrm formed afterhis retirement as a Senior Civil Aviation Security Specialist with FAA and theAirport Security Policy and Planning Division of the Transportation Security
Administration. Mr. Kosatka was responsible for writing the security regulations
under which airports operate and for the deﬁnitive manual of policy interpreta-
tions used nationwide by federal security directors at all commercial airports. He
came to FAA from a career in airport consulting in which he managed various
security projects at 32 airports, including 13 of the Transportation Security
Administration’s 22 high-risk Category X airports. He has been Director of Public
Safety and Security for the Airports Council International, representing the
industry’s security concerns nationwide, and he has served on both U.S. Senate
and House of Representatives staffs handling transportation issues. He was three-term Chairman of the Airport Consultant Council’s Security Committee and isan instrument- and multiengine-rated pilot.Stephen J. Lambrightis Vice President of Marketing, Savi Technology. He workswith customers, global partners, and government agencies to identify and deﬁneCYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY78Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.solutions for global supply chain security and asset management. With a focus onimproving, hardening, and expanding the global supply chain IT infrastructure,
Mr. Lambright has more than 12 years of international experience in enterprise
IT solution design, development, and deployment. Mr. Lambright is a member of
the Technology Board of the Auto-ID Center at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Council for Logistics Management, and the Society of Logistics
Engineers. He is also currently acting as Executive Director of the Strategic
Council on Security Technology. Mr. Lambright holds a bachelor of science from
Northwestern University and a master’s in business administration from the
University of California at Berkeley.Daniel Murrayis Director of Research for the American Transportation ResearchInstitute (ATRI; formerly the ATA Foundation). ATRI, the autonomousresearch arm of the American Trucking Associations (ATA), conducts compre-
hensive research on a variety of issues to improve trucking and transportation
safety, security, and productivity. His areas of expertise are in intelligent trans-
portation systems (ITS) applications and freight mobility and transportation plan-
ning, and his current research focuses on the development of national ITS systems
to enhance freight efﬁciency and security. Mr. Murray has managed several large-
scale research projects including the O’Hare Airport Air Cargo Security Access
System Project, the Multimodal Electronic Supply Chain Manifest ﬁeld test, a
study to develop real-time freight performance measures, and the Tacoma–
Chicago Intermodal Data Transfer Study. He is current or former board member
of the Minnesota Guidestar ITS Board, the Midwest Transportation Alliance, and
the Minneapolis–St. Paul metropolitan planning organization. He received his
M.S. from Northwestern University.Frank Pittelliis cofounder and President of Navius Technologies, LLC. He hasmore than 20 years of experience spanning the breadth of the computer indus-try, including research, system design and development, academic and profes-
sional teaching, high-level analysis, consulting, and product development. In
the area of computer security, Dr. Pittelli has participated in a number of
advanced computer security studies, including the National Research Council’sCommittee on Computer System Security and the Committee for Review of theNational Cryptographic Policy. Dr. Pittelli’s practical experience includes the
design and analysis of secure systems. He was the principal author of the con-
cept of operations for the key escrow system for the Clipper chip, and he devel-
oped a complete curriculum of courses for a major secure product vendor. HeSTUDY COMMITTEE BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION79Cybersecurity of Freight Information Systems: A Scoping Study -- Special Report 274Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.has conducted a number of enterprisewide security audits for clients that com-bined the analysis of system functionality and security in a relatively short
period of time. Dr. Pittelli has been instrumental in the development of three
successful entrepreneurial companies. He received his B.S. degree, summa cum
laude, in computer science from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in 1981 and
his M.A. and Ph.D. degrees in computer science from Princeton University in
1984 and 1986, respectively.Alan F. Spearis President of MRC Investigations (USA), Inc. The companyspecializes in cargo crime investigation and prevention, counterhijacking andpiracy, tracing stolen marine assets, vessel tracking, and asset tracing. Before this
appointment he was Director, Loss Control, Operation Intercept, and Assistant
Vice President, Claims, XL Specialty Insurance Company (Intercargo). He has
contributed to the development of standards on cargo security and is an author
of articles published on the subject. Mr. Spear received a bachelor’s degree from
Knox College and a master’s degree in community mental health from Northern
Illinois University.Karen Ryan Tobiahas held administrative and managerial positions with thePort Authority of New York and New Jersey in departments as diverse asComptrollers, Ofﬁce of the Executive Director, Economic Development, World
Trade and Economic Development, Regional Development, and Port 
Commerce.
In her current position as Manager, Technology Planning, in the Strategic
Analysis and Industry Relations Division of the Port Commerce Department,
she is responsible for the research, development, and implementation of new
maritime- and port-related technologies at Port Authority marine facilities
within the Port of New York and New Jersey. This includes the research of ITS
technologies as they relate to the movement of intermodal freight and com-
mercial vehicle operations, testing and implementation of new security-related
technologies, and testing and implementation of port-related information and
data management systems. She also acts as the Project Manager for the Port
Authority’s Freight Information Real-Time System for Transport, or FIRST,
which features an interactive website for ocean container tracking and portinformation. She is Vice Chair of the Cargo Handling Cooperative Programand Cochair of the Intermodal Program Track of the I-95 Corridor Coalition. 
Ms. Tobia received a bachelor of science degree in management and communi-
cations from Adelphi University.CYBERSECURITY  OF   FREIGHT  INFORMATION  SYSTEMS:  A  SCOPING  STUDY80