DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/10781Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System:Letter Report35 pages | 8.5 x 11 | PAPERBACKISBN null | DOI 10.17226/10781Committee on Data Standards for Patient Safety; Board on Health Care Services;Institute of MedicineKey Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.     Key Capabilities of an  Electronic Health Record System  
 Letter Report 
   
 
 
 
 
 Committee on Data Standard
s for Patient Safety   Board on Health Care Services 
     
   
     Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS     500 FIFTH STREET, N.W.     Washington, DC  20001 
 NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the 
National Research Council, whose members are draw
n from the councils of the National Academy of 
Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, an
d the Institute of Medicine. The members of the 
committee responsible for the report were chosen fo
r their special competences and with regard for 
appropriate balance. 
 Support for this project was provided by the U.S. De
partment of Health and 
Human Services. The views presented in this report are those of the Institute 
of Medicine Committee on Da
ta Standards for Patient 
Safety and are not necessarily those of the funding agencies.  
 
Additional copies of this report are available in limited quantities from the Committee on Data Standards 
for Patient Safety through the Board on Health Care
 Services, 500 Fifth Street, N.W., Washington, DC 
20001. This report is also available online at 
www.nap.edu
.  For more information about the Institute 
of Medicine, visit the IOM home page at: 
www.iom.edu. 
  
Copyright 2003 by the National Academ
y of Sciences. All rights reserved.  Printed in the United States of America. 
Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   The National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating so
ciety of distinguished scholars engaged in 
scientific and engineering research, dedica
ted to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general 
welfare.  Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by th
e Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it t
o advise the federal government on scientific 
and technical matters.  Dr. Bruce M. Albe
rts is president of the National Academy o
f Sciences. 
The National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the charter of
 the National Academy of Sciences, as a 
parallel organization of outstandi
ng engineers.  It is autonomous in its administ
ration and in the selection of its members, sh
aring with the National Academy of Sciences
 the responsibility for advising the federal government.  The National Academy of 
Engineering also sponsors engineering prog
rams aimed at meeting national needs, 
encourages education and research, and 
recognizes the superior achievements of engi
neers.  Dr. Wm. A. Wulf is president 
of the National Academy of Engineering. 
The Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the Na
tional Academy of Sciences to s
ecure the services of eminent 
members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy 
matters pertaining to the health
 of the public.  The Institute 
acts 
under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences 
by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal
 government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medica
l care, research, and education.  Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg i
s president of the Institute of Medicine. 
The National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of Scie
nces in 1916 to associate the broad community 
of science and technology with the Acad
emy™s purposes of furthering knowledge a
nd advising the federal government.  
Functioning in accordance with
 general policies determined by
 the Academy, the Council has become the principal operating 
agency of both the National Academy of 
Sciences and the National Academy of E
ngineering in providing services to the 
government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communitie
s.  The Council is administered jointly by both Academies 
and the Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts and Dr. Wm. A. Wulf are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the Nationa
l Research Council. 
 www.national-academies.org 
 Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 1 KEY CAPABILITIES OF AN ELECTRONIC HEALTH RECORD SYSTEM 
 Letter Report 
  
 
 
July 31, 2003 
 
Dr. Carolyn Clancy Director, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality 

John M. Eisenberg Building 
540 Gaither Road 
Rockville MD, 20850 

 Dear Dr. Clancy:  
In May 2003, the Department of Health and Human Services
 (DHHS) asked the Institute of Medicine (IOM) to provide guidance on the key care delivery-related capabilities of an 
electronic health record (EHR) system. An EHR system in
cludes (1) longitudinal collection of electronic health information for and about persons, where health information is defined as 
information pertaining to the health of an individu
al or health care provided to an individual; (2) immediate electronic access to 
person- and population-level information by authorized, and only 
authorized, users; (3) provision of knowledge and decision-support that enhance the quality, safety, and efficiency of patient care; and (4) support of efficient processes for health care 
delivery.  Critical buildin
g blocks of an EHR system are th
e electronic health records (EHR) 
maintained by providers (e.g., hospitals, nursing ho
mes, ambulatory settings) and by individuals 
(also called personal health records). There is a great deal of interest within both the public and private sect
ors in encouraging all health care providers to migrate fr
om paper-based health records to a system that stores health 
information electronically and employs computer-a
ided decision support systems.  In part, this 
interest is due to a growing recognition that a stronger informa
tion technology (IT) infrastructure is integral to addressing such national concerns as the need to improve the safety and quality of health care, rising health care cost
s, and matters of homeland security
 related to the health sector.  
The efforts of all partiesŠpurchasers, regulators, providers, and vendorsŠto advance the deployment of EHR systems, would benefit fr
om a common set of expectations about EHR capabilities. 
The IOM was asked to respond very rapidly to this request from DH
HS.  Fortunately, a sizable project focused on patient safety data 
standards was already under way at the IOM, and this new task proved to be an appropriate expansion of that ongoing work.  Thus the charge to the IOM Committee on Data Standards for Patient 
Safety (the IOM Committee) was expanded to 
address this additional task, and the committee devoted a portion of its previously scheduled 
Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Electronic Health Record Functional Model:  Letter Report 
 2 meeting of June 9Œ10, 2003, to the development of th
is letter report.  The IOM Committee™s full report on data standards will be issued in fall 2003. 
BACKGROUND The development of an IT infrastructure ha
s enormous potential to improve the safety, 
quality, and efficiency of health care in the 
United States (Institute of Medicine, 2001).  
Computer-assisted diagnosis and chronic care
 management programs can improve clinical 
decision making and adherence to clinical guideli
nes, and can provide focus on patients with those diseases (Durieux et al., 2000; Evans et al., 1998).  Computer-based reminder systems for 
patients and clinicians can improve compliance with
 preventive service pr
otocols (Balas et al., 2000).  More immediate access to computer-based c
linical information, such as laboratory and 
radiology results, can reduce redundancy and improve
 quality.  Likewise, the availability of complete patient health information  at the point 
of care delivery, together with clinical decision support systems such as those for medication or
der entry, can prevent many errors and adverse 
events (injuries caused by medical management
 rather than by the underlying disease or condition of the patient) from occurring (Bates
 et al., 1998, 1999; Evans et al., 1998).  Via a  secure IT infrastructure, patient health information can be shared amongst all authorized  
participants in the health care community (National Research Council, 2000). An IT infrastructure also has great potential to contribute
 to achieving other important 
national objectives, such as enhanced homeland security and 
improved and informed public 
health services (Institute of Medicine, 2002b; National Committee 
on Vital and Health Statistics, 2001; Wagner et al., 2001).   EHRs, combined 
with Internet-based communication, may enable early detection of and rapid response to bioterrorism attacks, including the organization and 
execution of large-scale inoculation campaigns
 and ongoing monitoring, detection, and treatment 
of complications arising from exposure to bioc
hemical agents or immunizations (Tang, 2002; 
Teich et al., 2002).  A more advanced health information infrastr
ucture is also crucial for various forms of biomedical and health systems resear
ch, as well as educating patients, informal 
caregivers, and citizens about 
health (Detmer, 2003; Nationa
l Committee on Vital and Health 
Statistics, 2001). EHR system implementation and its continuing 
development is a critical element of the 
establishment of an IT infrastruc
ture for health care.  In 1991, the IOM issued a report calling for the elimination of paper-based pa
tient records within 10 years, but progress has been slow, and this goal has not yet been met (In
stitute of Medicine, 1991; Overha
ge et al., 2002).  It should be noted that the motivation is not to have a paperl
ess record per se, but to make important patient 
information and data readily available and us
eable. In addition, computerizing patient data 
enables the use of various computer-aided decision supports. 
There are some noteworthy examples of health 
care settings in both the private and public sectors in which EHRs have been deployed.  A handful of communities and systems have 

established secure platforms for the exchange 
of data among providers; 
suppliers; patients; and other authorized users, such as the Veterans 
Health Administration, the New England Healthcare 
Electronic Data Interchange Network, the Indian
a Network for Patient Care, the Santa Barbara 
County Care Data Exchange, the Patient Safety Institute™s National Benefit Trust Network, and 
the Markle Foundation™s Healthcare Collaborative Network (CareScience, 2003; Kolodner and Douglas, 1997; Markle Foundation, 2003b; New England Healthcare EDI Network, 2002; Overhage, 2003; Patient Safety Institute, 2002).  But these examples are the exception, not the 
Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Electronic Health Record Functional Model:  Letter Report 
 3rule. In most of the nation™s hospitals, orders fo
r medications, laboratory te
sts, and other services 
are still written on paper, and ma
ny hospitals lack even the capability to deliver laboratory and 
other results in an automated fashion.  The s
ituation is no different in most small practice 
settings, where there has been little if
 any migration to electronic records. 
In addition to the technical challenges, there are sizable policy, 
organizational, financial, and technological challenges that must be addresse
d to facilitate the adoption of EHR systems 
(Overhage et al., 2002). Some attempts to introd
uce order entry systems 
and other components of an EHR system have been unsuccessful (A
uber and Hamel, 2001; Ornstein, 2003).  Also, 
currently available personal health records, which allow patients to enter their own information, 
have demonstrated limited functionality
 to date (Kim and Johnson, 2002).   
Government health care programs, along with 
various private-sector stakeholders, are considering options for encouraging the impl
ementation of EHR systems by providers.  To 
achieve widespread implementation, some ex
ternal funding or incentive programs will be 
necessary (Institute of Medicine, 2001, 2002a).  
For example, the Centers for Medicare and 
Medicaid Services might provide so
me form of financial reward to
 providers participating in the Medicare program that have deployed EHR syst
ems.  On the private-sector side, various 
insurers, purchasers, and employer groups are 
instituting quality incentive programs for specific 
EHR system functionalities, such as computeriz
ed provider order entry for prescription drugs and electronic reporting of performance measur
es (National Health Care Purchasing Institute, 
2003).  In addition, a number of employers, health 
plans, and physicians have recently formed a 
coalition called Bridges to Excellence, which will provide financial bonuses to providers to encourage improved patient care management 
systems, including EHR systems (Bridges to 
Excellence, 2003).  Another option is to provide gr
ant funding or access to ﬁlow-costﬂ capital to 
enable providers, especially those with a safety net role, to invest in acquiring EHR systems 
(Health Technology Center and Manatt, Phelps and Phillips, LLP, 2003).  Certain regulatory strategies might also be pursued, such as requi
ring providers to have an EHR system as a 
condition of participation in Medicare (Department of Health and Huma
n Services, 2003).   To implement any of the above strategies, one mu
st first clearly define a functional model of 
key capabilities for an EHR system.  There have been many different views of what constitutes 

an EHR system.  Some EHR systems include virtua
lly all patient data, while others are limited to 
certain types of data, such as medications and 
ancillary results.  Some EHR systems provide 
decision support (e.g., preventive service reminders,
 alerts concerning possible drug interactions, clinical guideline-driven prompts), while ot
hers do not.  Most current EHR systems are 
enterprise-specific (e.g., operate within a specif
ic health system or mu
lti-hospital organization), 
and only a few provide strong support for communication and interconnectivity across the providers in a community.  The functionality 
of EHR systems also varies across multiple 
settingsŠfrom the perspective of 
both what is available from vendors and what has actually been implemented.  Some EHR systems have been 
developed locally and others by commercial 
vendors. In summary, EHR systems are actively 
under development and will remain so for many 
years. A ﬁfunctional modelﬂ of an EHR system will 
assist providers in acquiring and vendors in 
developing software.  For most providers, the mi
gration to an electronic environment will take 
place over a period of years.  The development of a common set of requirements for the 
functional capabilities of various EHR system 
software components would allow providers to 
compare and contrast the systems that are availabl
e, and enable vendors to build systems more in 
line with providers™ expectations.  To be most 
useful, a functional model 
of an EHR system must 
Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Electronic Health Record Functional Model:  Letter Report 
 4 also reflect a balance between what is desi
rable and what can feas
ibly be implemented 
immediately or within a short time frame.  It
 will be important to upda
te the functional model 
from time-to-time to reflect advancements 
in health care technology and care delivery.  PROJECT OVERVIEW In response to the request from DHHS in May 2003, the charge to the IOM Committee on 
Data Standards for Patient Safety was expanded as follows:   Provide guidance to DHHS on a set of ﬁbasic functionalitiesﬂ that an electronic health record system should possess 
to promote patient safety.  The IOM 
committee will consider functions, such as
 the types of data that should be 
available to providers when making clini
cal decisions (e.g., diagnoses, allergies, laboratory results); and the types of decision-support capabilities that should be 
present (e.g., the capability to alert provide
rs to potential drug-drug interactions). 
The IOM Committee was asked to focus on 
care delivery functions, and did not address infrastructure functions, such as database manage
ment and the use of health care data standards 
(e.g., terminology, messaging standards, network pr
otocols).  Although not within the scope of this project, the IOM Committee would like to 
emphasize the importance of two infrastructure 
functionsŠprivacy and security (e.g., access control, en
cryption).  It is absolutely critical that an 
EHR system be capable of safegua
rding privacy and security.   DHHS requested a rapid response because of its desire to implement various programs in 
2004 that would benefit from th
e availability of a functional model for an EHR system.  Specifically, the Center for Medi
care and Medicaid Services (CMS) is considering offering financial and other incentives to providers to 
encourage the deployment of EHR systems.  The 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality is 
implementing an applied research program that 
will provide funding for the implementation and 
evaluation of innovative IT-related programs.  
The federal government is also 
working collaboratively with private sector stakeholders to facilitate the development of a national health in
formation infrastructure (Department of Health 
and Human Services, 2003). 
In addition, the IOM work is the first step of a two-step process.  IOM is being asked to identify core care deliveryŒrelated functionalities of an EHR system.  Health Level Seven (HL7), 
a leading standards-setting organization working on the development 
of an EHR functional model, will incorporate these core functionalitie
s into the model, and further specify each 
functionality along three dimensions:  (1) devel
op a functional statement or definition (what), 
(2) establish a rationale for the functionality (why included), and (3) establish a compliance 
metric or test (Dickinson et al., 2003). 
Because of the quick turnaround required, the IOM  Committee convened a small working 
group that met at the National Academies™ 
Jonsson Conference Center in Woods Hole, Massachusetts, on June 7Œ8, 2003.  The work of this group served as a starting point for 
discussions of the full IOM Commi
ttee at its June 9Œ10, 2003, meeting. 
FRAMEWORK FOR IDENTIFYING CORE EHR FUNCTIONALITIES 
In recent years, several IOM reports have recommended that the U.S. health care system 
make a commitment to the development of a he
alth information infrastructure by the year 2010 
Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Electronic Health Record Functional Model:  Letter Report 
 5(Institute of Medicine, 2001, 2002a, 2002c).  This IOM Committee concurs with those 
recommendations.   
It is recognized that the EHR 
system will be built incrementall
y utilizing clinical information 
systems and decision support tools as building bl
ocks of the EHR, and the IOM Committee has strived to identify reasonable steps that can be
 taken by health care providers over the next 7 years to advance the accomplishment of this overall 
goal.  It will be important for the Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality and others to 
pursue a robust research agenda if the EHR 
system is to reach full maturity in the years ahead. 
Key EHR functionalities have been identified for four settingsŠhospital, ambulatory care, 
nursing home, and care in the community (i.e., th
e personal health record). Additional settings 
will need to be addressed in the future, such as home health agencies, pharmacies, and dental 

care. In considering the core functionalities of EHR systems, it is important to recognize their 
many potential uses (see Box 1).  EHR systems mu
st support the delivery of personal health care services, including care delivery (e.g., care processes), care mana
gement, care support processes, 
and administrative processes (e.g., billing and reim
bursement).  As individuals engage more 
actively in management of their own health, they 
too become important users of electronic health 
information.  There are also important sec
ondary uses, including education, regulation (e.g., credentialing), clinical and health services re
search, public health and homeland security, and 
policy support.  There are both individual users (e.g., patients, clinicians, managers) and 
institutional users (e.g., hospitals, public health departments,
 accreditation organizations, educators, and research entities).    Box 1.  Primary and Secondary Uses of 
an Electronic Health Record System Primary Uses Secondary Uses 
! Patient Care Delivery 
! Education 
! Patient Care Management 
! Regulation 
!    Patient Care Support Processes ! Research 
! Financial and Other Administrative Processes  
! Public Health and Homeland Security 
!    Patient Self-Management  !  Policy Support 
 SOURCE:  Adapted from Institute of Medicine (1997). 
 To guide the process of identifying core EHR system functionalities, the IOM Committee 
formulated five criteria, which are listed belo
w.  Although each functi
onality independently may 
not fulfill all five criteria, when taken together as part of an EHR system, the core functionalities 

should address all criteria.  ! Improve patient safety.  Safety is the prevention of harm
 to patients.  Each year in the United States, tens of thousands of people die as a result of preventable adverse events 
due to health care (Institute of Medicine, 2000).   ! Support the delivery of effective patient care.  Effectiveness is providing services based 
on scientific knowledge to those who could benefit and at the same time refraining from 
providing services to those not likely to bene
fit (Institute of Medicine, 2001).  Only about 
Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Electronic Health Record Functional Model:  Letter Report 
 6 one-half (55 percent) of Americans receive 
recommended medical care that is consistent 
with evidence-based practice guidelines (McGlynn et al., 2003).   ! Facilitate management of chronic conditions
.  Chronic conditions are now the leading 
cause of illness, disability, and death in the United States (Hoffman et al., 1996).  Persons with chronic conditions account for over 75 percent of all health care spending, and more than half of that spending is on behalf
 of people with multiple such conditions 
(Partnership for Solutions, 2002; U.S. Departme
nt of Health and Human Services, 2002).  
More than half of those with chronic conditions have three or more different providers 
and report that they often receive conflicting 
information from those providers; moreover, 
many undergo duplicate tests and procedures, 
but still do not receive recommended care (Leatherman and McCarthy, 2002; Partnership 
for Solutions, 2002).  Physicians also report difficulty in coordinating care for their patients w
ith chronic conditions, and believe that this lack of coordination produces poor outcomes (Partnership for Solutions, 
2002).   ! Improve efficiency.  Efficiency is the avoidance of waste, in particular, waste of equipment, supplies, ideas, and energy (Inst
itute of Medicine, 2001).  Methods must be 
found to enhance the efficiency of health care professionals and reduce the administrative 
and labor costs associated with health care delivery and financing.  Staffing shortages have developed in multiple health care professions, placing added pressure on providers 

to continually improve care processes with
 current staffing levels (AHA Commission on 
Workforce for Hospitals and Health Systems, 20
02).  The cost of private health insurance is increasing at an annual rate of greater than 12 percent, while individuals are paying more out of pocket and receiving fewer benef
its (Edwards et al., 2002; Kaiser Family 
Foundation and Health Research and Educational Trust, 2002).  And rising health care costs will likely contribute to growing numbers of uninsured, who currently total over 41 
million, or 1 in 7 Americans (U.S. Census Bureau, 2002). Addressing these issues 

represents a major challenge.   
! Feasibility of implementation
.  The IOM Committee consid
ered this criterion in 
determining the time frames within which 
it is reasonable to e
xpect providers™ EHR systems will be capable of demonstrating th
e key functionalities.  The timing of this 
study did not allow for a thorough evaluation of
 feasibility, so the IOM Committee had to 
rely on its collective knowledge of the field. 
 In assessing feasibility, the IOM Committee 
considered whether software is currently available or under development; the time period 
necessary for vendors to develop, produce, and market new software to achieve certain functionalities; and the willingness of users to 
purchase and implement such systems.  It 
would be advisable to reassess periodically the feasibility of implementing certain EHR 
functionalities and modify expectati
ons regarding timing, as appropriate. 
Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Electronic Health Record Functional Model:  Letter Report 
 7CORE EHR FUNCTIONALITIES 
The IOM Committee identified core functionalities
 falling into eight 
categories (see Box 2).  Box 2.  Core Functionalities for an Electronic Health Record System 
! Health information and data 
! Patient support 
! Results management 
! Administrative processes 
! Order entry/management 
! Reporting & population health  
! Decision support  managemen
t ! Electronic communication and 
connectivity  Health Information and Data  
Although not truly a functionality attribute per se, in order to achieve the objectives set forth for an EHR system, it must contain certain data
 about patients.  Physicians and other care providers require certain information to ma
ke sound clinical decisions; however, their information needs are often not met (Bates et 
al., 2003; Covell et al., 1985; McKnight et al., 2001; Tang et al., 1994).  This lack of information 
can lead to lesser-quality and inefficient care. As noted, for example, the capability to disp
lay previous laboratory test results can 
significantly reduce the number 
of redundant tests ordered, not only saving money, but also 
preventing the patient from undergoing unnecessary test
s (Bates et al., 1999; Stair, 1998; Tierney 
et al., 1987).  Also as noted earlier, information on patient alle
rgies and other medications, in 
combination with alerts and reminders, can decr
ease the number of medication-related adverse 
events and improve the prescribing practices of physicians and nurse practitioners (Bates et al., 
1999; Kuperman et al., 2001; McDonald, 1976; Teich 
et al., 2000).  In addition, urgent matters, 
such as abnormal test results, can be addresse
d on a more timely basis if the physician has the 
information at the point of care (Bates et al., 
2003).  EHR systems with a defined dataset that 
includes such items as, medical and nursing 
diagnoses, a medication list, allergies, 
demographics, clinical narratives, and laborator
y test results, can ther
efore ensure improved 
access to at least some types of information 
needed by care providers when they need it. 
It is also important to note that too much in
formation and data may overwhelm or distract the 
end user, so EHR systems must have well designe
d interfaces.  The health information and data 
captured by an EHR system must also evolve 
over time, as new knowledge becomes available, 
both clinical knowledge and knowledge regarding the information needs of different users. Results Management 
Managing results of all types (e.g., laboratory test results, radiology procedure results reports) electronically has several distinct advantages over paper-based reporting in terms of 
improved quality of care.  Computerized results 
can be accessed more easily by the provider at 
the time and place they are needed; the reduced 
lag time increases both efficiency and patient 
Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Electronic Health Record Functional Model:  Letter Report 
 8 safety by allowing for quicker recognition and treatment of me
dical problems (Bates et al., 
2003).  Additionally, the automated display of prev
ious test results makes it possible to reduce 
redundant and additional testing, thus not only improving efficiency of treatment, but also 
decreasing costs (Bates et al., 2003; Shea et al., 2002; Tierney et al., 1987).  Having electronic results can allow for better interpretation a
nd for easier detection of abnormalities, thereby 
ensuring appropriate follow-up (Bates et al., 2003; Overhage et al., 2001; Schiff et al., 2003).  Finally, access to electronic consu
lts and patient consents can establish critical linkages and 
improve care coordination among multiple provider
s, as well as between provider and patient 
(Bates et al., 2003). Order Entry/Order Management The benefits of computerized provider orde
r entry (CPOE) have been well documented 
(Bates and Gawande, 2003; Bates et al., 1998, 1999; Butler and Bender, 1999; Kuperman and 
Gibson, 2003; Kuperman et al., 2001; Mekhjian et
 al., 2002; Schiff and Rucker, 1998; Sittig and Stead, 1994; Teich et al., 2000; Tierney et al., 1993).  Even with little or no decision support capabilities, such systems can improve workflow
 processes by eliminating lost orders and 
ambiguities caused by illegible handwriting, genera
ting related orders automatically, monitoring 
for duplicate orders, and reducing the time to fill 
orders (Lepage et al., 1992; Mekhjian et al., 
2002; Sittig and Stead, 1994).  The use of comp
uterized order entry, in conjunction with an electronic health record, is also beginning 
to demonstrate a positive effect on clinician 
productivity (Overhage et al., In press). The strongest evidence of the clinical effectiveness of CPOE is seen in medication order entry.  Relatively simple systems have been shown to reduce the number of non-intercepted 

medication errors by up to 83 percent by usi
ng ﬁforcing functionsﬂ for medication dose and 
frequency (Bates and Gawande, 2003), displaying relevant laboratories, and checking for drugŒallergy and drugŒdrug interactions.  CPOE is expected to offer similar benefits for laboratory, 
microbiology, pathology, radiology, nur
sing, and supply orders, as well as for ancillary services and consults (Butler and Bender, 1999; Sanders and Miller, 2001; Schiff et al., 2003; Schuster et al., 2003; Teich et al., 1992; Wa
ng et al., 2002).  Financial benefitsŠsuch as reducing the amount of money spent on preprinted forms, assu
ring that prescribing practices are consistent with a facility™s established formulary, and info
rming physicians and othe
r providers about cost-saving options and duplicate test ordersŠhave also been demonstrated (Butler and Bender, 
1999; Mekhjian et al., 2002; Sittig and Stead, 1994).   Decision Support Computerized decision support systems have dem
onstrated their effectiveness in enhancing clinical performance for many aspects of health 
care, including prevention, prescribing of drugs, diagnosis and management, and de
tection of adverse events and disease outbreaks (Bates and Gawande, 2003; Hunt et al., 1998; Johnston et al., 1994; Tang et al., 1999b).  In two meta-
analyses, computer reminders and prompts were
 shown to significantly improve preventive practices in such areas as vaccinations, breast 
cancer screening, colore
ctal screening, and 
cardiovascular risk reduction (Balas et al., 2000; Shea et al., 1996).  Several studies have also been conducted on the use of computerized 
decision support to improve drug dosing, drug 
selection, and screening for drug interactions; these studies have shown overall positive effects Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Electronic Health Record Functional Model:  Letter Report 
 9on the quality of patient care (Abookire et al., 2000; Evans et al., 1998; Hunt et al., 1998; Schiff 
and Rucker, 1998).  A study comparing clinical 
decisions made by physicians in the same 
practice using an EHR system and traditional pa
per records found that the former group made 
more appropriate clinical decisions as a result
 of all the tools available in an EHR system, 
including decision support (Tang et al., 1999a).   There is also a small but growing evidence base 
for the effectiveness of such systems in the 
area of computer-assisted diagnosis and disease treatment and ma
nagement.  In 1992, an expert 
diagnostic system demonstrated the ability to de
tect more serious quality
 problems arising from 
diagnostic errors than those detected by a state-based peer review organization, suggesting that computerized tools may help prevent such dia
gnostic misadventures (L
ee and Warner, 1992).  A 
1999 study comparing the performance of clinicians
 with and without the aid of a diagnostic computerized decision support system found a si
gnificant improvement in
 the generation of correct diagnoses when the system was used 
(Friedman et al., 1999).  Two additional recent 
studies have revealed that decision support tools could improve clinician compliance with 
established evidence-based guidelines and protocols (Morris, 2003; Starmer et al., 2000).  Other 
studies on the use of decision support tools have not found improvements, however (Eccles et al., 
2002; Rollman et al., 2002).   More sophisticated tools, such as artificial neural networks, 
have also demonstrated their 
effectiveness in detecting acute myocardial infarction, breast can
cer, and cervical cancer (Bates and Gawande, 2003; Heden et al., 1997; Kok and Boon, 1996; Petrick et al., 2002).  In addition, computerized tools can be used to identify and tr
ack the frequency of adverse events (Bates et 
al., 2001; Classen et al., 1991; Honigman et al., 2001) and hospital-acquired infections (Evans et 
al., 1986), as well as disease outbreaks and bioterrorism events (Pavlin, 2003; Tsui et al., 2003). 
Electronic Communication and Connectivity Effective communicationŠamong h
ealth care team members and 
other care partners (e.g., laboratory, radiology, pharmacy) and 
with patientsŠis critical to the provision of quality health care.  Its lack can contribute to the occurrence of adverse events (Bates and Gawande, 2003; Petersen et al., 1994; Schmidt and Svarstad, 2002; Wanl
ass et al., 1992).  Improved 
communication among care partners, such as la
boratory, pharmacy, and radiology, can enhance 
patient safety and quality of care (Schiff et al., 2003), and improve publ
ic health surveillance (Schiff and Rucker, 1998; Wagner et al., 2001).  El
ectronic connectivity is essential in creating and populating EHR systems, especially for 
those patients with chronic conditions, who 
characteristically have multiple providers in multiple settings that must coordinate care plans 

(Wagner, 2000; Wagner et al., 1996).  While
 communication interfaces are becoming well 
established for administrative data exchange, there are very few such interfaces for the exchange 

of clinical data.   Electronic communication tools, such as e-ma
il and web messaging, have been shown to be 
effective in facilitating communi
cation both among providers and 
with patients, thus allowing 
for greater continuity of care (Balas et al., 1997; Liederma
n and Morefield, 2003; Worth and 
Patrick, 1997) and more timely interventions 
(Kuebler and Bruera, 2000).  One recent study 
found that automatic alerts to providers regard
ing abnormal laboratory results reduced the time 
until an appropriate treatment was ordered 
(Kuperman et al., 1999).  Another important 
communication tool is an integrated health reco
rd, both within a setting and across settings and institutions.  Such a record allows for improved 
access to patient data at the point where clinical 
Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Electronic Health Record Functional Model:  Letter Report 
 10 decisions are made (Institute of 
Medicine, 1997).  In addition, telemedicine has demonstrated 
effectiveness in certain setti
ngs, including pulmonary clinics a
nd intensive care units (Pacht et 
al., 1998; Rosenfeld et al., 2000; Shafazand et al.,
 2000); home telemonitoring has been shown to 
be successful as well (Finkelstein et al., 2000; Johnston et al., 2000; Rogers et al., 2001; Shea et al., 2002; Whitlock et al., 2000).   
Patient Support Patient education has demonstrated significant effectiveness in
 improving control of chronic 
illnesses (Weingarten et al., 2002). 
 Computer-based patient educat
ion in particular has been 
found to be successful in primary care (Balas et 
al., 1996).  In a 1997 study of 22 clinical trials, 
interactive educational interventions showed
 positive results for several major clinical 
applications, the most frequently targeted of 
these being diabetes (Krishna et al., 1997).  Additionally, as noted earlier, several studies have demonstrated the feasibility of home 
monitoring by patients (Finkelstein et al., 2000; Johnston et al., 2000; Rogers et al., 2001; 
Whitlock et al., 2000).  In a recent study, for instan
ce, spirometry self-testing by asthma patients 
during home telemonitoring was found to provide va
lid results comparable to those of tests 
collected under the supervision of a clinicia
n (Finkelstein et al., 2000).  A multidimensional 
telehealth system has also demonstrated the ab
ility to decrease stress for some caregivers of 
patients with Alzheimer™s disease (Bass et al., 1998). 
Administrative Processes Electronic scheduling systems for hospital admi
ssions, inpatient and outpatient procedures, and visits not only increase the efficiency of heath care organiza
tions, but also provide better, more timely service to patients (Everett, 2002; 
Hancock and Walter, 1986; Woods, 2001).  Use 
of communication and content st
andards is equally important 
in the billing and claims 
management areaŠclose coupling of authorizatio
n and prior approvals can, in some cases, 
eliminate delays and confusion.  Additionally, 
immediate validation of 
insurance eligibility 
should add value for both providers and patie
nts through improved access to services, more 
timely payments and less paperwork. 
Moreover, computerized decision support tools ar
e being used in a variety of settings to 
identify eligible or potentially eligible patients for clinical trials (Breitfeld et al., 1999; Carlson et al., 1995; Ohno-Machado et al., 1999; Papaconstan
tinou et al., 1998).  Other effective electronic administrative tools include re
porting tools that support drug recalls (Schiff and Rucker, 1998) and artificial neural networks that can assi
st in identifying candidates for chronic disease management programs (Heden et al., 1997;
 Kok and Boon, 1996; Petrick et al., 2002). Reporting and Population Health Management  Institutions currently have multiple public a
nd private sector reporting requirements at the 
federal, state, and local levels for patient safety and quality, as well as for public health.  In addition, the internal quality improvement effort
s of many health care organizations include 
routine reporting of key quality indicators (sometimes referre
d to as clinical dashboards) to clinicians.  Most of the data for these reports must
 be abstracted from claims data, paper records, 
and surveys, a process that is labor-intensive and time-c
onsuming, and usually occurs Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Electronic Health Record Functional Model:  Letter Report 
 11retrospectively.  Thus such reporting is often limited to en
tities that have sufficient 
administrative infrastructure to develop the n
ecessary data (Institute of Medicine, 2002c).  
Additionally, chart abstraction has been shown to involve a number of significant errors (Green 
and Wintfeld, 1993).  Having clinical
 data represented with a standardized terminology and in a 
machine-readable format would reduce the significant data collection burden at the provider 

level, as well as the associated costs, and would li
kely increase the accuracy
 of the data reported.   CORE FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
When identifying the core functional requirements for an EHR system, the IOM Committee 
was asked to consider both the care setting of each function and the time frame for its 
introduction
.  Table 1 at the end of this report lists the eight key EHR system capabilities 
described above, broken down at a more detailed 
level, according to these two dimensions.  The 
committee was asked to provide guidance pertaini
ng to four care settings:  (1) hospitals; (2) 
ambulatory care settings, including small practic
e settings, community health centers, and group 
practices; (3) nursing homes; a
nd (4) care in the community. 
In addressing the fourth se
tting, care in the community, the IOM Committee focused on 
functional requirements for the pers
onal health record (PHR), defined to include (1) a subset of data from the individual™s EHR, and (2) informa
tion recorded by the individual, including health maintenance and monitoring data. A PHR may be us
ed in a number of ways by the patient to support their care, disease management, and 
clinical communication. (Markle Foundation, 
2003a). As computer-based PHRs become part of
 the EHR system, being 
able to access patients™ 
own narratives of their illnesses will become a va
luable source of information for improving care 
through comparisons with the clinicians™ records.  
Assuming that the migration from paper record
s to a comprehensive EHR system will take 7 
or more years for most provide
rs, the IOM Committee strived to identify functional requirements 
for three time periods: 
 ! In the immediate future (2004Œ2005), it is assu
med that providers (i.e., ambulatory care 
settings, hospitals, and nursing homes) will focus on (1) the capture of essential patient 

data already found frequently in electronic form, such as la
boratory and radiology results; (2) the acquisition of limited decision support capabilities for which software is readily available in the marketplace (e.g., order en
try, electronic prescribing); and (3) the 
generation of reports required by external organizations for quality and safety oversight and public health reporting.   ! In the near term (2006Œ2007), providers™ EHR 
systems should (1) allow for the capture 
of defined sets of health information, (2) 
incorporate a core set of decision support functions (e.g., clinical guideline support, care plan impl
ementation), and (3) support the 
exchange of basic patient care data and communication (e.g., laboratory results, medication data, discharge summaries) 
among the care settings (e.g. pharmacies, 
hospitals, nursing homes, home health 
agencies, etc.) within a community. 
! In the longer term (2008Œ2010), the committee believes that fully functional, 
comprehensive EHR systems will be availabl
e and implemented by some health systems 
and regions.  It may take considerably longer,
 however, for all providers to be using a comprehensive EHR system that provides fo
r the longitudinal collection of complete 
Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Electronic Health Record Functional Model:  Letter Report 
 12 health information for an individual; im
mediate access to patient information by all 
authorized users within a secure environment; extensive use of knowledge support and 
decision support systems; and extensive s
upport for applications that fall outside 
immediate patient care (e.g., homeland securi
ty, public health, clinical research).  
In identifying core functionalities for specifi
c provider settings, the IOM Committee also 
considered the current level of information tec
hnology capabilities within a sector.  Specifically, the IOM Committee assumed that the migration path
way for hospitals would be more rapid than 
that for nursing homes, recognizing that many ho
spitals have some EHR system capabilities 
already in place while most nursing homes do not, 
and that hospitals generally have greater 
access to technical expertise.  Th
e migration can also be expected
 to take longer for physicians™ 
offices than for hospitals, given the differences between the two in financial resources available for IT investments. The IOM Committee set thes
e targets within the context of the current 
momentum it is observing in the public and 
private sectors. A loss of momentum would 
adversely affect these estimates. It is recognized
 that not every provider will meet the functional 
requirements by the times indicated. The functional 
requirements are intende
d to be challenging but achievable for a sizable proportion of the health care sector. CONCLUSION 
The IOM Committee is pleased to have had 
the opportunity to provide guidance on this important issue.  The committee hopes its work w
ill be useful to HL7 in its efforts to develop 
functional statements for an EHR system; to 
government programs and private purchasers in 
their efforts to encourage and 
assist health care providers 
in deploying EHR systems; to 
providers and vendors as they strive to acquire and build software products that form part of the 
foundation for a comprehensive health information in
frastructure; and to patients as they seek to participate more fully in decisi
ons regarding their own care.    Paul C. Tang, Chair Committee on Data Standards for Patient Safety 
 
 Cc: Ann Marie Lynch, Acting Assistant Secret
ary for Planning and Evaluation (ASPE), Department of Health and Human Services 
Thomas A. Scully, Administrator, Centers for 
Medicare and Medicaid Services, Department 
of Health and Human Services 
Gary Christopherson, Senior Advisor for the U
ndersecretary for Health, Department of 
Veterans Affairs 
  Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  Electronic Health Record Functiona
l Model:  Letter Report     13 
Table 1  EHR System Capabilities 
by Time Frame and Site of Care 
 Core Functionality
 Hospitals Ambulatory Care Nursing Homes 
Care in the Community 
(Personal Health Record) 
 2004Œ5 2006Œ7 2008Œ10 2004Œ5 2006Œ7 2008Œ10 2004Œ5 2006Œ7 2008Œ10 2004Œ5 2006Œ7 2008Œ10 
1. Health Information and Data 
Key data (using standardized 
code sets where available) 
Œ Problem list 

Œ Procedures 
Œ Diagnoses 
Œ Medication list  
Œ Allergies  Œ Demographics 

Œ Diagnostic test results 
Œ Radiology results 

Œ Health maintenance 
Œ Advance directives 
Œ Disposition 
Œ Level of service    X 
X 
X 
X X X 
X 
X 
X X X     
 
 
   
 
 
   X    X 
X 
X 
X X X 
X 
X 
X X X 
X    
 
 
   
 
 
   
     
 See Minimum Dataset Below 
   
 
 
     X 
X 
X 
X X X 
X 
X 
X X X    
 
 
   
 
 
   X  Minimum dataset (MDS) for 
nursing homes 
Œ Defined MDS for nursing  
 homes 
Œ Expanded/refined MDS    
 NA NA     
 NA NA     
 X   
 
 X    
 NA NA   Note: NA=not applicable Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Table 1 continued 
 14 Electronic Health Record Functional Model:  Letter Report 
 Functionality
 Hospitals Ambulatory Care Nursing Homes 
Care in the Community 
(Personal Health Record) 
 2004Œ5 2006Œ7 2008Œ10 2004Œ5 2006Œ7 2008Œ10 2004Œ5 2006Œ7 2008Œ10 2004Œ5 2006Œ7 2008Œ10 
1. Health Information and Data 
continued
 Narrative (clinical and patient narrative) Œ Free text 
Œ Template-based 

Œ Deriving structure from  
 unstructured text 
- Natural Language  Processing Œ Structured and coded 
- Signs and Symptoms 

- Diagnoses - Procedures - Level of service Œ Treatment plan 
- Single discipline 
- Interdisciplinary 
   X  
 
   
 
 X X X  X     X    
 
 
  X  X    
 
 X   X  
 
   
 
 X X X    X  
   
 
 
   
 X    
 
 
  X  X    
 
 X    
 
 
   
 
 X X NA    X    X  
  X  X    
 X 
X   X 
X  
  NA  
 X X NA  
 
    
    
 
 
   
 X    
 X 
X  Patient acuity/severity of 

illness/risk adjustment Œ Nursing workload 
Œ Severity adjustment 
   X    X    NA     X       X    X   NA NA   Capture of identifiers Œ People and roles 

Œ Products/devices 
Œ Places (including 
directions)   X 
X 
X    X 
X 
X     
X 
X 
X     X 
X 
X   Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  Electronic Health Record Func
tional Model:  Letter Report
     
15  2. Results Management 
Results Reporting 
Œ Laboratory 

Œ Microbiology 

Œ Pathology 
Œ Radiology Reports 
Œ Consults   X 
X 
X X    
 
  X   X 
X 
X X   
 
  X   
 
    X   X 
X X X   X 
X 
X X   
   
 
  X Results Notification 
 X   X    X  X   
Multiple views of data / 
Presentation 
  X    X     
X    
X  Multimedia support 
Œ Images 
Œ Waveforms Œ Scanned documents 
- Patient consents Œ Pictures 
Œ Sounds 
    
  X  X 
X   X 
X    
  X  X 
X   X 
X    
X 
X  X 
X 
X    
X 
X  X 
X 
X 3. Order Entry/Management
 Computerized provider order 
entry 
Œ Electronic prescribing Œ Laboratory 
Œ Microbiology 

Œ Pathology 

Œ XR 
Œ Ancillary 
Œ Nursing Œ Supplies 
Œ Consults    X X X 
X 
X 
X X X 
X      X X X 
X 
X   
   
 
 X X X 
X    X   
 X  
 
 
   X   
  X 
X 
X 
X X X   NA NA NA 
NA 
NA 
NA NA NA 
NA     Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Table 1 continued 
 16 Electronic Health Record Functional Model:  Letter Report 
 Core Functionality
 Hospitals Ambulatory Care Nursing Homes 
Care in the Community 
(Personal Health Record) 
 2004Œ5 2006Œ7 2008Œ10 2004Œ5 2006Œ7 2008Œ10 2004Œ5 2006Œ7 2008Œ10 2004Œ5 2006Œ7 2008Œ10 
4. Decision Support Access to knowledge sources Œ Domain knowledge 
Œ Patient education 
  X X      X X     
X  
   X  X X   Drug alerts Œ Drug dose defaults 

Œ Drug dose checking 
Œ Allergy checking 
Œ Drug interaction  
 checking Œ DrugŒlab checking 
Œ DrugŒcondition checking Œ DrugŒdiet checking 
  X  X  X   X    X 
X 
X   X  X  X   X    X 
X 
X   X  X  X   X   
 
   X 
X 
X  NA 
NA 
NA  NA 
NA 
NA 
NA   Other rule-based alerts (e.g., 
significant lab trends, lab test 
because of drug) 
    X    
 X    
 X    NA   Reminders 
Œ Preventive services 
  X    X     
X   X   Clinical guidelines and pathways 
Œ Passive Œ Context-sensitive passive Œ Integrated    X   
 X X    X   
 X X    
 X   
 X X   X  NA   
 X  Chronic disease management 
 NA    X    X  X  
 Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  Electronic Health Record Func
tional Model:  Letter Report
     
17  Clinician work list  X   X    X  NA   
Incorporation of patient and/or 
family preferences 

   X    
X     
X   X  Diagnostic decision support 
   X   X   X NA   
Use of epidemiologic data    X   X   X NA   
Automated real-time 
surveillance Œ Detect adverse events and  
 near misses 
Œ Detect disease outbreaks 

Œ Detect bioterrorism 
     X 
X 
X    
  X 
X 
X     
 
 NA    X 
X      NA 
NA 
NA   5. Electronic Communication & Connectivity 
ProviderŒprovider 
 X    X   X   
 NA   
Team coordination 
  X    X   X NA   
PatientŒprovider 
Œ E-mail 
Œ Secure web messaging 
  X X    X X    NA NA    X X   Medical devices   X    X  X    X 
Trading partners (external) 
Œ Outside pharmacy 

Œ Insurer 
Œ Laboratory 

Œ Radiology 
   X 
X  X  
 X    X 
X  X  
 X    
X 
X 
X   
 
 X  X 
X NA 
NA    Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Table 1 continued 
 18 Electronic Health Record Functional Model:  Letter Report 
 Core Functionality Hospitals Ambulatory Care Nursing Homes 
Care in the Community 
(Personal Health Record) 
 2004Œ5 2006Œ7 2008Œ10 2004Œ5 2006Œ7 2008Œ10 2004Œ5 2006Œ7 2008Œ10 2004Œ5 2006Œ7 2008Œ10 
5. Electronic Communication & Connectivity 
continued Integrated medical record 
1 Œ Within setting Œ Cross-setting - InpatientŒoutpatient - Other cross-setting 
Œ Cross-organizational   X  X    
 X    
 
 X  X  X    
 X    
 
 X   X    X 
X 
X  NA  
 
 
    X 
X    
 
 X  6. Patient Support 
Patient education Œ Access to patient  
 education materials Œ Custom patient education 

Œ Tracking    X    X 
X    X    X 
X    
 X X     X   X    X 
X  Family and informal caregiver 
education 
   X    
X    
X    
X  Data entered by patient, 
family, and/or informal 
caregiver Œ Home monitoring 

Œ Questionnaires 
     NA X    
  X 
X    
  NA 
NA      X    X  7. Administrative Processes 
Scheduling management 
Œ Appointments 

Œ Admissions 

Œ Surgery/procedure  
 schedule   X 
X  X    X NA  X     
 
 NA   X 
X  X NA  NA                                                    1 Defined as the extent to which a single record integrates data 
from different settings, providers, and organizations (e.g., Pri
mary Care Physician, 
specialist, hospital). Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  Electronic Health Record Func
tional Model:  Letter Report
     
19  Eligibility determination 
Œ Insurance eligibility 

Œ Clinical trial recruitment 
Œ Drug recall Œ Chronic disease  
 management   X 
X X  X    X 
X X  X    X NA NA   
   X   X  NA  NA   X  8. Reporting and Population Health Management 
Patient safety and quality  
reporting Œ Clinical dashboards 
Œ External accountability 
reporting Œ Ad hoc reporting 
   X  X X    
 
   
    X  X X    
 
   
    X  X X    
 
   
    NA  NA NA    
 
   
  Public health reporting 
Œ Reportable diseases 

Œ Immunization 
  X 
X    X 
X    X   X   NA 
NA   Deidentifying data 
  X   X   X  NA   
Disease registries 
 X   X   X    X  
 Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20  
Electronic Health Record Functional Model:  Letter Report 
 REFERENCES 
Abookire, S. A., J. M. Teich, H. Sandige, M. D. Paterno, 
M. T. Martin, G. J. Kuperman, and D. W. Bates.  2000.  
Improving Allergy Alerting in a Computerized Physician Order Entry System.  
 Proc AMIA Symp
  :2-6. 
AHA Commission on Workforce for Hospitals and Health Systems.  2002. 
In Our Hands:  How Hospital Leaders 
Can Build a Thriving Workforce.
 Washington, D.C.: American Hospital Association. 
Auber, B. A., and G. Hamel.  2001.  Adoption of Smart Cards in the Medical Sector: the Canadian Experience.  
Soc 
Sci Med
  53  (7):879-94. 
Balas, E. A., S. M. Austin, J. A. Mitc
hell, B. G. Ewigman, K. D. Bopp, and G. D. Brown.  1996.  The Clinical Value 
of Computerized Information Services. A Review of 98 Randomized Clinical Trials.  
Arch Fam Med
  5 (5):271-
8. Balas, E. A., F. Jaffrey, G. J. Kuperman, S. A. Boren, G. D. Brown, F. Pinciroli, and J. A. Mitchell.  1997.  
Electronic Communication With Patients. Evaluation of Distance Medicine Technology.  
JAMA
  278 (2):152-9. 
Balas, E. A., S. Weingarten, C. T. Garb, D. Blumenthal
, S. A. Boren, and G. D. Brown.  2000.  Improving 
Preventive Care by Prompting Physicians.  
Arch Intern Med
  160 (3):301-8. 
Bass, D. M., M. J. McClendon, P. F. Brennan, and C. 
McCarthy.  1998.  The Buffering Effect of a Computer 
Support Network on Caregiver Strain.  
J Aging Health
  10 (1):20-43. 
Bates, D. W., M. Cohen, L. L. Leape, J. M. Overhage
, M. M. Shabot, and T. Sher
idan.  2001.  Reducing the 
Frequency of Errors in Medicine Using Information Technology.  
J Am Med Inform Assoc
  8 (4):299-308. 
Bates, D. W., M. Ebell, E. Gotlieb, J.
 Zapp, and H. C. Mullins.  2003.  A Proposal for Electronic Medical Records in 
U.S. Primary Care.  
J Am Med Inform Assoc
  10 (1 ):1-10. 
Bates, D. W., and A. A. Gawande.  2003.  Improving Safety With Information Technology.  
N Engl J Med
  348 
(25):2526-34. 
Bates, D. W., G. J. Kuperman, E. Rittenberg, J. M. Te
ich, J. Fiskio, N. Ma'luf, A. Onderdonk, D. Wybenga, J. 
Winkelman, T. A. Brennan, A. L. Komaroff, and M. Tanasijevic.  1999.  A Randomized Trial of a Computer-
Based Intervention to Reduce Utilization of Redundant Laboratory Tests.  
Am J Med
  106 (2):144-50. 
Bates, D. W., L. L. Leape, D. J. Cullen, N. Laird, L. A. 
Petersen, J. M. Teich, E. Burdick, M. Hickey, S. Kleefield, 
B. Shea, M. Vander Vliet, and D. L. Seger.  1998.  Effect of Computerized Physician Order Entry and a Team 
Intervention on Prevention of 
Serious Medication Errors.  
JAMA
  280 (15):1311-6. 
Bates, D. W., J. M. Teich, J. Lee, D. Seger, G. J. Kupe
rman, N. Ma'Luf, D. Boyle, and L. Leape.  1999.  The Impact 
of Computerized Physician Order Entry on Medication Error Prevention.  
J Am Med Inform Assoc
  6 (4):313-
21. 
Bellazzi, R., A. Riva, S. Montani, C. Larizza, G. d'Annunzio, R. Lorini, A. Monteforte, and M. Stefanelli.  1998.  A 
Web-Based System for Diabetes Management:  
the Technical and Clinical Infrastructure.  
Proc AMIA Symp
  :972. 
Breitfeld, P. P., M. Weisburd, J. M. Overhage, G. Sledge 
Jr, and W. M. Tierney.  1999.  Pilot Study of a Point-of-
Use Decision Support Tool for Cancer Clinical Trials Eligibility.  
J Am Med Inform Assoc
  6 (6):466-77. 
Bridges to Excellence. 2003. "Bridges to Excellence:  
Rewarding Quality Across the Healthcare System." Online. 
Available at http://www.bridgestoexce
llence.org [accessed 
July 1, 2003]. 
Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Electronic Health Record Functional Model:  Letter Report 21 
 Butler, M. A., and A. D. Bender.  
1999.  Intensive Care Unit Bedside Documentation Systems. Realizing Cost 
Savings and Quality Improvements.  
Comput Nurs
  17 (1):32-8; quiz 39-40. 
CareScience. 2003. "Santa Barbara County Ca
re Data Exchange." Online. Available at 
http://www.carescience.com/h
ealthcare_providers/cde/care_data_excha
nge_santabarbara_cde.shtml [accessed 
July 10, 2003]. 
Carlson, R. W., S. W. Tu, N. M. Lane, T. L. Lai, C. 
A. Kemper, M. A. Musen, an
d E. H. Shortliffe.  1995.  
Computer-Based Screening of Patients With 
HIV/AIDS for Clinical-Trial Eligibility.  
Online J Curr Clin Trials
  Doc No 179:[3347 words; 32 paragraphs]. 
Classen, D. C., S. L. Pestotnik, R. S.
 Evans, and J. P. Burke.  1991.  Co
mputerized Surveillance of Adverse Drug 
Events in Hospital Patients.  
JAMA
  266 (20):2847-51. 
Covell, D. G., G. C. Uman, and P. R. Manning .  1985.  
Information Needs in Office Practice: Are They Being Met?  
Ann Intern Med
  103 (4):596-9. 
Detmer, Don E. 2003.
 Building the National Health Information Infrastructure for Personal Health, Health Care 
Services, Public Health,a Nd Research.  
BioMed Central
  3(1) 
Dickinson, Gary, Linda Fische
tti, and Sam Heard.  2003. 
EHR Functional Model and Standard.
 (PowerPoint 
Presentation): Health Leve
l Seven (HL7) EHR SIG. 
Durieux, Pierre, Remy Nizard, Philippe Ravaud, et al. 2000.
 A Clinical Decision Support 
System for Prevention of 
Venous Thromboembolism.  
JAMA   283 (21):2816-21. 
Eccles, M., E. McColl, N. Steen, N. Rousseau, J. Grim
shaw, D. Parkin, and I. Pu
rves.  2002.  Effect of 
Computerised Evidence Based Guidelines on Management 
of Asthma and Angina in Adults in Primary Care: 
Cluster Randomised Controlled Trial.  
BMJ
  325 (7370):941. 
Edwards, J. N., M. M. Doty, and C. Schoen.  2002. 
The Erosion of Employer-Based Health Coverage and the 
Threat to Workers' Health Care:  Findings From the Commonwealth Fund 2002 Workplace Health Insurance 
Survey.
 New York, NY: The Commonwealth Fund. 
Evans, R. S., R. A. Larsen, J. P. Burke, R. M. Gardner, F. 
A. Meier, J. A. Jacobson, M. 
T. Conti, J. T. Jacobson, and 
R. K. Hulse.  1986.  Computer Surveillance of 
Hospital-Acquired Infections and Antibiotic Use.  
JAMA  256 
(8):1007-11. 
Evans, R. S., S. L. Pestotnik, D. C. Classen, T. P. Clemme
r, L. K. Weaver, J. F. Orme Jr, J. F. Lloyd, and J. P. 
Burke.  1998.  A Computer-Assisted Management Program for Antibiotics and Other Antiinfective Agents.  
N Engl J Med
   338 (4):232-8. 
Everett, J. E.  2002.  A Decision Support Simulation 
Model for the Management of an Elective Surgery Waiting 
System.  
Health Care Manag Sci
  5 (2):89-95. 
Finkelstein, J., M. R. Cabrera, and G. Hripcsak.  2000. 
 Internet-Based Home Asthma Telemonitoring: Can Patients 
Handle the Technology?  
Chest
  117 (1):148-55. 
Friedman, C. P., A. S. Elstein, F. M. 
Wolf, G. C. Murphy, T. M. Franz, P. S.
 Heckerling, P. L. Fine, T. M. Miller, 
and V. Abraham.  1999.  Enhancement of Clinicians' Diagnostic Reasoning by Computer-Based Consultation: a 
Multisite Study of 2 Systems.  
JAMA
  282 (19):1851-6. 
Green, J., and N. Wintfeld.  1993.  How Accurate Are 
Hospital Discharge Data for Evaluating Effectiveness of 
Care?  
Med Care
  31 (8):719-31. 
Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22 Electronic Health Record Functional Model:  Letter Report 
 Hancock, W. M., and P. F. Walter.  1986.  Reduce Hospital Costs With Admissions and Operating Room 
Scheduling Systems.  
Softw Healthc
  4 (1):42-6. 
Health Technology Center and Manatt, Phelps and Phillips, LLP.  2003.  
Spending Our Money Wisely: Improving 
America™s Healthcare System By Investing 
in Healthcare Information Technology.  
New York, NY: Manatt, 
Phelps and Phillips, LLP. 
Heden, B., H. Ohlin, R. Rittner, and L. Edenbrandt.  1997
.  Acute Myocardial Infarction Detected in the 12-Lead 
ECG by Artificial Neural Networks.  
Circulation
  96 (6):1798-802. 
Hoffman, C., D. Rice, and H. Y. Sung.  1996.  Person
s With Chronic Conditions. Their Prevalence and Costs.  
JAMA  276 (18):1473-9. 
Honigman, B., J. Lee, J. Rothschild, P. Light, R. M. Pullin
g, T. Yu, and D. W. Bates.  2001.  Using Computerized 
Data to Identify Adverse Drug Events in Outpatients.  
J Am Med Inform Assoc
  8 (3):254-66. 
Hunt, D. L., R. B. Haynes, S. E. Hanna, and K. Smith.  
1998.  Effects of Computer-Bas
ed Clinical Decision Support 
Systems on Physician Performance and Patient Outcomes: a Systematic Review.  
JAMA
  280  (15):1339-46. 
Institute of Medicine.  1991. 
The Computer-Based Patient Record:  An Essential Technology for Health Care.
 eds. 
R. S. Dick and E. B. Steen. Washington, D.C: National Academy Press. 
ŠŠŠ.  1997. 
The Computer-Based Patient Record:  An Essentia
l Technology for Health Care (Revised Edition).
 eds. R. S. Dick, E. B. Steen, and D. E. De
tmer. Washington, D.C: National Academy Press. 
ŠŠŠ.  2000. 
To Err Is Human: Building a Safer Health System.  
 Linda T. Kohn, Janet M. Corrigan, and Molla S. 
Donaldson, eds. Washington, D.C: National Academy Press. 
ŠŠŠ.  2001. 
Crossing the Quality Chasm:  A New Health System for the 21st Century.
 Washington, D.C.: 
National Academy Press. 
ŠŠŠ.  2002a. 
Fostering Rapid Advances in Health Care: Learning From System Demonstrations.
 J. M. Corrigan, 
A. Greiner, and S. M. Erickson, eds. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press. 
ŠŠŠ.  2002b. 
The Future of the Public's Health in the 21st Century.
 Washington, D.C.: National Academies 
Press. ŠŠŠ.  2002c. 
Leadership by Example: Coordinating Governmen
t Roles in Improving Health Care Quality.
 eds. J. 
M. Corrigan, J. Eden, and B. M. Smith. 
Washingon, D.C.: National Academy Press. 
Johnston, B., L. Wheeler, J. Deuser, and K. H. Sousa. 
 2000.  Outcomes of the Kaiser Permanente Tele-Home 
Health Research Project.  
Arch Fam Med
  9 (1):40-5. 
Johnston, M. E., K. B. Langton, R. B. Haynes, and A. Mathie
u.  1994.  Effects of Comput
er-Based Clinical Decision 
Support Systems on Clinician Performance and Patient
 Outcome. A Critical Appraisal of Research.  
Ann Intern 
Med  120 (2):135-42. 
Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research and Educational Trust. 2002. "2002 Employer Health Benefits 
Survey." Online. Available at 
http://www.kff.org/content/2002/20020905a/ 
[accessed Sept. 13, 2002]. 
Kim, M. I., and K. B. Johnson.  2002.  Personal H
ealth Records: Evaluation of Functionality and Utility.  
J Am Med 
Inform Assoc
  9 (2):171-80. 
Kok, M. R., and M. E. Boon.  1996.  Consequences of Neural Network Technology for Cervical Screening: Increase 
in Diagnostic Consistency and Positive Scores.  
Cancer
  78 (1):112-7. 
Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Electronic Health Record Functional Model:  Letter Report 23 
 Kolodner, R. M. and J. V. Douglas, eds.  1997. 
Computerized Large Integrated Health Networks:  The VA Success.
 New York, NY: Springer-Verlag. 
Krishna, S., E. A. Balas, D. C. Spencer, J. Z. Griffin, 
and S. A. Boren.  1997.  Clinical Trials of Interactive 
Computerized Patient Education: Im
plications for Family Practice.  
J Fam Pract
  45 (1):25-33. 
Kuebler, K. K., and E. Bruera.  2000.  Interactive 
Collaborative Consultation Model in End-of-Life Care.  
J Pain 
Symptom Manage
  20 (3):202-9. 
Kuperman, G. J., and R. F. Gibson.  2003.  Computer Physician Order Entry: Benefits, Costs, and Issues.  
Ann 
Intern Med
  139 (1):31-9 . 
Kuperman, G. J., J. M. Teich, T. K. Gandhi, and D. W. Bates.  2001.  Patient Safety and Computerized Medication 
Ordering at Brigham and Women's Hospital.  
Jt Comm J Qual Improv
  27 (10):509-21. 
Kuperman, G. J., J. M. Teich, M. J. Tanasijevic, N. Ma'L
uf, E. Rittenberg, A. Jha, J. Fiskio, J. Winkelman, and D. 
W. Bates.  1999.  Improving Response to Critical Laboratory Results With Automation: Results of a 
Randomized Controlled Trial.  
J Am Med Inform Assoc
  6 (6):512-22. 
Leatherman, S. and D. McCarthy.  2002. 
Quality of Health Care in the United States: A Chartbook.
 New York, NY: 
The Commonwealth Fund. 
Lee, M. L., and H. R. Warner.  1992.  Performance of a Di
agnostic System (Iliad) As  Tool for Quality Assurance.  
Comput Biomed Res
  25 (4):314-23. 
Lepage, E. F., R. M. Gardner, R. M. Laub, and O. K. Golubjatnikov.  1992.  Improving Blood Transfusion Practice: 
Role of a Computerized Hospital Information System.  
Transfusion (Paris)
  32 (3):253-9. 
Liederman, E. M., and C. S. Morefield.  2003.  Web Messaging: a New Tool for Patient-Physician Communication.  
J Am Med Inform Assoc
  10 (3):260-70. 
Markle Foundation. 2003a . "Connecting for Health - A Pu
blic-Private Collaboration:  The Personal Health Working 
Group, Executive Summary.
" Online. Available at 
http://www.connectingfor
health.org/resources/PHWG_Report
.pdf [accessed Ju
ly 16, 2003a]. ŠŠŠ. 2003b. "Connecting for Health Unites Over 100 Organizations To 
Bring American Hea
lthcare System into 
Information Age." Online. Availabl
e at http://www.markle.org/news/_ne
ws_pressrelease_060503.stm [accessed 
July 10, 2003b]. 
McDonald, C. J.  1976.  Protocol-Based Computer Remi
nders, the Quality of Care and the Non-Perfectability of 
Man.  
N Engl J Med
  295 (24):1351-5. 
McGlynn, E. A., S. M. Asch, J. Adams, 
J. Keesey, J. Hicks, A. DeCristofaro, an
d E. A. Kerr.  2003.  The Quality of 
Health Care Delivered to Adults in the United States.  
N Engl J Med
  348 (26):2635-45. 
McKnight, L., P. D. Stetson, S. Bakken, C. Curran, an
d J. J. Cimino.  2001.  Perceived Information Needs and 
Communication Difficulties of Inpatient Physicians and Nurses.  
Proc AMIA Symp
  :453-7. 
Mekhjian, H. S., R. R. Kumar, L. Kuehn, T. D. Bentley, 
P. Teater, A. Thomas, B. Payn
e, and A. Ahmad.  2002.  
Immediate Benefits Realized Following Implementation 
of Physician Order Entry at an Academic Medical 
Center.  
J Am Med Inform Assoc
  9 (5):529-39. 
Morris, A. H.  2003.  Treatment Algorithms and Protocolized Care.  
Curr Opin Crit Care
  9 (3):236-40. 
Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24 Electronic Health Record Functional Model:  Letter Report 
 National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics. 2001
. "Information for Health: A Strategy for Building the 
National Health Information Infrastructure." Online. Av
ailable at http://ncvhs.hhs.gov/nhiilayo.pdf [accessed 
Apr. 18, 2002]. 
National Health Care Purchasing Institute. 2003. "Profile
s of Organizations Using Quality Incentives." Online. 
Available at http://nhcpi.net/prof
iles.cfm [accessed Ju
ly 10, 2003]. 
National Research Council.  2000. 
Networking Health:  Prescriptions for the Internet.
 Washington, D.C.: National 
Academy Press. 
New England Healthcare EDI Network. 
2002. "NEHEN About Us." Online. 
Available at http://www.nehen.net/ 
[accessed July 10, 2003]. 
Ohno-Machado, L., S. J. Wang, P. Mar, and A. A. Boxwala.
  1999.  Decision Support for Clinical Trial Eligibility 
Determination in Breast Cancer.  
Proc AMIA Symp
  :340-4. 
Ornstein, C. Jan. 22, 2003.  California; Hospital Needs Doct
ors, Suspends Use of Software; Cedars-Sinai Physicians 
Entered Prescriptions and Other Orders In It, But Called It Unsafe. 
Los Angeles Times.
  Sect. B-1 
Overhage, J. M.  2003.  Enhancing Public Health, Health 
Care System, and Clinician Preparedness:  Strategies to 
Promote Coordination and Communication--The Indiana Network for Patient Care [PowerPoint Presentation].  
Overhage, J. M., B. Middleton, R. A. 
Miller, R. D. Zielstorff, and Hersh W.
 R.  2002.  Does National Regulatory 
Mandate of Provider Order Entry Portend Greater Benefit Than Risk for Health Care Delivery?  The 2001 
ACMI Debate.  
J Am Med Inform Assoc
  9 (3):199-208. 
Overhage, J. M., S. Perk
ins, and C. J. McDonald.  In press.  The Im
pact of Direct Physician Time Utilization on a 
University Affiliated, Ambulatory Primary Care Internal Medicine Practice.  
J Am Med Inform Assoc
   Overhage, J. M., J. Suico, and C. J. McDonald.  2001. 
 Electronic Laboratory Reporting: Barriers, Solutions and 
Findings.  
J Public Health Manag Pract
  7 (6):60-6. 
Pacht, E. R., J. W. Turner, M. Gailiun, L. A. Violi, D. Ralston, H. S. Mekhjian, and R. C. St John.  1998.  
Effectiveness of Telemedicine in the Outpatient Pulmonary Clinic.  
Telemed J
  4 (4):287-92. 
Papaconstantinou, C., G. Theocharous, and S. Mahadevan.  1998.  An Expert System for Assigning Patients into 
Clinical Trials Based on Bayesian Networks.  
J Med Syst
  22 (3):189-202. 
Partnership for Solutions, Johns Hopkins University, Prepared for The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.  2002. 
Chronic Conditions: Making the Case for Ongoing Care.
 Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University. 
Patient Safety Institute. 2002. "Patient Safety Institute
:  Presentation to the Fifth National HIPAA Summit--Beyond 
HIPAA:  Clinical Data Standards 
and the Creation of an Interconnect
ed Electronic Health Information 
Infrastructure." Online. Available at
 http://www.ehcca.com/presentations
/HIPAA5/walker.pdf [accessed July 
10, 2003]. 
Pavlin, J. A.  2003.  Investigation of Disease Outb
reaks Detected by "Syndromic" Surveillance Systems.  
J Urban 
Health
  80 (Suppl 1):I107-14. 
Petersen, L. A., T. A. Brennan, A. C. O'Neil, E. F. Cook, 
and T. H. Lee.  1994.  Does Housestaff Discontinuity of 
Care Increase the Risk for 
Preventable Adverse Events?  
Ann Intern Med
  121 (11):866-72. 
Petrick, N., B. Sahiner, H. P. Chan, M. A. Helvie, S.
 Paquerault, and L. M. Hadjiiski.  2002.  Breast Cancer 
Detection: Evaluation of a Mass-Detection Algorithm for Computer-Aided Diagnosis -- Experience in 263 

Patients.  
Radiology
  224 (1):217-24. 
Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Electronic Health Record Functional Model:  Letter Report 25 
 Rogers, M. A., D. Small, D. A. Buchan, C. A. Butch, C. M. Stewart, B. E. Krenzer, and H. L. Husovsky.  2001.  
Home Monitoring Service Improves Mean Arterial Pr
essure in Patients With Essential Hypertension. A 
Randomized, Controlled Trial.  
Ann Intern Med
  134 (11):1024-32. 
Rollman, B. L., B. H. Hanusa, H. J. Lowe, T. Gilbert, W. N. Kapoor, and H. C. Schulberg.  2002.  A Randomized 
Trial Using Computerized Decision Support to Improve 
Treatment of Major Depression in Primary Care.  
J Gen Intern Med
  17 (7):493-503. 
Rosenfeld, B. A., T. Dorman, M. J. Breslow, P. Pronovost, M. Jenckes, N. Zhang, G. Anderson, and H. Rubin.  
2000.  Intensive Care Unit Telemedicine: Alternate Pa
radigm for Providing Continuous Intensivist Care.  
Crit Care Med
  28 (12):3925-31. 
Sanders, D. L., and R. A. Miller.  
2001.  The Effects on Clinician Ordering Patterns of a Computerized Decision 
Support System for Neuroradiology Imaging Studies.  
Proc AMIA Symp
  :583-7. 
Schiff, G. D., D. Klass, J. Peterson, G. Shah, and D.
 W. Bates.  2003.  Linking Laboratory and Pharmacy: 
Opportunities for Reducing Errors and Improving Care.  
Arch Intern Med
  163 (8):893-900. 
Schiff, G. D., and T. D. Rucker.  1998.  Computerized Pr
escribing: Building the Electronic Infrastructure for Better 
Medication Usage.  
JAMA   279 (13):1024-9. 
Schmidt, I. K., and B. L. Svarstad.  2002.  Nurse-Ph
ysician Communication and Quality
 of Drug Use in Swedish 
Nursing Homes.  
Soc Sci Med
  54 (12):1767-77. 
Schuster, D. M., S. E. Hall, C. B. Couse, D. S. Swayng
im, and K. Y. Kohatsu.  2003.  Involving Users in the 
Implementation of an Imaging Order Entry System.  
J Am Med Inform Assoc
   
Shafazand, S., H. Shigemitsu, and A. 
B. Weinacker.  2000.  A Brave New Wo
rld: Remote Intensive Care Unit for 
the 21st Century.  
Crit Care Med
  28 (12):3945-6. 
Shea, S., W. DuMouchel, and L. Bahamonde.  1996.  A Meta-Analysis of 16 Randomized Controlled Trials to 
Evaluate Computer- Based Clinical
 Reminder Systems for Preventive Care in the Ambulatory Setting.  
J Am Med Inform Assoc
  3 (6): 399-409. 
Shea, S., J. Starren, R. S. Weinstock, P. E. Knudson, J. 
Teresi, D. Holmes, W. Palmas, L. Field, R. Goland, C. Tuck, 
G. Hripcsak, L. Capps, and D. Liss.  2002.  Columbia
 University's Informatics 
for Diabetes Education and 
Telemedicine (IDEATel) Project: Rationale and Design.  
J Am Med Inform Assoc
  9 (1):49-62. 
Sittig, D. F., and W. W. Stead.  1994.  Computer-Bas
ed Physician Order Entry: the State of the Art.  
J Am Med 
Inform Assoc
  1 (2):108-23. 
Stair, T. O.  1998.  Reduction of 
Redundant Laboratory Orders by Access 
to Computerized Patient Records.  
J Emerg Med
  16 (6):895-7. 
Starmer, J. M., D. A. Talbert, and 
R. A. Miller.  2000.  Experience Us
ing a Programmable Rules Engine to 
Implement a Complex Medical Protocol During Order Entry.  
Proc AMIA Symp
  :829-32. 
Tang, P. C.  2002.  AMIA Advocates Na
tional Health Information System in Fi
ght Against National Health Threats.  
J Am Med Inform Assoc
  9 (2):123-4. 
Tang, P. C., D. Fafchamps, and E. H. 
Shortliffe.  1994.  Traditional Medical Records As a Source of Clinical Data in 
the Outpatient Setting.  
Proc Annu Symp Comput Appl Med Care
  :575-9. 
Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26 Electronic Health Record Functional Model:  Letter Report 
 Tang, P. C., M. P. LaRosa, and S. M. Gorden.  1999a.  Use of Computer-Based Records, Completeness of 
Documentation, and Appropriateness of
 Documented Clini
cal Decisions.  
J Am Med Inform Assoc
  6 (3):245-
51. 
Tang, P. C., M. P. LaRosa, C. Newcomb, and S. M. Gorden.  1999b.   Measuring the Effects of Reminders for 
Outpatient Influenza Immunizations at the Point of Clinical Opportunity.  
J Am Med Inform Assoc
  6 (2):115-
21. 
Teich, J. M., J. F. Hurley, R. F. Beckley, and M. Aranow
.  1992.  Design of an Easy-to-Use Physician Order Entry 
System With Support for Nursing and Ancillary Departments.  
Proc Annu Symp Comput Appl Med Care
  :99-103. 
Teich, J. M., P. R. Merchia, J. L. Schmiz, G. J. Kuperman, C. D. Spurr, and D. W. Bates.  2000.  Effects of 
Computerized Physician Order En
try on Prescribing Practices.  
Arch Intern Med
  160 (18):2741-7. 
Teich, J. M., M. M. Wagner, C. F. Mackenzie, and K. O.
 Schafer.  2002.  The Inform
atics Response in Disaster, Terrorism, and War.  
J Am Med Inform Assoc
  9 (2):97-104. 
Tierney, W. M., C. J. McDonald, D. K. Martin, and M. 
P. Rogers.  1987.  Computerized Display of Past Test 
Results. Effect on Outpatient Testing.  
Ann Intern Med
  107 (4):569-74. 
Tierney, W. M., M. E. Miller, J. M. Overhage, and C. 
J. McDonald.  1993.  Physician Inpatient Order Writing on 
Microcomputer Workstations. Eff
ects on Resource Utilization.  
JAMA
  269 ( 3):379-83. 
Tsui, F. C., J. U. Espino, V. M. Dato, 
P. H. Gesteland, J. Hutman, and M. M.
 Wagner.  2003.  Technical Description 
of RODS: A Real-Time Public Health Surveillance System.  
J Am Med Inform Assoc
  [Epub ahead of print] 
U.S. Census Bureau. 2002 . "Health Insuran
ce Coverage:  2001." Online. Available at 
http://www.census.gov/prod/
2002pubs/p60-220.pdf [accessed Sept. 30, 2002]. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.  2002. 
The Burden of 
Chronic Diseases and Their Risk Fact
ors: National and State Perspectives.
 Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention. 
Wagner, E. H.  2000.  The Role of Patient Care Teams in Chronic Disease Management.  
BMJ   320 (7234):569-72. 
Wagner, E. H., B. T. Austin, and M. Von Korff.  1996. 
 Organizing Care for Patients With Chronic Illness.  
Milbank 
Q  74 (4):511-44. 
Wagner, M. M., F. C. Tsui, J. U. Espino, V. M. Dato, D. F.
 Sittig, R. A. Caruana, L. F. McGinnis, D. W. Deerfield, 
M. J. Druzdzel, and D. B. Fridsma.
  2001.  The Emerging Science of
 Very Early Detection of Disease 
Outbreaks.  
J Public Health Manag Pract
  7 (6):51-9. 
Wang, S. J., B. H. Blumenfeld, S. E. Roche, J. A. Grei
m, K. E. Burk, T. K. Gandhi, D. W. Bates, and G. J. 
Kuperman.  2002.  End of Visit: Design Consider
ations for an Ambulatory Order Entry Module.  
Proc AMIA 
Symp
  :864-8. 
Wanlass, R. L., S. L. Re
utter, and A. E. Kline. 
 1992.  Communication Among Rehabilitation Staff: "Mild," 
"Moderate," or "Severe" Deficits?  
Arch Phys Med Rehabil
   73 (5):477-81. 
Weingarten, S. R., J. M. Henning, E. Badamgarav, K. Knight, V. Hasselblad, A. Gano Jr, and J. J. Ofman.  2002.  
Interventions Used in Disease Management Programmes
 for Patients With Chronic 
Illness-Which Ones Work? 
Meta-Analysis of Published Reports.  
BMJ  325 (7370):925. 
Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Electronic Health Record Functional Model:  Letter Report 27 
 Whitlock, W. L., A. Brown, K. 
Moore, H. Pavliscsak, A. Dingbaum, D. Lacefie
ld, K. Buker, and S. Xenakis.   2000.  
Telemedicine Improved Diabetic Management.  
Mil Med  165 (8 ):579-84. 
Woods, L.  2001.  What Works: Scheduling. Picture Perfect Solution. The Right Technology and an ASP Solution 
Bring Scheduling Efficiency and Added Revenue to a Community Hospital's Radiology Department.  
Health 
Manag Technol
   22 (8):48-50. 
Worth, E. R., and T. B. Patrick.  1997.  Do Electronic Mail Discussion Lists Act As Virtual Colleagues?  
 Proc 
AMIA Annu Fall Symp
  :325-9. 
Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28 Electronic Health Record Functional Model:  Letter Report 
 Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Electronic Health Record Functional Model:  Letter Report
  29
  Appendix A Committee and Staff COMMITTEE ON DATA STANDARDS FOR PATIENT SAFETY  PAUL C. TANG 
(Chair), Chief Medical Information Offi
cer, Palo Alto Medical Foundation MOLLY JOEL COYE 
(Vice Chair), Chief Executive Officer, H
ealth Technology Center SUZANNE BAKKEN, Alumni Professor of Nursing and Professor of Biomedical 
Informatics, Columbia University 
E. ANDREW BALAS, 
Dean, School of Public Health, Saint Louis University DAVID W. BATES, 
Chief, Division of General Medicine, Brigham and Women™s Hospital 
JOHN R. CLARKE, Professor of Surgery, Drexel University 
DAVID C. CLASSEN, 
Associate Professor of Medicine, Vice
 President, University of Utah, 
First Consulting Group SIMON P. COHN, National Director of Health Information Policy, Kaiser Permanente 
CAROL CRONIN, Consultant JONATHAN S. EINBINDER, 
Assistant Professor, Harvard 
Medical School and Corporate Manager, Partners Health Care Information Systems 
LARRY D. GRANDIA, 
Chief Technology Officer, Executive Vice President, Premier, Inc. 
W. ED HAMMOND, Professor, Division of Medical Informatics, Duke University 
BRENT C. JAMES, 
Executive Director, Intermountain Health Care Institute for Health Care Delivery Research, and Vice President for Medical Research, Intermountain Health Care KEVIN JOHNSON, Associate Professor and Vice Chair, Department of Biomedical 
Informatics and Associate Professor, Depart
ment of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University 
JILL ROSENTHAL, 
Program Manager, National Acad
emy for State Health Policy TJERK W. van der SCHAAF, Associate Professor of Human Factors in Risk Control, Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven Safety Management Group, Department of 
Technology Management 
Special Consultant J. MARC OVERHAGE, Associate Professor of Medicine and Investigator, Regenstrief Institute for Health Care, Indiana 
University School of Medicine  Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 Electronic Health Record Functional Model:  Letter Report 
 Study Staff JANET M. CORRIGAN
, Director, Board on Health Care Services PHILIP ASPDEN, Study Director JULIE WOLCOTT, 
Program Officer 
SHARI ERICKSON, Research Associate REBECCA LOEFFLER, 
Senior Project Assistant ANTHONY BURTON, Administrative Assistant 
 
The committee wishes to thank the co-chair
s of the Health Level Seven (HL7) Special Interest Group (SIG), 
Linda Fischetti (U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs), 
Gary L. 
Dickinson
 (Misys Healthcare), and Sam Herd (Ocean Informatics, Australia),
 for the briefing and background materials they provided to 
the committee at its J
une 2003 meeting.  The 
committee would also like to thank 
Gary Christopherson 
of the U.S. Department of Veterans 
Affairs, William C. Rollow 
of the Centers for Medicare 
and Medicaid Services, and Scott Young of the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality for their helpful contributions to the 
report.  Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Reviewers  31 
  Appendix B Reviewers 
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their diverse 
perspectives and technical expertise, in accord
ance with procedures approved by the NRC's 
Report Review Committee.  The purpose of this i
ndependent review is to provide candid and critical comments that w
ill assist the institution
 in making its
 published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets in
stitutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and 
responsiveness to the study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript remain 
confidential to protect the integrity of the deliber
ative process.  We wish to thank the following 
individuals for their review of this report: 
 
REED M. GARDNER
, Professor, Medical Informa
tics, University of Utah 
BLACKFORD MIDDLETON, Director of Clinical Informatics Research and 
Development, Partners Healthcare Syst
em, Inc., Brigham and Women™s Hospital 
DAVID N. MOHR
, Professor of Medicine, Area Medicine, Mayo Clinic JUDITH J. WARREN, Associate Professor, School of 
Nursing, University of Kansas  
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive comments and 
suggestions, they did not see the final draft of the report before its release.  The review of this 
report was overseen by Don E. Detmer, 
Dennis Gillings Professor of Health Management, The 
Judge Institute of Management Studies, Univer
sity of Cambridge, and Professor Emeritus, 
Professor of Medical Education, University of Virginia, appointed by the National Research Council and Institute of Medicine, he was responsible for making certain that an independent 
examination of this report was carried out in acco
rdance with institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully considered.  Res
ponsibility for the final content of this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.   