DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/10795Innovation in Information Technology84 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-08980-7 | DOI 10.17226/10795Computer Science and Telecommunications Board; Division on Engineering andPhysical Sciences; National Research CouncilInnovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
in INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY
Computer Science and Telecommunications BoardDivision on Engineering and Physical SciencesTHE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSWashington, D.C.
www.nap.eduInnovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS   500 Fifth Street, N.W.   Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE:  The projects that are the basis of this synthesis report were approved by
the Governing Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawnfrom the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of
Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.  The members of the committees re-
sponsible for the final reports of these projects and of the board that produced thissynthesis were chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropri-
ate balance.Support for this project was provided by the core sponsors of the ComputerScience and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), which include the Air Force Of-fice of Scientific Research, Cisco Systems, Defense Advanced Research ProjectsAgency, Department of Energy, Intel Corporation, Microsoft Research, National
Aeronautics and Space Administration, National Institute of Standards and Tech-nology, National Library of Medicine, National Science Foundation, and Office ofNaval Research.  Sponsors enable but do not influence CSTBÕs work.  Any opin-

ions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication arethose of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the organizationsor agencies that provide support for CSTB.International Standard Book Number 0-309-08980-8 (book)International Standard Book Number 0-309-52622-1 (PDF)Copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 500 FifthStreet, N.W., Lockbox 285, Washington, DC 20055, (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313 in the Washington metropolitan area; Internet: http://www.nap.edu.Copyright 2003 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Printed in the United States of AmericaInnovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating soci-
ety of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedi-
cated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the generalwelfare.  Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863,
the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on
scientific and technical matters.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts is president of the NationalAcademy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter
of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstandingengineers.  It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its mem-bers, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advis-
ing the federal government.  The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors
engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages educationand research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers.  Dr. Wm. A.

Wulf is president of the National Academy of Engineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in
the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public.  The
Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciencesby its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon
its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education.Dr.Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of
Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology withthe AcademyÕs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal gov-ernment.  Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the

Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both theNational Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in pro-viding services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering
communities.  The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the
Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts and Dr. Wm. A. Wulf are chair and
vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.www.national-academies.orgInnovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ivCOMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARDDAVID D. CLARK, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, ChairERIC BENHAMOU, 3Com Corporation
DAVID BORTH, Motorola Labs
JAMES CHIDDIX,** AOL Time Warner
JOHN M. CIOFFI, Stanford University
ELAINE COHEN, University of Utah
W. BRUCE CROFT, University of Massachusetts at Amherst
THOMAS E. DARCIE, University of Victoria
JOSEPH FARRELL, University of California at Berkeley
JOAN FEIGENBAUM, Yale University
HECTOR GARCIA-MOLINA, Stanford University
SUSAN L. GRAHAM,* University of California at Berkeley
JUDITH HEMPEL,* University of California at San Francisco
JEFFREY M. JAFFE,** Bell Laboratories, Lucent Technologies
ANNA KARLIN,** University of Washington
WENDY KELLOGG, IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center
BUTLER W. LAMPSON, Microsoft Corporation
EDWARD D. LAZOWSKA,** University of Washington
DAVID LIDDLE, U.S. Venture Partners
TOM M. MITCHELL, Carnegie Mellon University
DONALD NORMAN,** Nielsen Norman Group
DAVID A. PATTERSON, University of California at Berkeley
HENRY (HANK) PERRITT, Chicago-Kent College of Law
DANIEL PIKE, GCI Cable and Entertainment
ERIC SCHMIDT, Google Inc.
FRED SCHNEIDER, Cornell University
BURTON SMITH, Cray Inc.
TERRY SMITH,** University of California at Santa Barbara
LEE SPROULL, New York University
WILLIAM STEAD, Vanderbilt University
JEANNETTE M. WING, Carnegie Mellon UniversityMARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL, DirectorKRISTEN BATCH, Research Associate
JENNIFER BISHOP, Senior Project Assistant
JANET BRISCOE, Administrative Officer
DAVID DRAKE, Senior Project Assistant**Term ended June 30, 2001.**Term ended June 30, 2002.Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vJON EISENBERG, Senior Program OfficerRENEE HAWKINS, Financial Associate
PHIL HILLIARD, Research Associate
MARGARET MARSH HUYNH, Senior Project Assistant
ALAN S. INOUYE, Senior Program Officer
HERBERT S. LIN, Senior Scientist
LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Program Officer
DAVID PADGHAM, Research Associate
CYNTHIA A. PATTERSON, Program Officer
JANICE SABUDA, Senior Project Assistant
BRANDYE WILLIAMS, Staff Assistant
STEVEN WOO, Dissemination OfficerNOTE: For more information on CSTB, see its Web site at <http://www.cstb.org>, write toCSTB, National Research Council, 500 Fifth Street, N.W., Washington, DC 20001, call at(202) 334-2605, or e-mail the CSTB at cstb@nas.edu.Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiPreface
The health of the computer science field and related disciplines hasbeen an enduring concern of the National Research CouncilÕs ComputerScience and Telecommunications Board (CSTB).  From its first reports in

the late 1980s, CSTB has examined the nature, conduct, scope, and direc-
tions of the research that drives innovation in information technology.Ironically, the success of the industries that produce information tech-
nology (IT) has caused confusion about the roles of government and
academia in IT research.  And it does not help that research in computer

scienceÑespecially research relating to softwareÑis hard for many peopleoutside the field to understand.  This synthesis report draws on several

CSTB reports, published over the course of the past decade, to explain the
what and why of IT research.  It was developed by members of the board,

drawing on CSTBÕs body of work and on insights and experience fromtheir own careers.This synthesis is kept brief in order to highlight key points.  It is
paired with a set of excerpts from previous reports, chosen either for their
explanation of relevant history or for their compelling development of
core arguments and principles.David D. Clark, ChairComputer Science and
Telecommunications BoardInnovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ixAcknowledgment of ReviewersThis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen fortheir diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with pro-
cedures approved by the National Research CouncilÕs Report ReviewCommittee.  The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid

and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its pub-lished report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets
institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to
the study charge.  The review comments and draft manuscript remain

confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process.  We wish

to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:Frederick P. Brooks, Jr., University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,Linda Cohen, University of California at Irvine,
Samuel H. Fuller, Analog Devices Inc.,
Juris Hartmanis, Cornell University,
Timothy Lenoir, Stanford University,
David G. Messerschmitt, University of California at Berkeley,
Ivan E. Sutherland, Sun Microsystems Laboratories, and
Joseph F. Traub, Columbia University.Although the reviewers listed above have provided many construc-tive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the con-
clusions or recommendations, nor did they see the final draft of the report
before its release.  The review of this report was overseen by John
Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERSHopcroft, Cornell University.  Appointed by the National Research Coun-
cil, he was responsible for making certain that an independent examina-
tion of this report was carried out in accordance with institutional proce-
dures and that all review comments were carefully considered.
Responsibility for the final content of this report rests entirely with the
authoring board and the institution.Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiContentsSUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS1
1INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY5
Universities, Industry, and Government:  A Complex
Partnership Yielding Innovation and Leadership, 5The Essential Role of the Federal Government, 9
The Distinctive Character of Federally Supported Research, 15
University Research and Industrial R&D, 20
Hallmarks of Federally Sponsored IT Research, 22
Looking Forward, 262EXCERPTS FROM EARLIER CSTB REPORTS30
Making IT Better: Expanding Information TechnologyResearch to Meet SocietyÕs Needs (2000), 31The Many Faces of Information Technology Research, 31
Implications for the Research Enterprise, 33Funding a Revolution:  Government Support for Computing
Research (1999), 37Lessons from History, 37
Sources of U.S. Success, 44
Research and Technological Innovation, 46
The Benefits of Public Support of Research, 47
Maintaining University Research Capabilities, 48Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiCONTENTSCreating Human Resources, 49The Organization of Federal Support:  A Historical Review, 50

1945-1960:  Era of Government Computers, 51

The GovernmentÕs Early Role, 52Establishment of Organizations, 53
Observations, 57
1960-1970:  Supporting Continuing Revolution, 58

Maturing of a Commercial Industry, 58
The Changing Federal Role, 60
1970-1990:  Retrenching and International Competition, 67

Accomplishing Federal Missions, 67Evolving the High Performance Computing and CommunicationsInitiative to Support the NationÕs Information Infrastructure(1995), 68Continued Federal Investment Is Necessary to SustainOur Lead, 68WHAT IS CSTB?71
Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Summary and RecommendationsProgress in information technology (IT) has been remarkable, but thebest truly is yet to come: the power of IT as a human enabler is just begin-
ning to be realized.  Whether the nation builds on this momentum or

plateaus prematurely depends on todayÕs decisions about fundamental
research in computer science (CS) and the related fields behind IT.The Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB) hasoften been asked to examine how innovation occurs in IT, what the most
promising research directions are, and what impacts such innovation

might have on society.  Consistent themes emerge from CSTB studies,

notwithstanding changes in information technology itself, in the IT-pro-
ducing sector, and in the U.S. university system, a key player in IT re-
search.In this synthesis report, based largely on the eight CSTB reports enu-merated below, CSTB highlights these themes and updates some of the
data that support them.  Much of the material is drawn from (1) the 1999

CSTB report Funding a Revolution: Government Support for Computing Re-search,1 written by both professional historians and computer scientists toensure its objectivity, and (2) Making IT Better: Expanding Information Tech-1Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  1999.
Funding a Revolution: Government Support for Computing Research.  National Academy Press,
Washington, D.C.Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYnology Research to Meet SocietyÕs Needs,2 the 2000 CSTB report that focuseson long-term goals for maintaining the vitality of IT research.  Many of

the themes achieved prominence in (3) the 1995 CSTB report Evolving theHigh Performance Computing and Communications Initiative to Support the
NationÕs Information Infrastructure,3 known informally as the Brooks-
Sutherland report.  Other reports contributing to this synthesis include

(4)Computing the Future: A Broader Agenda for Computer Science and Engi-neering (1992),
4  (5) 
Building a Workforce for the Information Economy (2001),5(6) Academic Careers in Experimental Computer Science and Engineering(1994),6 (7) 
Embedded, Everywhere: A Research Agenda for Networked Systemsof Embedded Computers (2001),
7 and (8) 
More Than Screen Deep: TowardEvery-Citizen Interfaces to the NationÕs Information Infrastructure (1997).
8 In
the text that follows, these reports are cited by number as listed, for easy
reference, in Box 1.Here are the most important themes from CSTBÕs studies of innova-tion in IT:¥The results of researchAmericaÕs international leadership in ITÑleadership that is vitalto the nationÑsprings from a deep tradition of research (1,3,4).The unanticipated results of research are often as important asthe anticipated resultsÑfor example, electronic mail and instant messag-ing were by-products of research in the 1960s that was aimed at making it2Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  2000.
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet SocietyÕs Needs.  NationalAcademy Press, Washington, D.C.3Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  1995.
Evolving the High Performance Computing and Communications Initiative to Support the NationÕsInformation Infrastructure.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
4Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  1992.
Computing the Future: A Broader Agenda for Computer Science and Engineering.  National Acad-
emy Press, Washington, D.C.5Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  2001.
Building a Workforce for the Information Economy.  National Academy Press, Washington,
D.C.6Computer Science and Telecommunications Board., National Research Council.  1994.
Academic Careers in Experimental Computer Science and Engineering.  National Academy Press,
Washington, D.C.7Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  2001.
Embedded, Everywhere: A Research Agenda for Networked Systems of Embedded Computers.  Na-
tional Academy Press, Washington, D.C.8Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  1997.
More Than Screen Deep: Toward Every-Citizen Interfaces to the NationÕs Information Infrastruc-ture.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS3BOX 1Reference Numbers for Key CSTB Titles Cited in This ReportReferenceTitle
Number(1)Funding a Revolution: Government Support for ComputingResearch (1999)
(2)Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research toMeet SocietyÕs Needs  (2000)
(3)Evolving the High Performance Computing and CommunicationsInitiative to Support the NationÕs Information Infrastructure (1995)
(4)Computing the Future: A Broader Agenda for Computer Scienceand Engineering (1992)
(5)Building a Workforce for the Information Economy (2001)
(6)Academic Careers in Experimental Computer Science andEngineering (1994)(7)Embedded, Everywhere: A Research Agenda for NetworkedSystems of Embedded Computers (2001)
(8)More Than Screen Deep:  Toward Every-Citizen Interfaces to the
NationÕs Information Infrastructure (1997)
NOTE: Complete citations for these reports appear in footnotes 1 through 8 in this ÒSummaryand RecommendationsÓ section.possible to share expensive computing resources among multiple simul-taneous interactive users (1,3).The interaction of research ideas multiplies their impactÑforexample, concurrent research programs targeted at integrated circuit
design, computer graphics, networking, and workstation-based comput-
ing strongly reinforced and amplified one another (1-4).¥Research as a partnershipThe success of the IT research enterprise reflects a complex part-nership among government, industry, and universities (1-8).The federal government has had and will continue to have anessential role in sponsoring fundamental research in ITÑlargely univer-sity-basedÑbecause it does what industry does not and cannot do (1-8).Industrial and governmental investments in research reflect different
Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYmotivations, resulting in differences in style, focus, and time horizon(1-3,7,8).Companies have little incentive to invest significantly in activi-ties whose benefits will spread quickly to their rivals (1,3,7).  Fundamen-

tal research often falls into this category.  By contrast, the vast majority of

corporate research and development (R&D) addresses product and
process development (1,2,4).Government funding for research has leveraged the effectivedecision making of visionary program managers and program office
directors from the research community, empowering them to take risks in
designing programs and selecting grantees (1,3).  Government sponsor-

ship of research especially in universities also helps to develop the IT
talent used by industry, universities, and other parts of the economy (1-5).¥The economic payoff of researchPast returns on federal investments in IT research have beenextraordinary for both U.S. society and the U.S. economy (1,3).  The trans-

formative effects of IT grow as innovations build on one another and as
user know-how compounds.  Priming that pump for tomorrow is today
Õschallenge.When companies create products using the ideas and workforcethat result from federally sponsored research, they repay the nation in
jobs, tax revenues, productivity increases, and world leadership (1,3,5).The themes highlighted above underlie two recurring and overarchingrecommendations evident in the eight CSTB reports cited:Recommendation 1The federal government should continue toboost funding levels for fundamental information technology research,
commensurate with the growing scope of research challenges (2-4,6-8).  It

should ensure that the major funding agencies, especially the National
Science Foundation and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency,
have strong and sustained programs for computing and communications
research that are broad in scope and independent of any special initiatives
that might divert resources from broadly based basic research (2,3).Recommendation 2The government should continue to maintainthe special qualities of federal IT research support, ensuring that it comple-
ments industrial research and development in emphasis, duration, and
scale (1-4,6).This report addresses the ways that past successes can guide federalfunding policy to sustain the IT revolution and its contributions to other
fields.Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.51Innovation in Information Technology
UNIVERSITIES, INDUSTRY, AND GOVERNMENT:  A COMPLEX
PARTNERSHIP YIELDING INNOVATION AND LEADERSHIPFigure 1 illustrates some of the many cases in which fundamentalresearch in IT, conducted in industry and universities, led 10 to 15 years
later to the introduction of entirely new product categories that became
billion-dollar industries.  It also illustrates the complex interplay between

industry, universities, and government.  The flow of ideas and people
Ñthe interaction between university research, industry research, and prod-
uct developmentÑis amply evident.Figure 1 updates Figure 4.1 from the 2002 CSTB report InformationTechnology Research, Innovation, and E-Government.1  The originally pub-
lished figure2produced an extraordinary response:  it was used in presen-
tations to Congress and to administration decision makers, and it was1Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  2002.
Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-Government.  National Academy Press,
Washington, D.C.2Known informally as the Òtire-tracks chartÓ  because of its appearance, the figure was
first published in Evolving the High Performance Computing and Communications Initiative toSupport the NationÕs Information Infrastructure (3; p. 2).
Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYLANsRings, HubnetEthernet, Datakit, AutonetLANs, switched EthernetGraphical user interfaces 
Workstations
GraphicsSketchpad, UtahGM/IBM, Xerox, MicrosoftE&S, SGI, ATI, Adobe
Lisp machine, StanfordXerox Alto
Xerox Star, Apollo, Sun
Engelbart / Rochester
Alto, SmalltalkStar, Mac, Microsoft
Timesharing
CTSS, Multics / BSDUnixSDS 940, 360/67, VMSInternetARPANET, Aloha, Internet
PupDECnet, TCP/IPRISC  processors
Berkeley, Stanford

IBM 801SUN, SGI, IBM, HPVLSI designBerkeley, Caltech, MOSIS
many19651970197519801985199019952005
19651970197519801985199019952005
Client/server computingBerkeley, CMU, CERN
PARC, DEC, IBM
Novell, EMC, Sun, OracleEntertainmentSpacewar (MIT), Trek (Rochester)
Atari, Nintendo, SGI, PixarThe topics are ordered roughly by increasing date of $1 B industry.UniversityIndustry R&DProducts$1 B market
to World Wide Web
FIGURE 1  Examples of government-sponsored IT research and development inthe creation of commercial products and industries.  Federally sponsored research

lies at the heart of many of todayÕs multibillion-dollar information technologyindustriesÑindustries that are transforming our lives and driving our economy.Ideas and people flow in complex patterns.  The interaction of research ideas
Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY7RAID /disk servers
Relational databasesBerkeley, Wisconsin
IBMOracle, IBM, SybaseBerkeleyStriping/Datamesh, Petalmany19651970197519801985199019952005
World Wide Web
Alta VistaNetscape, Yahoo, Google
19651970197519801985199019952005
Speech recognitionCMU, SRI, MITBell, IBM, DragonDragon, IBMBroadband l in last mileBellcore (Telcordia)
Amati, Alcatel, BroadcomStanford, UCLAPortable communication
Linkabit, HughesQualcommBerkeley, Purdue (CDMA)
Parallel databases
Tokyo, Wisconsin, UCLA
IBM, ICLICL, Teradata, Tandem
Parallel computing
Illiac 4, CMU, Caltech, HPCIBM, IntelCM-5, Teradata, Cray T3D
Data miningWisconsin, StanfordIBM, ArborIRI, Arbor, Plato
CERN, Illinois (Mosaic)The topics are ordered roughly by increasing date of $1 B industry.
UniversityIndustry R&DProducts$1 B market
from Internet
multiplies their effect.  The result is that the United States is the world leader in
this critical arena.  Although the figure reflects input from many individuals at
multiple points in time, ensuring readability required making judgments about
the examples to present, which should be seen as illustrative rather than exhaus-tive.  SOURCE: 2002 update by the Computer Science and Telecommunications
Board of a figure (Figure ES.1) originally published in Computer Science and
Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, 1995, Evolving the HighPerformance Computing and Communications Initiative to Support the NationÕs Infor-mation Infrastructure, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYdiscussed broadly in the research community.  Although IT commercial
success leads some policy makers to assume that industry is self-suffi-
cient, the tire-tracks chart underscores how much industry builds on gov-
ernment-funded university research, sometimes through long incubation
periods (1,3).Figure 1 also illustratesÑalthough sketchilyÑthe interdependenciesof research advances in various subfields.  There is a complex research

ecology at work, in which concurrent advances in multiple subfieldsÑinparticular within computer science but extending into other fields, too,
from electrical engineering to psychologyÑare mutually reinforcing: theystimulate and enable one another.3One of the most important messages of Figure 1 is the long, unpre-dictable incubation periodÑrequiring steady work and fundingÑbe-tween initial exploration and commercial deployment (1,3).  Starting a

project that requires considerable time often seems risky, but the payoff
from successes justifies backing researchers who have vision.  It is often

not clear which aspect of an early-stage research project will be the most
important; fundamental research produces a range of ideas, and later
developers select from among them as needs emerge.  Sometimes the

utility of ideas is evident well after they have been generated.  For ex-

ample, some early work in artificial intelligence has achieved unantici-
pated applicability in computer games, some of which are now being
investigated for decision support and other professional uses as well as
recreation.It is important to remember that real-world requirements can changequickly.  Although the end of the Cold War was interpreted by some as

lessening the need for research,4 September 11, 2001, underscored re-
search needs in several areas:  system security and robustness, automatic
natural language translation, data integration, image processing, and
biosensors, among othersÑareas in which technical problems are diffi-cult to begin with, and may become harder when technology must be
designed to both meet homeland security needs and protect civil liber-3The idea that research in IT not only builds in part on research in physics, mathematics,electrical engineering, psychology, and other fields but also strongly influences them isconsistent with what Donald Stokes has characterized in his four-part taxonomy asÒPasteurÕs QuadrantÓ research:  use- or application-inspired basic research that pursues
fundamental understanding (such as Louis PasteurÕs research on the biological bases offermentation and disease).  See the discussion on pp. 26-29 in the 2000 CSTB report 
MakingIT Better (2), and see Donald E. Stokes, 1997, PasteurÕs Quadrant:  Basic Science and Tech-
nological Innovation, Brookings Institution Press, Washington, D.C.4Linda R. Cohen and Roger G. Noll.  1994.  
ÒPrivatizing Public Research,Ó ScientificAmerican  271(3): 72-77.
Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY9ties.5  Without fundamental research, the cupboard is bare when there is
a sudden need for ideas to reduce to practice.THE ESSENTIAL ROLE OF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENTFederally sponsored research played a critical role in creating theenabling technologies for each of the billion-dollar market segments illus-
trated in Figure 1Ñand for many others as well.  The government role
coevolved with IT industries:  its organization and emphases changed to

focus on capabilities not ready for commercialization and on new needs
that emerged as commercial capabilities grew, both moving targets (1).
As this coevolution shows, successful technology development relies on
flexibility in the conduct of research and in the structure of industry.Most often, this federal investment took the form of grants or con-tracts awarded to university researchers by the Defense Advanced Re-
search Projects Agency (DARPA) and/or the National Science Founda-
tion (NSF)Ñalthough a shifting mix of other funding agencies has beeninvolved, reflecting changes in the missions of these agencies and their
needs for IT (1,3).  For example, the Department of Energy (DOE), the

National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), and the mili-
tary services have supported high-performance computing, networking,
human-computer interaction, and other kinds of research.6Why has federal support been so effective in stimulating innovationin computing?  As discussed below, many factors have been important.
1.Federally funded programs have supported long-term research into fun-damental aspects of computing, whose widespread practical benefits typically
take years to realize (1).ÒLong-termÓ research refers to a long time horizon for the research
effort and for its impact to be realized.  Examples of innovations that

required long-term research include speech recognition, packet radio,
computer graphics, and internetworking.  In every case illustrated in Fig-

ure 1, the time from first concept to successful market is measured in5See Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  2003.
Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future Possibilities.  Na-
tional Academies Press, Washington, D.C.6In addition to research funding, complementary activities have been undertaken byother agencies, such as the National Institute of Standards and Technology, which oftenbrings together people from universities and industry on issues relating to standards set-ting and measurement.Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYdecades (see Box 2)Ña contrast to the more incremental innovations thatare publicized as evidence of the rapid pace of IT innovation. Work on speech recognition, for example, which began in earnest in
the early 1970s, took until 1997 to generate a successful product for en-
abling personal computers to recognize continuous speech (8).  Work on

packet radio also dates from the 1970s, and its realization in commercial
ad hoc mobile networking also began in the late 1990s.7  Fundamental
algorithms for shading three-dimensional graphics images, which were
developed with federal funding in the 1960s, saw limited use on high-
performance machines until they entered consumer products in the 1990s;
today these algorithms are used in a range of products in the health care,
entertainment, and defense industries.  The research programs behind

these innovations not only were long-term but also were broad enough to
accommodate within a single program the development of those unan-
ticipated results that have in many cases provided the most significant
outcomes of a project.The benefits of a long time horizon, combined with program breadth,extend to todayÕs challenges.  This point was emphasized in CSTB
Õs 1997report on usability, More Than Screen Deep (8), which explained (at p. 192):
Federal initiatives that emphasize long-term goals beyond the horizonof most commercial efforts and that may thus entail added risk have thepotential to move the whole information technology enterprise into newmodes of thinking and to stimulate discovery of new technologies for
the coming century.Because of unanticipated results and synergies, the exact course offundamental research cannot be planned in advance, and its progress
cannot be measured precisely in the short term.  Even projects that appear

to have failed or whose results do not seem to have immediate utility
often make significant contributions to later technology development or
achieve other objectives not originally envisioned.  A striking example is

the field of number theory (1): for hundreds of years a branch of pure
mathematics without applications, it is now the basis for the public-key
cryptography that underlies the security of electronic commerce.7Similarly, commercial developments in broadband cellular radio (which has becomeessentially wireless Internet access in third-generation wireless) are built in part on many
decades of federally supported research into Code Division Multiple Access technology,signal processing for antenna arrays, error-correction coding, and so on.Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY11BOX 2The Role of Federal Support for Fundamental Research in ITCSTBÕs 1995 report Evolving the High Performance Computing and Communi-cations Initiative to Support the NationÕs Information Infrastructure (3) examined
the payoff from several decades of federal investment in IT research. Among the
conclusions of that report are these:¥Research has kept paying off over a long period.¥The payoff from research takes time.  As Figure [1] shows, at least 10 years,
more often 15, elapse between initial research on a major new idea and commer-cial success.  This is still true in spite of today
Õs shorter product cycles.¥Unexpected results are often the most important.  Electronic mail and the
ÒwindowsÓ interface are only two examples. . . .
¥Research stimulates communication and interaction.  Ideas flow back and
forth between research programs and development efforts and between academiaand industry [and between research programs with different foci that are proceed-ing concurrently].¥Research trains people, who start companies or form a pool of trained per-sonnel that existing companies can draw on to enter new markets quickly.¥Doing research involves taking risks. 
 Not all public research programs have
succeeded or led to clear outcomes even after many years.  But the record of
accomplishments suggests that government investment in computing and commu-nications research has been highly productive.11Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  1995.
Evolving the High Performance Computing and Communications Initiative to Support the Na-tionÕs Information Infrastructure.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., pp. 3-4.
2.The interplay of government-funded and industry research has been animportant factor in IT commercialization (1-8).The examples in Figure 1 show the interplay between government-funded research and industry research and development.  In some cases,

such as reduced-instruction-set computing (RISC) processors, the initial
ideas came from industry, but the research that was essential to advanc-
ing these ideas came from government funding to universities.  RISC was

conceived at IBM, but it was not commercialized until DARPA funded
additional research at the University of California at Berkeley and at
Stanford University as part of its Very Large Scale Integrated Circuit
(VLSI) program of the late 1970s and early 1980s (1,3).  The VLSI program

also supported university research that gave rise to such companies as
Synopsys, Cadence, and Mentor, which have acquired dozens of smallerInnovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYcompanies that started as spinoffs of DARPA-funded8 university re-
search; such research has also pushed the proverbial envelope in algo-
rithms and user interfaces.  The more than $3 billion electronic design

automation industry is an essential enabler to other parts of IT.Similarly, IBM pioneered the concept of relational databases (its Sys-tem R project) but did not commercialize the technology.  NSF-sponsored

research at the University of California at Berkeley brought this technol-
ogy to the point at which it was commercialized by several start-up com-
panies and then by more established database companies (including IBM)
(1,3).  In other cases, such as timesharing, the initial ideas came from the

university community, and subsequent industry research, while signifi-
cant for a time, was not sustained.  In none of the examples in Figure 1 did

industry alone provide the necessary research.3.There is a complex interleaving of fundamental research and focused de-velopment (1-3).In the case of integrated circuit (VLSI) design tools, research innova-tion led to products and then to major industrial markets.  A still-unfold-
ing example is the theoretical research that yielded the algorithms behind
the Web-content management technology underlying Akamai.  In the

case of relational databases, the introduction of products stimulated new
fundamental research questions, leading to a new generation of products
with capabilities vastly greater than those of their predecessors.  The

purpose of publicly funded research is to advance knowledge and to
solve hard problems.  The exploitation of that knowledge and those solu-

tions in products is fundamentally important, but the form it takes is
often unpredictable, as is the impact on future research (see Box 3).4.Federal support for research has tended to complement, rather than pre-empt, industry investments in research.The IT sector invests an enormous amount each year in R&D.  It is
critical to understand, however, that the vast majority of corporate R&D
has always been focused on product and process development (2).  This is

what shareholders (or other investors) demand.  It is harder for corpora-

tions to justify funding long-term, fundamental research.  Economists
8In some cases, the Semiconductor Research Corporation provided the funding.  For
additional information, see the Web site <http://www.src.org/member/about/history.asp>.  Accessed June 2, 2003.
Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY13BOX 3The Technological Underpinnings of Electronic CommerceElectronic commerce is becoming pervasive.  It is changing many aspects of
our lives, from the way we shop to the way we obtain government services.The organizations and individuals that exploit electronic commerce employcommercial tools from companies such as Microsoft and Oracle.  They may not
think of themselves as the beneficiaries of federal investments in university-basedIT researchÑbut they are.  Nearly every key technological component underlying
electronic commerce has been shaped by this investment.  For example:
¥The InternetÑDefense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) in-vestments in the 1960s and 1970s were followed by National Science Foundation(NSF) investments in the 1980s and early 1990s, with research (supported bymultiple agencies) continuing to this day (1).¥Web browsersÑMosaic, the first browser with a graphical user interface,was invented at the NSF-supported National Center for Supercomputer Applica-tions at the University of Illinois (1).¥Public-key cryptography for secure credit card transactionsÑNSF spon-sored university-based research in the 1970s that supported this innovation (1).¥Back-end database and transaction processing systemsÑNSF and DARPAsupported key research on relational databases and transaction processing sys-tems at the University of California at Berkeley, University of Wisconsin, and else-where, beginning in the early 1980s and continuing to this day (1).¥Search enginesÑSearch engines grew out of federally supported universityresearch programs, such as the ranking algorithm work at Stanford University thatcontributed to Google; the WebCrawler and MetaCrawler grew out of work at the
University of Washington.But the development is not complete: a range of technical challenges still exist,along with challenges for improving the fit between the technologies and the be-havior and needs of the people who use them (2,8).SOURCES: Pieces of this history are recounted in the previously cited CSTB reports (1-8)and in CSTBÕs series of reports on the Internet: Toward a National Research Network (1988),Realizing the Information Future: The Internet and Beyond (1990),  The Unpredictable Certain-ty: Information Infrastructure Through 2000 (1996), The InternetÕs Coming of Age (2001), andBroadband: Bringing Home the Bits (2002), all published by the National Academy Press,
Washington, D.C.have articulated the concept of ÒappropriabilityÓ to express the extent to
which the results of an investment can be captured by the investor, as
opposed to being available to all players in the market.  The results of

long-term, fundamental research are hard to appropriate for several rea-
sons: they tend to be published openly and thus to become generally
known; they tend to have broad value; the most important may be unpre-Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYdictable in advance; and they become known well ahead of the moment ofrealization as a product, so that many parties have the opportunity to
incorporate the results into their thinking.  In contrast, incremental re-

search and product development can be performed in a way that is more
appropriable: it can be done under wraps, and it can be moved into the
marketplace more quickly and predictably.Although individual industrial players may find it hard to justifyresearch that is weakly appropriable, it is the proper role of the federal
government to support this sort of endeavor (1,3).  When companies cre-

ate successful new products using the ideas and workforce that result
from federally sponsored research, they repay the nation handsomely in
jobs, tax revenues, productivity increases, and world leadership (1,3).
Long-term research often has great benefits for the IT sector as a whole,
although no particular company can be sure of reaping most of these
benefits.Appropriability helps to explain why the companies that have tendedto provide the greatest support for fundamental research are large com-
panies that enjoy dominant positions in their market (1).  AT&T and IBM,

for example, have historically made significant investments in fundamen-
tal research.  Anything that advances IT as a whole benefits the dominant

playersÑthey may be capable of reaping a significant proportion of thereturns on their research investments.  As IT industries became more

competitive, however, even these firms began to link their research more
closely with corporate objectives and product development activities.9One of them (AT&T) has radically cut back its research effort. This process
began with a government proceeding that resulted in the splitting up of
functions formerly aggregated under ÒMa BellÓ and continued with the
growth and contraction of a set of industry research and development
endeavors (AT&T Research, Lucent Technologies, Agere Systems, and
Bellcore [now Telcordia]) where once there was the monolithic Bell
Laboratories.10Several of the companies that have recently emerged as dominant intheir sectors, such as Intel and Microsoft, have increased their support for
fundamental research.  However, many other successful companies with

large market shares (e.g., Cisco, Dell, Oracle) have chosen not to invest in
fundamental research to any significant extent.  And even at Microsoft,

just as at AT&T and IBM before it, the investment in fundamental research9Elizabeth Corcoran, 1994, ÒThe Changing Role of U.S. Corporate Research Labs,Ó Re-search-Technology Management  37(4):14-20;  Peter Coy, 1993, ÒR&D Scoreboard:  In the Labs,the Fight to Spend Less, Get More,Ó Business Week, June 28, pp. 102-124.10CSTB launched a study of the future of telecommunications R&D in 2003.Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY15represents a relatively small proportion of overall corporate R&D.  In
2002, Microsoft invested roughly $5 billion in R&D, but the companyÕsfundamental research arm is small enough to suggest that 95 percent of
MicrosoftÕs R&D investment is product-related.Start-ups represent the other end of the spectrum.  A hallmark of U.S.
entrepreneurship, start-ups and start-up financing promote flexibility in
industry structure and industry management.  They have facilitated the

development of high-risk products as well as an iconoclastic, risk-taking
attitude among more traditional companies and managers in the IT busi-
ness.  But they do not engage in research (2).  Thus, the wave of Internet-
related and other IT start-ups of the 1990s is notable for two reasons: first,
these start-ups attracted some researchers away from universities and
research, and second, notwithstanding the popular labeling of those start-
ups as Òhigh-tech,Ó they applied the fruits of past research rather than
generating more.  Start-ups illustrate the critical role of government fund-

ing in building the foundations for innovative commercial investments.THE DISTINCTIVE CHARACTER OFFEDERALLY SUPPORTED RESEARCHThe most important characteristic of successful government researchactivities is their breadth of scopeÑboth in their long time dimension andin their focus on activities that are potentially difficult to appropriate
privately in their entirety.  Two specific topic areas that illustrate these

principles are large-scale IT systems and social applications of IT.  Grow-
ing capabilities and broadening use of IT in the 1990s motivated CSTB
recommendations for greatly increased federal support in these two cat-
egories (2) (see Boxes 4 and 5).Prospects for progress in social applicationsÑhowever difficultÑareone reason for confidence that IT will improve as a human enabler.  The

beginnings evident in all of these areas are but crude indicators of what
research may make possible.An example of particular currency is that of cybersecurity.  Stimu-
lated by the events of September 11,  CSTB issued the report 
CybersecurityToday and Tomorrow: Pay Now or Pay Later, in early 2002. The report sum-marized the findings of seven CSTB reports issued over the preceding
decade that had cybersecurity as a principal theme. Cybersecurity Todayand Tomorrow concludes with the following paragraph:
Research and development on information systems security should beconstrued broadly to include R&D on defensive technology (includingboth underlying technologies and architectural issues), organizationaland sociological dimensions of such security, forensic and recovery tools,
and best policies and practices. Given the failure of the market to ad-Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYBOX 4Defining Large-Scale Systems and Social Applicationsof Information TechnologyLarge-scale systems are IT systems that contain many (thousands, millions,
billions, or trillions or more) interacting hardware and software components. Theytend to be heterogeneousÑin that they are composed of many different types ofcomponentsÑand highly complex because the interactions among the compo-nents are numerous, varied, and complicated. They also tend to span multipleorganizations (or elements of organizations) and have changing configurations.Over time, the largest IT systems have become ever larger and more complex,
and at any given point in time, systems of a certain scale and complexity are notfeasible or economical to design with existing methodologies.Social applications of IT serve groups of people in shared activities. The moststraightforward of these applications improve the effectiveness of geographicallydispersed groups of people who are collaborating on some task in a shared con-text. More sophisticated applications may support the operations of a business or
the functioning of an entire economy; systems for e-commerce are an example.Characteristic of social applications of IT is the embedding of IT into a large orga-nizational or social system to form a ÒsociotechnicalÓ system in which people and
technology interact to achieve a common purposeÑeven if that purpose is notobviously social, such as efficient operation of a manufacturing line (which is aconjunction of technological automation and human workers) or rapid and decisive
battlefield management (which is a conjunction of command-and-control technolo-gy and the judgment and expertise of commanders). Social applications of ITÑespecially those supporting organizational and societal missionsÑtend to be large-scale and complex, mixing technical and nontechnical design and operationalelements and involving often-difficult social and policy issues such as those relat-ed to privacy and access.SOURCE: Reprinted from Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, NationalResearch Council.  2000.  
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research toMeet SocietyÕs Needs.   National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., p. 3.
dress security challenges adequately, government support for such re-search is especially important.11CSTBÕs 2001 study on networked systems of embedded computers(7) sounds a similar theme (at p. 9):[T]he committee (composed of people from both academia and indus-try) believes that while some of the questions raised in this report may11Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  2002.
Cybersecurity Today and Tomorrow: Pay Now or Pay Later.  National Academy Press, Washing-
ton, D.C., pp. 14-15.Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY17BOX 5Research on the Social Applications ofInformation TechnologyResearch on the social applications of information technology (IT) combineswork in technical disciplines, such as computing and communications, with re-
search in the social sciences to understand how people, organizations, and ITsystems can be combined to most effectively perform a set of tasks. Such re-search can address a range of issues related to IT systems, as demonstrated by
the examples below . . .  :
¥Novel activities and shifts in organizational, economic, and social struc-turesÑWhat will people do (at work, in school, at play, in government, and so on)when computers can see and hear better than people can? How will activities andorganizations change when robotic technology is widespread and cheap? How will
individual and organizational activities change when surveillance via IT becomeseffectively universal? New technologies will affect all kinds of people in many ways,and they hold particular promise for those with special situations or capabilities,
because they will give them broader access to social and economic activities.¥Electronic communitiesÑHow can IT systems be best designed to facilitatethe communication and coordination of groups of people working toward a com-
mon goal? Progress requires an understanding of the sociology and dynamics ofgroups of users, as well as of the tasks they wish to perform. Psychologists andsociologists could offer insight for the conceptualization and refinement of these
social applications, and technologists could mold their technological aspects.¥Electronic commerceÑHow can buyers and sellers be best brought togeth-er to conduct business transactions on the Internet? What kinds of security tech-
nologies will provide adequate assurances of the identities of both parties andprotect the confidentiality of their transactions without imposing unnecessary bur-dens on either? How will electronic commerce affect the competitive advantage of
firms, their business strategies, and the structure of industries (e.g., their horizon-tal and vertical linkages)? Such work requires the insight of economists, organiza-tional theorists, business strategists, and psychologists who understand consumer
behavior, as well as of technologists.¥Critical infrastructuresÑHow can IT be better embedded into the nationÕstransportation, energy, financial, telecommunications, and other infrastructures to
make them more efficient and effective without making them less reliable or moreprone to human error? For example, how can an air traffic control system be de-signed to provide controllers with sufficient information to make critical decisions
without overwhelming them with data? Such work requires the insight of cognitivepsychologists and experts in air traffic control, as well as of technologists.¥ComplexityÑHow can the benefits of IT be brought to the citizenry withoutthe exploding complexity characteristic of professional uses of IT? Although net-works, computers, and software can be assembled and configured by profession-als to support the mission-critical computing needs of large organizations, the tech-
niques that make this possible are inadequate for information appliances designedfor the home, car, or individual. Research is needed to simplify and automatecontinuesInnovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYbe answered without a concerted, publicly funded research agenda, leav-ing this work solely to the private sector raises a number of troublingpossibilities.  Of great concern is that individual commercial incentives

will fail to bring about work on problems that have a larger scope andthat are subject to externalities: interoperability, safety, upgradability,and so on.  Moreover, a lack of government funding will slow down the
sharing of the research, since the commercial concerns doing the re-search tend to keep the research private to retain their competitive ad-vantage.  The creation of an open research community within which

results and progress are shared is vital to making significant progress inthis arena.Another example of the distinctive role that federal funding can playin computing research comes from two recent CSTB studies of the Internet.
The 2001 report The InternetÕs Coming of Age examined the role of the
government in funding research that leads to open standards, exempli-
fied by the work that defined the Internet.  One of the Internet
Õs hallmarkshas been its openness.  Proprietary research can enhance a particular

product, but research leading to open standards can create a new market-
place for products.  Each company that is an Internet 
ÒplayerÓ will be
tempted to diverge from the common standard if it looks possible to
capture a large portion of itÑwe have seen this during the past decade inprotocols for transport, electronic mail, instant messaging, and many other
areas (see Box 6).  However, a common, open standard maximizes overall

social welfare as a result of the network externalities obtained from the
larger market.  When effective open standards are made available, they

can be attractive in the marketplace and may win out over proprietary
ones.  The report notes:
The governmentÕs role in supporting open standards for the Internet hasnot been, and should not be, to directly set or influence standards.  Rath-
er, its role should be to provide funding for the networking research
community, which has led to both innovative networking ideas as wellsystem configuration, change, and repair. Such research will require insight fromtechnologists, cognitive psychologists, and those skilled in user interface design.SOURCE: Reprinted from Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, NationalResearch Council.  2000.  
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research toMeet SocietyÕs Needs.   National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., p. 7.
BOX 5ContinuedInnovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY19as specific technologies that can be translated into new open stan-dards.12A 2002 report, Broadband: Bringing Home the Bits, outlines an even
broader role for federally funded research to enable openness in
infrastructural systems:Support research and development on access technologies, especiallytargeting the needs of nonincumbent players and other areas that arenot targets of stable, private sector funding. . . .  [One target area is]

technologies that foster the accommodation of multiple competitive ser-vice providers over facilities.  Such open access-ready systems might not
be a natural research and development target of large incumbent pro-
viders but will be the preferred form for a variety of public sector orpublic-private deployments.13Broadband: Bringing Home the Bits notes that federally funded research
can complement the more proprietary-oriented industry approaches to
innovation, whether in communications architecture or content.  It also
BOX 6The Origins of Electronic Mail and Instant MessagingThe invention of timesharing systems in the 1960s not only contributed impor-tant technical developments in hardware, software, and system security but alsoprovided the environment that led to the development of the most useful and wide-spread of popular applications, namely, e-mail and instant messaging (1).Timesharing allowed concurrent multiple users to share the power of a comput-er, which provided a fresh way for colleagues to interact.  By 1970, programmers
in federally funded research laboratories had developed both asynchronous elec-
tronic mail and facilities for real-time interaction between users, in research oper-ating systems such as Tenex, Multics, and CalTSS.These modalitiesÑnow widely known as e-mail and instant messagingÑproved so powerful that they have spread far and wide with the availability of low-cost personal computers, public networking, and client-server computing.  These
popular and visible tools, as well as all of the other forms of collaborative comput-
ing, have truly transformed our work and our lives.  They owe their origins to the
funding of IT research by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency andthe National Science Foundation (1,3).12Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  2001.
The InternetÕs Coming of Age.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., p. 18.
13Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  2002.
Broadband: Bringing Home the Bits.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., p. 40.
Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYcalls for the support of research on economic, social, and regulatory fac-tors relating to broadband technologiesÑnontechnical factors that inter-act with the design and deployment of broadband.UNIVERSITY RESEARCH AND INDUSTRIAL R&DMuch of the government-funded research in IT has been carried outat universities.14  Federal support has constituted roughly 70 percent of
total university research funding in computer science and electrical engi-
neering since 1976 (2).  Among the many benefits of federally funded

university research, the generation of new knowledge is only one (see
Box7).
Strong research institutions are recognized as being among the mostcritical success factors in high-tech economic development (5).  In com-

puting, electronics, telecommunications, and biotechnology, evidence of
the correlation aboundsÑin Boston (Harvard University and the Massa-chusetts Institute of Technology); Research Triangle Park (Duke Univer-
sity, the University of North Carolina, and North Carolina State Univer-
sity); New Jersey (Princeton University, Rutgers University, and New
York City-based Columbia University); Austin (the University of Texas);
southern California (the University of California at San Diego, the Uni-
versity of California at Los Angeles, the California Institute of Technol-
ogy, and the University of Southern California); northern California (the
University of California at Berkeley, the University of California at San
Francisco, and Stanford University); and Seattle (the University of Wash-
ington). In addition to creating ideas and companies, universities often im-
port forefront technologies to their regions (e.g., the nationwide expan-
sion of ARPANET in the 1970s and of NSFnet in the 1980s, and the con-
tinuation of those efforts through the private Internet2 activities in the
1990s and early 2000s).  Universities also serve as powerful magnets for

companies seeking to relocate.  These contributions are not reflected in

Figure 1.Figure 1 also does not capture the most important product of univer-sities: people.  The American research university is unique in the degree

to which it integrates research with educationÑboth undergraduate andgraduate education.  Not only do graduating students serve to staff in-

dustry (5,6), but they also are by far the most effective vehicle for technol-14The concentration of research in universities is particularly true for computer scienceresearch; industry played an important role in telecommunications research before thebreakup of AT&T and the original Bell Labs.Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY21BOX 7The Diverse Benefits of University ResearchUniversities have a number of important characteristics that contribute to theirsuccess as engines of innovation.  Among them are the following:
¥Universities can focus on long-term research.  Focusing on long-term re-search is the special role of universitiesÑone that IT companies cannot be expect-ed to fill to any significant extent (1-3).  America
Õs IT companies are extraordinarilyadept at improving current products, but the track record is at best mixed on theinvention and adoption of Òdisruptive technologies,Ó and corporate research in IT
has been becoming more applied (2).¥Universities provide a neutral ground for collaboration.  Universities encour-
age movement and collaboration among faculty through leave and sabbatical pol-
icies that allow professors to visit industry, government, and other university de-partments or laboratories.  These uniquely valuable components of the R&D
structure in the United States are not generally present in industry.  Universities

also provide sites at which researchers from competing companies can come to-gether to explore technical issues.  At the same time that industry people share
their wisdom and experience with university researchers, they have the opportuni-
ty to learn from one another (2,6).¥Universities integrate research and education.  Universities provide a forum
for educating the skilled IT workers of the future (5).  The presence of research

activities in an educational setting creates very powerful synergy (2,4).  IT is a
rapidly changing field.  Many of the specific facts and techniques that a student
learns become obsolete early in his or her career.  The educational foundation for
continuous learningÑÒkeeping up with the fieldÓÑis a crucial component of IT ed-ucation (5).  Students, even beginning undergraduates, get that education not only
in the classroom, but also by serving as apprentices on leading-edge research
projects, where knowledge is being discovered, not read from a book.  Often, new
ideas are a by-product of what goes on in the classroom: in an attempt to explainthe solutions to emerging problems, teachers often deepen their own understand-
ing, while discovering interesting research questions whose answers are as yetunknown.  Additionally, students are the most powerful vehicle for technology
transfer, not only from university to industry but also between university laborato-
ries and departments, through the hiring of postdoctoral researchers and assistantprofessors (5).¥Universities are inherently multidisciplinary.  University researchers are wellsituated to draw on experts from a variety of other fields (2).  There are often
cultural barriers to cross-disciplinary collaboration, but physical proximity and col-legial values go a long way in enabling collaboration.  The multidisciplinary nature
of universities is of historic and growing importance to computer science, whichinterfaces with so many other fields.¥Universities are Òopen.Ó  This characteristic of universities, which is trueboth literally and figuratively, can pay enormous unanticipated dividends.  Chance
interactions in an open environment can change the world; for example, whenMicrosoft founders Paul Allen and Bill Gates were students at SeattleÕs LakesideSchool in the early 1970s, they were exposed to computing and computer scienceat the University of Washington and a university spinoff company, Computer Cen-ter Corporation.Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYogy transfer (see Box 7).  Federal support for university research drives
this process (1-6).  In top university computer science programs, over half

of all graduate students receive financial support from the federal gov-
ernment, mostly in the form of research assistantships.  In addition, most
of the funding for research equipmentÑthat is, research infrastructureÑcomes from federal agencies.  Industry also contributes significantly to

equipment but is usually attracted by existing research excellence and
collaborations.  Thus, by placing infrastructure in universities, the federal

government directly and indirectly makes possible hands-on learning ex-
periences for countless young engineers and scientists, as well as enabling
university researchers to continue their work (1-6).HALLMARKS OF FEDERALLY SPONSORED IT RESEARCHAs discussed below, the hallmarks of federally sponsored IT researchinclude scale, diversity, vision, and flexibility.1. Federal programs have been effective in supporting the construction oflarge-scale systems and testbeds that have motivated research and demonstrated
the feasibility of new technological approaches (1-3).Some research challenges are too large and require too much researchinfrastructure to be carried out by small, local research groups (6).  In IT

research, as in other areas of scientific investigation, federal programs
have played an important role in stimulating and supporting large-scale
efforts.  DARPA
Õs decision to construct a packet-switched network (calledthe ARPANET) to link computers at its many contractor sites prompted
diverse, high-impact research on networking protocols, the design of
packet switches and routers, software structures for managing large net-
works (such as the Domain Name System), and applications (such as
remote log-in, file transfer, and ultimately the Web).  Moreover, by con-

structing a successful system, DARPA demonstrated the value of large-
scale packet-switched networks, motivating subsequent deployment of
other networksÑsuch as the NSFÕs NSFnet, which ultimately served asthe foundation of the InternetÑand also a series of high-speed network-ing testbeds (1,3).Much of the success of major system-building efforts derives fromtheir ability to bring together large groups of researchers from universi-
ties and industry that develop a common vocabulary, share ideas, and
create a critical mass of people who subsequently extend the technology
(2,6).Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY232. Computing research has benefited from diverse modes of research spon-sored by different federal agencies (1-3).Funding for research in computing has been provided by variousfederal agenciesÑmost notably DARPA and NSF, but also including otherparts of the Department of Defense (DOD) besides DARPA, and other
federal agencies such as NASA, DOE, and the National Institutes of Health

(NIH; in particular through the National Library of Medicine).  Comple-

mentary investments have supported technology transfer to industry (e.g.,
activities of the National Institute of Standards and Technology, or NIST).
Funding agencies have continually evolved in order to match their struc-
tures better to the needs of the research and policy-making communities
(1).  (See Box 8.)
In supporting research, these agencies pursue different objectives andemploy different mechanisms.  In contrast to NSF, for example
Ñwhichhas a mandate to support a very broad research agendaÑÒmission agen-ciesÓ tend to focus on topics that appear to have the greatest relevance to
their specific missions.  Additionally, the early DARPA programs chose

to concentrate large research awards in so-called centers of excellence
(many of which over time have matured into some of the nationÕs leadinguniversity computer science programs), while NSF and the Office of Na-
val Research have supported individual researchers at a more diverse set
of institutions (1).  NSF has been active in supporting educational and

research needs more broadly, awarding graduate student fellowships and
providing funding for research equipment and infrastructure.CSTB has recognized the effective leadership of NSF and DARPA,calling on them to step up to larger roles (2; p. 11):The programs run by [NSF and DARPA] should complement oneanother and should together [do the following]:¥Support both theoretical and experimental work;¥Offer awards in a variety of sizes (small, medium, and large) tosupport individual investigators, small teams of researchers, and largercollaborations;¥Investigate a range of approaches to large-scale systems problems,such as improved software design methodologies, system architecture,reusable code, and biological and economic models . . . ;¥Attempt to address the full scope of large-scale systems issues,including scalability, heterogeneity, trustworthiness, flexibility, and pre-
dictability; and¥Give academic researchers some form of access to large-scale sys-tems for studying and demonstrating new approaches.Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYBOX 8Federal Agency EvolutionIn response to proposals by Vannevar Bush and others for an organization tofund basic research, especially in universities, the U.S. Congress established theNational Science Foundation (NSF) in 1950 (1).  A few years earlier, the U.S. Navy

had founded the Office of Naval Research to draw on science and engineeringresources in the universities.In the early 1950s, during an intense phase of the Cold War, the military servic-es became the preeminent funders of computing and communications research.The Soviet UnionÕs launching of Sputnik in 1957 raised fears in Congress and thecountry that the Soviets had forged ahead of the United States in advanced tech-
nology.  In response, the U.S. Department of Defense, pressured by the Eisen-
hower administration, established the Advanced Research Projects Agency(ARPA, now DARPA) to fund technological projects with military implications.  In

1962 DARPA created the Information Processing Techniques Office (IPTO),whose initial research agenda gave priority to further development of computersfor command-and-control systems.With the passage of time, new organizations have emerged, and old ones haveoften been reformed or reinvented to respond to new national imperatives andcounter bureaucratic trends (2).  DARPA
Õs IPTO has transformed itself severaltimes to bring greater coherence to its research efforts and to respond to techno-logical developments and changes in perceived national needs for IT.In 1967 NSF established the Office of Computing Activities, and in 1986 itformed the Computer and Information Science and Engineering Directorate toadvance and coordinate support for research, education, and infrastructure in com-puting (1).  In the 1980s NSF, which customarily has focused on fundamental

research in universities, also began to encourage joint university-industry researchcenters through its Engineering Research Centers program (these centers focuson research and education in the context of long-time-horizon, complex engineer-
ing challenges1) and its Science and Technology Center program (aimed at long-term research in areas that are new or that can bridge disciplines and/or institu-tions and sectors2).With the growth in the IT sector and corresponding IT development togetherwith the maturation of the field of computer science, more recent federal fundinghas been characterized by a series of multiagency, long-term, high-risk initiatives.
The first was the High Performance Computing and Communications Initiative,which emerged in the late 1980s and broadened through the mid-1990s (1,3).  Bythe late 1990s and the establishment of the multiagency Information Technology
for the Twenty-First Century initiative (in NSF, the Information Technology Re-search initiative), social science researchÑrelating IT innovation to the peoplewho use ITÑwas an important complement to the science and technology re-search per se (3,8).1See <http://www.eng.nsf.gov/eec/erc.htm>.  Accessed June 2, 2003.
2See <http://www.nsf.gov/od/oia/programs/stc/>.  Accessed June 2, 2003.
Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY25Given the wide circle of agencies interested in and involved with ITresearch and the even wider circle coming to depend on large-scale IT
systems, the NSF and DARPA should attempt to involve in their re-search other federal agencies . . . that operate large-scale IT systems andwould benefit from advances in their design.  Such involvement could

provide a means for researchers to gain access to operational systemsfor analytical and experimental purposes.The diversity of research funding objectives and program manage-ment styles offers many benefits (1,3).  It helps ensure exploration of a

diverse set of research topics and consideration of a range of applications.
For example, DARPA, NASA, and NIH (in addition to NSF) have all
supported work in expert systems.  However, because the systems have

had different applicationsÑdecision aids for pilots, tools for determiningthe structure of molecules on other planets, and medical diagnosticsÑeach agency has supported different groups of researchers who tried dif-
ferent approaches.  And no one
Õs judgment is infallible.  If one agency
declines to support a particular topic, researchers have other sources of
funding.3. Visionary program managers who were willing to take risks have been a
hallmark of many of the highest-impact federal research initiatives (1,3).The program manager is responsible for initiating, funding, and over-seeing research programs.  The funding and management styles of pro-

gram managers at DARPA during the 1960s and 1970s, for example, re-
flected an ability to marry visions for technological progress with strong
technical expertise and an understanding of the uncertainties of the re-
search process (1,3).  Many of these program managers and program

office directors were recruited from universities and industrial research
laboratories for limited tours of duty and were themselves leading
researchers.  With close ties to the field, they were trusted by
ÑandtrustedÑthe research community.  They tended to lay down broad guide-
lines for new research areas and to draw specific project proposals from
principal investigators.  They were willing to place bets
Ñto pursue high-risk/high-gain projects.This style of funding and management allowed researchers room topursue new venues of inquiry.  The funding style resulted in advances in

areas as diverse as computer graphics, artificial intelligence, networking,
and computer architecture.  As that experience illustrates, because unan-

ticipated outcomes of research are so valuable, federal mechanisms for
funding and managing research need to recognize the inherent uncertain-
ties and build in enough flexibility to accommodate midcourse changes
(1,3).Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYLOOKING FORWARDFederal funding agencies will have to continue to adjust their strate-gies and tactics as national needs and imperatives change.  Today there is

an escalation in concern about homeland security, the globalization of
industry, a rise of commodity IT products and an IT mass market, the
growing dependence of economic and social activity on networking and
distributed computing capabilities, and a variety of industry retrench-
ments.  Coevolution with industry thus means different things for feder-

ally funded computing research today than it did in the middle to late
decades of the 20th century.Challenges as well as opportunities have grown: computer science isa larger field with more subdisciplines; telecommunications is increas-
ingly intertwined with computing while evolving across multiple me-
dia;15 the interdisciplinary problems that engage computer science and
telecommunications are broader-ranging; and the number of hard prob-
lemsÑreflecting growth in scale, complexity, and interactions withpeopleÑhas increased.  Evolving capabilities motivate a range of stretch
goals that can help realize the potential of information technology as a
human enabler.16  Examples include new forms of prosthetics (beginning
with systems that can hear, speak, or see as well as a person can) and
better ways to observe or participate in activities from a distance (i.e.,
telepresence).These circumstances imply that the challenge to federal research pro-gram managers has also grown.  For example, while IT is at the core of a

number of interdisciplinary programs (such as the multiagency Digital
Libraries Initiative and NSFÕs Digital Government and Computing andSocial System programs), it takes more work to review proposals for in-
terdisciplinary work and to assure its quality.  It may thus be more impor-

tant to engage IT-using organizations in research projects, which may
involve more work for the researchers (2).  The growth in opportunities at

the intersection of computing and biology, for example, or even comput-
ing and the artsÑboth topics of CSTB projects17Ñsuggests new horizons15Innovations are enhancing the potential of optical fiber, various forms of wireless, andeven older media, such as copper.16These and other problems were outlined by Jim Gray in his 1998 A.M. Turing Awardlecture.  See Jim Gray.  1998.  
ÒWhatÕs Next?  A Few Remaining Problems in Information
Technology.Ó  Available online at <http://research.Microsoft.com/~Gray/talks>.  Accessed
June 9, 2003.17The project on computing and the arts and design was completed in early 2003.  See
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  2003.  
Be-yond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and Creativity.  National Academies
Press, Washington, D.C.Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY27for IT innovation that depend on the nurturing that is available throughuniversity-based research programs.The challenges confronting program managers underscore the needto attract talent from universities and industry to such public service
positions.  Past advances fostered by federal funding leveraged the

energies and wisdom of people who went from universities and industry
into the government, for at least a limited period.  It is ironic that their

success has increased the incentives for researchers to stay in universities
or to try their hand in industry instead of cultivating the field as program
managers.Government support for IT research will also be shaped by categoriesof problems in which it has a special interest.  The events of September 11,

2001, remind us that computer and communications security, constrained
by market failure, has always depended on federal investments.  But so,

too, has research in human-computer interaction, another arena in which
market forces have been limited (8) and where the rise of e-government
reinforces long-standing government interest associated with its own ap-
plications.18  The post-September 11 focus on homeland security and
intelligence analysis also puts a spotlight on supercomputing architec-
tures, numerical analysis, parallel programming languages and tools, and
other areas in which IT advances have flowed from scientific and engi-
neering computing needs within the research community at largeÑandin which purely commercial development was unlikely at best (1,3).The downturn in the telecommunications industry presents opportu-nities for the government to stimulate new directions through its support
for research.  We may see a consolidation and a loss of viable competition,

or a realignment of the sector boundaries to better reflect economic reali-
ties.  Government funding, supporting the development of open stan-

dards, can help shape the structure of industry.19 Given the 
Òchicken-and-eggÓ tension shaping advances in infrastructure and applications,
government support for exploration of new kinds of applications can
have great impact.20  The government can encourage competition by sup-
porting the definition of critical interfaces and demonstrations of feasibil-18Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council.  2002.
Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-Government.  National Academy Press,
Washington, D.C.19See Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council,2001, The InternetÕs Coming of Age, National Academy Press,  Washington, D.C.;  and Com-
puter Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council,  2002, 
Broadband:Bringing Home the Bits, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.20This was demonstrated by the evolution of the early Internet and Web, involving de-velopment and refinement of both the underlying infrastructure and a suite of compellingInnovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYity for open standards, and it can demonstrate new architectures throughfield trials and testbeds.  This role was critical in the emergence of the

Internet, and the relevance and importance of this sort of leadership have
not waned.21More generally, the 2001-2002 downturn in the economy and the cri-sis in the telecommunications industry caused a reduction in investment
across all of IT.  Spending remained down in 2003, and internal invest-

ment has dropped accordingly.  Venture and equity capital has also be-

come harder to obtain in the IT industries.  In times such as these, re-

search, especially longer-term research, is an obvious target for cost
cutting.  But if we as a nation do not continue to invest in the foundations

of innovation, we run the risk that when an improving economy justifies
an increase in investment, there may be few ideas in which to invest.  For

that reason this time is especially important for government-sponsored
research.TodayÕs research investments are essential to tomorrowÕs world lead-ership in IT.  From its position of leadership today
Ñreinforced by anaggregation of universities, companies, government programs, and tal-
entÑthe United States is better positioned than other nations are to makethe most of nonappropriable research (and even appropriable research).
Properly managed, publicly funded research in IT will continue to create
important new technologies and industries, some of them unimagined
today.  The process will continue to take 10 to 15 years from the inception

of a new idea to the creation of a billion-dollar industry.  Without contin-
ued federal investment in fundamental research there would still be inno-
vation, but the quantity and range of new ideas for U.S. industry to draw
from would be greatly diminishedÑas would the flow of people edu-applications by researchers focused not only on IT but also on other fields of science andengineering in which people used IT.  The Internet probably could never have developed

commercially without this phase of government-supported experimentation and refine-ment coordinated between infrastucture and applications.  For a discussion of new oppor-
tunities in the support of applications, see Computer Science and Telecommunications
Board, National Research Council,  2002, 
Broadband: Bringing Home the Bits, National Acad-
emy Press, Washington, D.C.21For a discussion of the role of government in setting a vision, see Computer Scienceand Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, 1994, Realizing the InformationFuture: The Internet and Beyond, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.  For a discus-
sion of government leadership and the importance of government funding of research as a
policy tool, see Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Coun-cil, 1996, The Unpredictable Certainty: Information Infrastructure Through 2000,  National Acad-
emy Press, Washington, D.C.Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY29cated at the forefront, the most important product of the nationÕs researchuniversities (1-8).The lessons of history are clear, as many CSTB studies in the pastdecade have shown, and many of those lessons are relevant to 21st-cen-
tury realities.  A complex partnership among government, industry, and

universities has made the United States the world leader in IT, and infor-
mation technology has become essential to our national security and eco-
nomic and social well-being.  Turn-of-the-century turmoil and structural

changes in IT industries have diminished their inherently limited capac-
ity to support fundamental IT research.  The role of the federal govern-

ment in sponsoring fundamental research in ITÑlargely university-basedÑhas been and will continue to be essential.Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.302Excerpts from Earlier CSTB Reports
This section contains excerpts from three CSTB reports:¥Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to MeetSocietyÕs Needs (2000),¥Funding a Revolution: Government Support for Computing Research(1999), and¥Evolving the High Performance Computing and Communications Initia-tive to Support the NationÕs Information Infrastructure (1995).While this synthesis report is based on all the CSTB reports listed inBox 1 in the ÒSummary and Recommendations,Ó the excerpts from these
three reports are the most general and broad.  To keep this report to a

reasonable length, nothing was excerpted from the other five reports.
Readers are encouraged to read all eight reports, which can be found
online at <http://www.nap.edu>.
For the sake of simplicity and organizational clarity, footnotes andreference citations appearing in the original texts have been omitted from
the reprinted material that follows.  A bar in the margins beside the ex-

cerpted material is used to indicate that it is extracted text.  Section heads

show the topics addressed.Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXCERPTS FROM EARLIER CSTB REPORTS31MAKING IT BETTER:  EXPANDING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
RESEARCH TO MEET SOCIETYÕS NEEDS (2000)CITATION: Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB),National Research Council.  2000.  
Making IT Better: Expanding InformationTechnology Research to Meet Society
Õs Needs.  National Academy Press,
Washington, D.C.The Many Faces of Information Technology Research(From pp. 23-26): IT research takes many forms. It consists of boththeoretical and experimental work, and it combines elements of science
and engineering. Some IT research lays out principles or constraints that
apply to all computing and communications systems; examples include
theorems that show the limitations of computation (what can and cannot
be computed by a digital computer within a reasonable time) or the fun-
damental limits on capacities of communications channels. Other research
investigates different classes of IT systems, such as user interfaces, the
Web, or electronic mail (e-mail). Still other research deals with issues of
broad applicability driven by specific needs. For example, todayÕs high-level programming languages (such as Java and C) were made possible
by research that uncovered techniques for converting the high-level state-
ments into machine code for execution on a computer. The design of the
languages themselves is a research topic: how best to capture a
programmerÕs intentions in a way that can be converted to efficient ma-chine code. Efforts to solve this problem, as is often the case in IT research,
will require invention and design as well as the classical scientific tech-
niques of analysis and measurement. The same is true of efforts to de-
velop specific and practical modulation and coding algorithms that ap-
proach the fundamental limits of communication on some channels. The
rise of digital communication, associated with computer technology, has
led to the irreversible melding of what were once the separate fields of
communications and computers, with data forming an increasing share of
what is being transmitted over the digitally modulated fiber-optic cables
spanning the nation and the world.Experimental work plays an important role in IT research. One mo-dality of research is the design experiment, in which a new technique is
proposed, a provisional design is posited, and a research prototype is
built in order to evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the design.
Although much of the effect of a design can be anticipated using analytic
techniques, many of its subtle aspects are uncovered only when the proto-
type is studied. Some of the most important strides in IT have been made
through such experimental research. Time-sharing, for example, evolvedInnovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYin a series of experimental systems that explored different parts of thetechnology. How are a computerÕs resources to be shared among severalcustomers? How do we ensure equitable sharing of resources? How do
we insulate each userÕs program from the programs of others? What re-sources should be shared as a convenience to the customers (e.g., com-
puter files)? How can the system be designed so itÕs easy to write com-puter programs that can be time-shared? What kinds of commands does a

user need to learn to operate the system? Although some of these trade-
offs may succumb to analysis, othersÑnotably those involving the userÕsevaluation and preferencesÑcan be evaluated only through experiment.Ideas for IT research can be gleaned both from the research commu-nity itself and from applications of IT systems. The Web, initiated by
physicists to support collaboration among researchers, illustrates how
people who use IT can be the source of important innovations. The Web
was not invented from scratch; rather, it integrated developments in in-
formation retrieval, networking, and software that had been accumulat-
ing over decades in many segments of the IT research community.  It also

reflects a fundamental body of technology that is conducive to innovation
and change.  Thus, it advanced the integration of computing, communica-

tions, and information. The Web also embodies the need for additional
science and technology to accommodate the burgeoning scale and diver-
sity of IT users and uses: it became a catalyst for the Internet by enhancing
the ease of use and usefulness of the Internet, it has grown and evolved
far beyond the expectations of its inventors, and it has stimulated new
lines of research aimed at improving and better using the Internet in
numerous arenas, from education to crisis management.Progress in IT can come from research in many different disciplines.For example, work on the physics of silicon can be considered IT research
if it is driven by problems related to computer chips; the work of electrical
engineers is considered IT research if it focuses on communications or
semiconductor devices; anthropologists and other social scientists study-
ing the uses of new technology can be doing IT research if their work
informs the development and deployment of new IT applications; and
computer scientists and computer engineers address a widening range of
issues, from generating fundamental principles for the behavior of infor-
mation in systems to developing new concepts for systems. Thus, IT re-
search combines science and engineering, even though the popularÑandeven professionalÑassociation of IT with systems leads many people toconcentrate on the engineering aspects. Fine distinctions between the sci-
ence and engineering aspects may be unproductive: computer science is
special because of how it combines the two, and the evolution of both is
key to the well-being of IT research.Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXCERPTS FROM EARLIER CSTB REPORTS33Implications for the Research Enterprise(From pp. 42-43): The trends in IT suggest that the nation needs toreinvent IT research and develop new structures to support, conduct, and
manage it. . . .As IT permeates many more real-world applications, additional con-stituencies need to be brought into the research process as both funders
and performers of IT research. This is necessary not only to broaden the
funding base to include those who directly benefit from the fruits of the
research, but also to obtain input and guidance. An understanding of
business practices and processes is needed to support the evolution of e-
commerce; insight from the social sciences is needed to build IT systems
that are truly user-friendly and that help people work better together. No
one truly understands where new applications such as e-commerce, elec-
tronic publishing, or electronic collaboration are headed, but business
development and research together can promote their arrival at desirable
destinations.Many challenges will require the participation and insight of the enduser and the service provider communities. They have a large stake in
seeing these problems addressed, and they stand to benefit most directly
from the solutions. Similarly, systems integrators would benefit from an
improved understanding of systems and applications because they would
become more competitive in the marketplace and be better able to meet
their estimates of project cost and time. Unlike vendors of component
technologies, systems integrators and end users deal with entire informa-
tion systems and therefore have unique perspectives on the problems
encountered in developing systems and the feasibility of proposed solu-
tions. Many of the end-user organizations, however, have no tradition of
conducting IT researchÑor technological research of any kind, in factÑand they are not necessarily capable of doing so effectively; they depend
on vendors for their technology. Even so, their involvement in the re-
search process is critical. Vendors of equipment and software have nei-
ther the requisite experience and expertise nor the financial incentives to
invest heavily in research on the challenges facing end-user organiza-
tions, especially the challenges associated with the social applications of
IT.  Of course, they listen to their customers as they refine their products
and strategies, but those interactions are superficial compared with the
demands of the new systems and applications. Finding suitable mecha-
nisms for the participation of end users and service providers, and engag-
ing them productively, will be a big challenge for the future of IT re-
search.Past attempts at public-private partnerships, as in the emerging arenaof critical infrastructure protection, show it is not so easy to get the publicInnovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYand private sectors to interact for the purpose of improving the researchbase and implementation of systems: the federal government has a re-
sponsibility to address the public interest in critical infrastructure,
whereas the private sector owns and develops that infrastructure, and
conflicting objectives and time horizons have confounded joint explora-
tion. As a user of IT, the government could play an important role.
Whereas historically it had limited and often separate programs to sup-
port research and acquire systems for its own use, the government is now
becoming a consumer of IT on a very large scale. Just as IT and the wide-
spread access to it provided by the Web have enabled businesses to rein-
vent themselves, IT could dramatically improve operations and reduce
the costs of applications in public health, air traffic control, and social
security; government agencies, like private-sector organizations, are turn-
ing increasingly to commercial, off-the-shelf technology.Universities will play a critical role in expanding the IT researchagenda. The university setting continues to be the most hospitable for
higher-risk research projects in which the outcomes are very uncertain.
Universities can play an important role in establishing new research pro-
grams for large-scale systems and social applications, assuming that they
can overcome long-standing institutional and cultural barriers to the
needed cross-disciplinary research. Preserving the university as a base for
research and the education that goes with it would ensure a workforce
capable of designing, developing, and operating increasingly sophisti-
cated IT systems. A booming IT marketplace and the lure of large salaries
in industry heighten the impact of federal funding decisions on the indi-
vidual decisions that shape the university environment: as the key funders
of university research, federal programs send important signals to faculty
and students.The current concerns in IT differ from the competitiveness concernsof the 1980s: the all-pervasiveness of IT in everyday life raises new ques-
tions of how to get from here to thereÑhow to realize the exciting possi-bilities, not merely how to get there first. A vital and relevant IT research
program is more important than ever, given the complexity of the issues
at hand and the need to provide solid underpinnings for the rapidly
changing IT marketplace.(From p. 93): Several underlying trends could ultimately limit thenationÕs innovative capacity and hinder its ability to deploy the kinds ofIT systems that could best meet personal, business, and government
needs. First, expenditures on research by companies that develop IT goods
and services and by the federal government have not kept pace with the
expanding array of IT. The disincentives to long-term, fundamental re-
search have become more numerous, especially in the private sector,Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXCERPTS FROM EARLIER CSTB REPORTS35which seems more able to lure talent from universities than the other wayaround. Second, and perhaps most significantly, IT research investments
continue to be directed at improving the performance of IT components,
with limited attention to systems issues and application-driven needs.
Neither industry nor academia has kept pace with the problems posed by
the large-scale IT systems used in a range of social and business con-
textsÑproblems that require fundamental research. . . . New mechanismsmay be needed to direct resources to these growing problem areas.(From pp. 6-9): Neither large-scale systems nor social applications ofIT are adequately addressed by the IT research community today. Most IT
research is directed toward the components of IT systems: the microproces-sors, computers, and networking technologies that are assembled into
large systems, as well as the software that enables the components to
work together.  This research nurtures the essence of IT, and continued

work is needed in all these areas. But component research needs to be
viewed as part of a much larger portfolio, in which it is complemented by
research aimed directly at improving large-scale systems and the social
applications of IT. The last of these includes some work (such as com-
puter-supported cooperative work and human-computer interaction) tra-
ditionally viewed as within the purview of computer science. Research in
all three areasÑcomponents, systems, and social applicationsÑwill makeIT systems better able to meet societyÕs needs, just as in the medical do-main work is needed in biology, physiology, clinical medicine, and epide-
miology to make the nationÕs population healthier.Research on large-scale systems and the social applications of IT willrequire new modes of funding and performing research that can bring
together a broad set of IT researchers, end users, system integrators, and
social scientists to enhance the understanding of operational systems.
Research in these areas demands that researchers have access to opera-
tional large-scale systems or to testbeds that can mimic the performance
of much larger systems. It requires additional funding to support sizable
projects that allow multiple investigators to experiment with large IT
systems and develop suitable testbeds and simulations for evaluating
new approaches and that engage an unusually diverse range of parties.
Research by individual investigators will not, by itself, suffice to make
progress on these difficult problems.Today, most IT research fails to incorporate the diversity of perspec-tives needed to ensure advances on large-scale systems and social appli-
cations. Within industry, it is conducted largely by vendors of IT compo-
nents: companies like IBM, Microsoft, and Lucent Technologies. Few of
the companies that are engaged in providing IT services, in integrating
large-scale systems (e.g., Andersen Consulting [now Accenture], EDS, orInnovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYLockheed Martin), or in developing enterprise software (e.g., Oracle, SAP,PeopleSoft) have significant research programs.  Nor do end-user organi-

zations (e.g., users in banking, commerce, education, health care, and
manufacturing) tend to support research on IT, despite their increasing
reliance on IT and their stake in the way IT systems are molded. Likewise,
there is little academic research on large-scale systems or social applica-
tions. Within the IT sector, systems research has tended to focus on im-
proving the performance and lowering the costs of IT systems rather than
on improving their reliability, flexibility, or scalability (although systems
research is slated to receive more attention in new funding programs).
Social applications present an even greater opportunity and have the
potential to leverage research in human-computer interaction, using it to
better understand how IT can support the work of individuals, groups,
and organizations. Success in this area hinges on interdisciplinary
research, which is already being carried out on a small scale.One reason more work has not been undertaken in these areas is lackof sufficient funding. More fundamentally, the problems evident today
did not reach critical proportions until recently. . . . From a practical
perspective, conducting the types of research advocated here is difficult.
Significant cultural gaps exist between researchers in different disciplines
and between IT researchers and the end users of IT systems.Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXCERPTS FROM EARLIER CSTB REPORTS37FUNDING A REVOLUTION:  GOVERNMENT SUPPORT FOR
COMPUTING RESEARCH (1999)CITATION: Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB),National Research Council.  1999. 
Funding a Revolution: Government Sup-port for Computing Research. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
(From p. 1): The computer revolution is not simply a technical change;it is a sociotechnical revolution comparable to an industrial revolution.
The British Industrial Revolution of the late 18th century not only brought
with it steam and factories, but also ushered in a modern era character-
ized by the rise of industrial cities, a politically powerful urban middle
class, and a new working class. So, too, the sociotechnical aspects of the
computer revolution are now becoming clear. Millions of workers are
flocking to computing-related industries. Firms producing microproces-
sors and software are challenging the economic power of firms manufac-
turing automobiles and producing oil. Detroit is no longer the symbolic
center of the U.S. industrial empire; Silicon Valley now conjures up vi-
sions of enormous entrepreneurial vigor. Men in boardrooms and gray
flannel suits are giving way to the casually dressed young founders of
start-up computer and Internet companies. Many of these entrepreneurs
had their early hands-on computer experience as graduate students con-
ducting federally funded university research.As the computer revolution continues and private companies increas-ingly fund innovative activities, the federal government continues to play
a major role, especially by funding research. Given the successful history
of federal involvement, several questions arise: Are there lessons to be
drawn from past successes that can inform future policy making in this
area? What future roles might the government play in sustaining the
information revolution and helping to initiate other technological devel-
opments?Lessons from History(From pp. 5-13): Why has federal support been so effective in stimu-lating innovation in computing? Although much has depended on the
unique characteristics of individual research programs and their partici-
pants, several common factors have played an important part. Primary
among them is that federal support for research has tended to complement,rather than preempt, industry investments in research. Effective federal
research has concentrated on work that industry has limited incentive to
pursue: long-term, fundamental research; large system-building efforts
that require the talents of diverse communities of scientists and engi-Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYneers; and work that might displace existing, entrenched technologies.Furthermore, successful federal programs have tended to be organized in
ways that accommodate the uncertainties in scientific and technological
research. Support for computing research has come from a diversity of
funding agencies; program managers have formulated projects broadly
where possible, modifying them in response to preliminary results; and
projects have fostered productive collaboration between universities and
industry. The lessons below expand on these factors. The first three les-
sons address the complementary nature of government- and industry-
sponsored research; the final four highlight elements of the organiza-
tional structure and management of effective federally funded research
programs. . . .1. Government supports long-range, fundamental research thatindustry cannot sustain.Federally funded programs have been successful in supporting long-term research into fundamental aspects of computing, such as computer
graphics and artificial intelligence, whose practical benefits often take
years to demonstrate. Work on speech recognition, for example, which
was begun in the early 1970s (some started even earlier), took until 1997
to generate a successful product for enabling personal computers to rec-
ognize continuous speech. Similarly, fundamental algorithms for shading
three-dimensional graphics images, which were developed with defense
funding in the 1960s, entered consumer products only in the 1990s, though
they were available in higher-performance machines much earlier. These
algorithms are now used in a range of products in the health care, enter-
tainment, and defense industries.Industry does fund some long-range work, but the benefits of funda-mental research are generally too distant and too uncertain to receive
significant industry support. Moreover, the results of such work are gen-
erally so broad that it is difficult for any one firm to capture them for its
own benefit and also prevent competitors from doing so. . . . Not surpris-
ingly, companies that have tended to support the most fundamental re-
search have been those, like AT&T Corporation and IBM Corporation,
that are large and have enjoyed a dominant position in their respective
markets. As the computing industry has become more competitive, even
these firms have begun to link their research more closely with corporate
objectives and product development activities. Companies that have be-
come more dominant, such as Microsoft Corporation and Intel Corpora-
tion, have increased their support for fundamental research.Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXCERPTS FROM EARLIER CSTB REPORTS392. Government supports large system-building efforts that haveadvanced technology and created large communities of researchers.In addition to funding long-term fundamental research, federal pro-grams have been effective in supporting the construction of large systems
that have both motivated research and demonstrated the feasibility of
new technological approaches. The Defense Advanced Research Projects
AgencyÕs (DARPAÕs) decision to construct a packet-switched network(called the ARPANET) to link computers at its many contractor sites

prompted considerable research on networking protocols and the design
of packet switches and routers. It also led to the development of struc-
tures for managing large networks, such as the domain name system, and
development of useful applications, such as e-mail. Moreover, by con-
structing a successful system, DARPA demonstrated the value of large-
scale packet-switched networks, motivating subsequent deployment of
other networks, like the National Science FoundationÕs NSFnet, whichformed the basis of the Internet.Efforts to build large systems demonstrate that, especially in comput-ing, innovation does not flow simply and directly from research, through
development, to deployment. Development often precedes research, and
research rationalizes, or explains, technology developed earlier through
experimentation. Hence attempts to build large systems can identify new
problems that need to be solved. Electronic telecommunications systems
were in use long before Claude Shannon developed modern communica-
tions theory in the late 1940s, and the engineers who developed the first
packet switches for routing messages through the ARPANET advanced
empirically beyond theory. Building large systems generated questions
for research, and the answers, in turn, facilitated more development.Much of the success of major system-building efforts derives fromtheir ability to bring together large groups of researchers from academia
and industry who develop a common vocabulary, share ideas, and create
a critical mass of people who subsequently extend the technology. Ex-
amples include the ARPANET and the development of the Air ForceÕsSemi-Automatic Ground Environment (SAGE) project in the 1950s. In-
volving researchers from MIT, IBM, and other research laboratories, the
SAGE project sparked innovations ranging from real-time computing to
core memories that found widespread acceptance throughout the com-
puter industry. Many of the pioneers in computing learned through
hands-on experimentation with SAGE in the 1950s and early 1960s.  They
subsequently staffed the companies and laboratories of the nascent com-
puting and communications revolution. The impact of SAGE was felt
over the course of several decades.Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY3. Federal research funding has expanded on earlier industrial research.In several cases, federal research funding has been important in ad-vancing a technology to the point of commercialization after it was first
explored in an industrial research laboratory. For example, IBM pioneered
the concept of relational databases but did not commercialize the technol-
ogy because of its perceived potential to compete with more-established
IBM products. National Science Foundation (NSF)-sponsored research at
UC-Berkeley allowed continued exploration of this concept and brought
the technology to the point that it could be commercialized by several
start-up companiesÑand more-established database companies (includ-ing IBM). This pattern was also evident in the development of reduced
instruction set computing (RISC). Though developed at IBM, RISC was
not commercialized until DARPA funded additional research at UC-Ber-
keley and Stanford University as part of its Very Large Scale Integrated
Circuit (VLSI) program of the late 1970s and early 1980s. A variety of
companies subsequently brought RISC-based products to the market-

place, including IBM, the Hewlett-Packard Company, the newly formed
Sun Microsystems, Inc., and another start-up, MIPS Computer Systems.
For both relational databases and VLSI, federal funding helped create a
community of researchers who validated and improved on the initial
work. They rapidly diffused the technology throughout the community,
leading to greater competition and more rapid commercialization.4. Computing research has benefited from diverse sources ofgovernment support.Research in computing has been supported by multiple federal agen-cies, including the Department of Defense (DOD)Ñmost notably the De-fense Advanced Research Projects Agency and the military servicesÑtheNational Science Foundation, National Aeronautics and Space Adminis-
tration (NASA), Department of Energy (DOE), and National Institutes of
Health (NIH). Each has its own mission and means of supporting re-
search. DARPA has tended to concentrate large research grants in so-
called centers of excellence, many of which over time have matured into
some of the countryÕs leading academic computer departments. The Of-fice of Naval Research (ONR) and NSF, in contrast, have supported indi-
vidual researchers at a more diverse set of institutions. They have awarded
numerous peer-review grants to individual researchers, especially in uni-
versities. NSF has also been active in supporting educational and research
needs more broadly, awarding graduate student fellowships and provid-
ing funding for research equipment and infrastructure. Each of these or-
ganizations employs a different set of mechanisms to support research,Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXCERPTS FROM EARLIER CSTB REPORTS41from fundamental research to mission-oriented research and develop-ment projects, to procurement of hardware and software.Such diversity offers many benefits. It not only provides researcherswith many potential sources of support, but also helps ensure exploration
of a diverse set of research topics and consideration of a range of applica-
tions. DARPA, NASA, and NIH have all supported work in expert sys-
tems, for example, but because the systems have had different applica-
tionsÑdecision aids for pilots, tools for determining the structure ofmolecules on other planets, and medical diagnosticsÑeach agency hassupported different groups of researchers who tried different approaches.Perhaps more importantly, no single approach to investing in re-search is by itself a sufficient means of stimulating innovation; each plays
a role in the larger system of innovation. Different approaches work in
concert, ensuring continued support for research areas as they pass
through subsequent stages of development. Organizations such as NSF
and ONR often funded seed work in areas that DARPA, with its larger
contract awards, later magnified and expanded. DARPAÕs Project MAC,which gave momentum to time-shared computing in the 1960s, for ex-
ample, built on earlier NSF-sponsored work on MITÕs Compatible Time-Sharing System. Conversely, NSF has provided continued support for
projects that DARPA pioneered but was unwilling to sustain after the
major research challenges were resolved. For example, NSF funds the
Metal Oxide Semiconductor Implementation Service (MOSIS)Ña systemdeveloped at Xerox PARC and institutionalized by DARPA that provides
university researchers with access to fast-turnaround semiconductor
manufacturing services. Once established, this program no longer
matched DARPAÕs mission to develop leading-edge technologies, but itdid match NSFÕs mission to support university education and researchinfrastructure. Similarly, NSF built on DARPAÕs pioneering research onpacket-switched networks to construct the NSFnet, a precursor to todayÕsInternet.5. Strong program managers and flexible management structures haveenhanced the effectiveness of computing research.Research in computing, as in other fields, is a highly unpredictableendeavor. The results of research are not evident at the start, and their
most important contributions often differ from those originally envi-
sioned. Few expected that the NavyÕs attempt to build a programmableaircraft simulator in the late 1940s would result in the development of the
first real-time digital computer (the Whirlwind); nor could DARPA pro-
gram managers have anticipated that their early experiments on packet
switching would evolve into the Internet and later the World Wide Web.Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYThe potential for unanticipated outcomes of research has two impli-cations for federal policy. First, it suggests that measuring the results of
federally funded research programs is extremely difficult. Projects that
appear to have failed often make significant contributions to later tech-
nology development or achieve other objectives not originally envisioned.
Furthermore, research creates many intangible products, such as knowl-
edge and educated researchers whose value is hard to quantify. Second, it
implies that federal mechanisms for funding and managing research need
to recognize the uncertainties inherent in computing research and to build
in sufficient flexibility to accommodate mid-course changes and respond
to unanticipated results.A key element in agenciesÕ ability to maintain flexibility in the past
has been their program managers, who have responsibility for initiating,
funding, and overseeing research programs. The funding and manage-
ment styles of program managers at DARPA during the 1960s and 1970s,
for example, reflected an ability to marry visions for technological
progress with strong technical expertise and an understanding of the
uncertainties of the research process. Many of these program managers
and office directors were recruited from academic and industry research
laboratories for limited tours of duty. They tended to lay down broad
guidelines for new research areas and to draw specific project proposals
from principal investigators, or researchers, in academic computer cen-
ters. This style of funding and management resulted in the government
stimulating innovation with a light touch, allowing researchers room to
pursue new avenues of inquiry. In turn, it helped attract top-notch pro-
gram managers to federal agencies. With close ties to the field and its
leading researchers, they were trusted byÑand trusted inÑthe researchcommunity.This funding style resulted in great advances in areas as diverse ascomputer graphics, artificial intelligence, networking, and computer ar-
chitectures. Although mechanisms are clearly needed to ensure account-
ability and oversight in government-sponsored research, history demon-
strates the benefits of instilling these values in program managers and
providing them adequate support to pursue promising research direc-
tions.6. Collaboration between industry and university researchers hasfacilitated the commercialization of computing research and
maintained its relevance.Innovation in computing requires the combined talents of universityand industry researchers. Bringing them together has helped ensure that
industry taps into new academic research and that university researchersInnovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXCERPTS FROM EARLIER CSTB REPORTS43understand the challenges facing industry. Such collaboration also helpsfacilitate the commercialization of technology developed in a university
setting. All of the areas described in this reportÕs case studiesÑrelationaldatabases, the Internet, theoretical computer science, artificial intelligence,
and virtual realityÑinvolved university and industry participants. Otherprojects examined, such as SAGE, Project MAC, and very large scale inte-
grated circuits, demonstrate the same phenomenon.Collaboration between industry and universities can take manyforms. Some projects combine researchers from both sectors on the same
project team. Other projects involve a transition from academic research
laboratories to industry (via either the licensing of key patents or the
creation of new start-up companies) once the technology matures suffi-
ciently. As the case studies demonstrate, effective linkages between in-
dustry and universities tended to emerge from projects, rather than be-
ing thrust upon them. Project teams assembled to build large systems
included the range of skills needed for a particular project. University
researchers often sought out productive avenues for transferring research
results to industry, whether linking with existing companies or starting
new ones. Such techniques have often been more effective than explicit
attempts to encourage collaboration, many of which have foundered due
to the often conflicting time horizons of university and industry research-
ers.7. Organizational innovation and adaptation are necessary elementsof federal research support.Over time, new government organizations have formed to supportcomputing research, and organizations have continually evolved in order
to better match their structure to the needs of the research and policy-
making communities. In response to proposals by Vannevar Bush and
others that the country needed an organization to fund basic research,
especially in the universities, for example, Congress established the Na-
tional Science Foundation in 1950. A few years earlier, the Navy founded
the Office of Naval Research to draw on science and engineering resources

in the universities. In the early 1950s during an intense phase of the Cold
War, the military services became the preeminent funders of computing
and communications. The Soviet UnionÕs launching of Sputnik in 1957raised fears in Congress and the country that the Soviets had forged ahead
of the United States in advanced technology. In response, the U.S. Depart-
ment of Defense, pressured by the Eisenhower administration, established
the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA, now DARPA) to fund
technological projects with military implications. In 1962 DARPA created
the Information Processing Techniques Office (IPTO), whose initial re-Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYsearch agenda gave priority to further development of computers forcommand-and-control systems.With the passage of time, new organizations have emerged, and oldones have often been reformed or reinvented to respond to new national
imperatives and counter bureaucratic trends. DARPAÕs IPTO has trans-formed itself several times to bring greater coherence to its research ef-
forts and to respond to technological developments. NSF in 1967 estab-
lished the Office of Computing Activities and in 1986 formed the
Computer and Information Sciences and Engineering (CISE) Directorate
to couple and coordinate support for research, education, and infrastruc-
ture in computer science. In the 1980s NSF, which customarily has fo-
cused on basic research in universities, also began to encourage joint
academic-industrial research centers through its Engineering Research
Centers program. With the relative increase in industrial support of re-
search and development in recent years, federal agencies such as NSF
have rationalized their funding policies to complement short-term indus-
trial R&D. Federal funding of long-term, high-risk initiatives continues to
have a high priority.As this history suggests, federal funding agencies will need to con-tinue to adjust their strategies and tactics as national needs and impera-
tives change. The Cold War imperative shaped technological history dur-
ing much of the last half-century. International competitiveness served as
a driver of government funding of computing and communications dur-
ing the late 1980s and early 1990s. With the end of the Cold War and the
globalization of industry, the U.S. computing industries need to maintain
their high rates of innovation, and federal structures for managing com-
puting research may need to change to ensure that they are appropriate
for this new environment.Sources of U.S. Success(From pp. 27-28): That the United States should be the leading coun-try in computing and communications was not preordained. Early in the
industryÕs formation, the United Kingdom was a serious competitor. TheUnited Kingdom was the home of the Difference Engine and later the
Analytical Engine, both of which were programmable mechanical devices
designed and partially constructed by Charles Babbage and Ada, Count-
ess of Lovelace, in the 19th century. Basic theoretical work defining a
universal computer was the contribution of Alan Turing in Cambridge
just before the start of World War II. The English defense industryÑwithAlan TuringÕs participationÑconceived and constructed vacuum tubecomputers able to break the German military code. Both machines and
their accomplishments were kept secret, much like the efforts and suc-Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXCERPTS FROM EARLIER CSTB REPORTS45cesses of the National Security Agency in this country. After the war,English universities constructed research computers and developed com-
puter concepts that later found significant use in U.S. products. Other
European countries, Germany and France in particular, also made efforts
to gain a foothold in this new technology.How then did the United States become a leader in computing? Theanswer is manifold, and a number of external factors clearly played a role.
The state of Europe, England in particular, at the end of World War II
played a decisive role, as rebuilding a country and industry is a more
difficult task than shifting from a war economy to a consumer economy.
The movement of people among universities, industry, and government
laboratories at the end of World War II in the United Kingdom and the
United States also contributed by spreading the experience gained during
the war, especially regarding electronics and computing. American stu-
dents and scholars who were studying in England as Fulbright Scholars
in the 1950s learned of the computer developments that had occurred
during the war and that were continuing to advance.Industrial prowess also played a role. After World War II, U.S. firmsmoved quickly to build an industrial base for computing. IBM and
Remington Rand recognized quite early that electronic computers were a
threat to their conventional electromechanical punched-card business and
launched early endeavors into computing. . . .  Over time, fierce competi-
tion and expectations of rapid market growth brought billions in venture
money to the industryÕs inventors and caused a flowering of small high-tech innovators. Rapid expansion of the U.S. marketplace for computing
equipment created buyers for new computing equipment.  The rapid post-

World War II expansion of civilian-oriented industries and financial
sources created new demands for data and data processing. Insurance
companies and banks were at the forefront of installing early computers
in their operations. New companies, such as Engineering Research Asso-
ciates, Datamatic, and Eckert-Mauchly, as well as established companies
in the data processing field, such as IBM and Sperry Rand, saw an oppor-
tunity for new products and new markets. The combination of new com-
panies and established ones was a powerful force. It generated fierce
competition and provided substantial capital funds.These factors helped the nation gain an early lead in computing that ithas maintained. While firms from other nations have made inroads into
computing technologyÑfrom memory chips to supercomputersÑU.S.firms have continued to dominate both domestic and international mar-
kets in most product categories. This success reflects the strength of the
nationÕs innovation system in computing technology, which has continu-ally developed, marketed, and supported new products, processes, and
services.Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYResearch and Technological Innovation(From pp. 28-31): Innovation is generally defined as the process ofdeveloping and putting into practice new products, processes, or ser-
vices. It draws upon a range of activities, including research, product
development, manufacturing, and marketing. Although often viewed as
a linear, sequential process, innovation is usually more complicated, with
many interactions among the different activities and considerable feed-
back. It can be motivated by new research advances or by recognition of a
new market need.  Government, universities, and industry all play a role

in the innovation process.Research is a vital part of innovation in computing. In dollar terms,research is just a small part of the innovation process, representing less
than one-fifth of the cost of developing and introducing new products in
the United States, with preparation of product specifications, prototype
development, tooling and equipment, manufacturing start-up, and mar-
keting start-up comprising the remainder.  Indeed, computer manufac-

turers allocated an average of just 20 percent of their research and devel-
opment budgets to research between 1976 and 1995, with the balance
supporting product development.  Even in the largest computer manu-

facturers, such as IBM, research costs are only about 1 to 2 percent of total
operating expenses. Nevertheless, research plays a critical role in the in-
novation process, providing a base of scientific and technological knowl-
edge that can be used to develop new products, processes, and services.
This knowledge is used at many points in the innovation processÑgener-ating ideas for new products, processes, or services; solving particular
problems in product development or manufacturing; or improving exist-
ing products, for example. . . .Traditionally, research expenditures have been characterized as ei-ther basic or applied. The term Òbasic researchÓ is used to describe work
that is exploratory in nature, addressing fundamental scientific questions
for which ready answers are lacking; the term Òapplied researchÓ de-
scribes activities aimed at exploring phenomena necessary for determin-
ing the means by which a recognized need may be met. These terms, at
best, distinguish between the motivations of researchers and the manner
in which inquiries are conducted, and they are limited in their ability to
describe the nature of scientific and technological research. Recent work
has suggested that the definition of basic research be expanded to include
explicitly both basic scientific research and basic technological research.
This definition recognizes the value of exploratory research into basic
technological phenomena that can be used in a variety of products. Ex-
amples include research on the blue laser, exploration of biosensors, and
much of the fundamental work in computer engineering.Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXCERPTS FROM EARLIER CSTB REPORTS47(From pp. 21-23): Clearly, the future of computing will differ from thehistory of computing because both the technology and environmental
factors have changed. Attempts by companies to align their research ac-
tivities more closely with product development processes have influenced
the role they may play in the innovation process. As the computing in-
dustry has grown and the technology has diffused more widely through-
out society, government has continued to represent a proportionally
smaller portion of the industry.The Benefits of Public Support of Research(From pp. 46-47): The development of scientific and technologicalknowledge is a cumulative process, one that depends on the prompt dis-
closure of new findings so that they can be tested and, if confirmed,
integrated with other bodies of reliable knowledge. In this way open
science promotes the rapid generation of further discoveries and inven-
tions, as well as wider practical exploitation of additions to the stock of
knowledge.The economic case for public funding of what is commonly referredto as basic research rests mainly on that insight, and on the observation
that business firms are bound to be considerably discouraged by the
greater uncertainties surrounding investment in fundamental, exploratory
inquiries (compared to commercially targeted R&D), as well as by the
difficulties of forecasting when and how such outlays will generate a
satisfactory rate of return.The proposition at issue here is quantitative, not qualitative. Onecannot adequately answer the question ÒWill there be enough?Ó merely
by saying, ÒThere will be some.Ó  Economists do not claim that without
public patronage (or intellectual property protection), basic research will
cease entirely. Rather, their analysis holds that there will not be enough
basic researchÑnot as much as would be carried out were individualbusinesses (like society as a whole) able to anticipate capturing all the
benefits of this form of investment.  Therefore, no conflict exists between

this theoretical analysis and the observation that R&D-intensive compa-
nies do indeed fund some exploratory research into fundamental ques-
tions. Their motives for this range from developing a capability to moni-
tor progress at the frontiers of science, to identifying ideas for potential
lines of innovation that may be emerging from the research of others, to
being better positioned to penetrate the secrets of their rivalsÕ technologi-
cal practices.Nevertheless, funding research is a long-term strategy, and thereforesensitive to commercial pressures to shift research resources toward ad-
vancing existing product development and improving existing processes,Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYrather than searching for future technological options. Large organiza-tions that are less asset constrained, and of course the public sector, are
better able to take on the job of pushing the frontiers of science and tech-
nology. Considerations of these kinds are important in addressing the
issue of how to find the optimal balance for the national research effort
between secrecy and disclosure of scientific and engineering information,
as well as in trying to adjust the mix of exploratory and applications-
driven projects in the national research portfolio.(From p. 137): Quantifying the benefits of federal research support isa difficult, if not impossible, task for several reasons. First, the output of
research is often intangible. Most of the benefit takes the form of new
knowledge that subsequently may be instantiated in new hardware, soft-
ware, or systems, but is itself difficult to measure. At other times, the
benefits take the form of educated people who bring new ideas or a fresh
perspective to an organization. Second, the delays between the time a
research program is conducted and the time the products incorporating
the research results are sold make measurement even more difficult. Of-
ten, the delays run into decades, making it difficult to tell midcourse how
effective a particular program has been. Third, the benefits of a particular
research program may not become visible until other technological ad-
vances are made. For example, advances in computer graphics did not
have widespread effect until suitable hardware was more broadly avail-
able for producing three-dimensional graphical images. Finally, projects
that are perceived as failures often provide valuable lessons that can guide
or improve future research. Even if they fail to reach their original objec-
tives, research projects can make lasting contributions to the knowledge
base.Maintaining University Research Capabilities(From pp. 139-140): Federal funding has . . . maintained universityresearch capabilities in computing. Universities depend largely on federal
support for research programs in computer science and electrical engi-
neering, the two academic disciplines most closely aligned with comput-
ing and communications. Since 1973, federal agencies have provided
roughly 70 percent of all funding for university research in computer
science. In electrical engineering, federal funding has declined from its
peak of 75 percent of total university research support in the early 1970s,
but still represented 65 percent of such funding in 1995.  Additional sup-
port has come in the form of research equipment. Universities need access
to state-of-the-art equipment in order to conduct research and train stu-
dents. Although industry contributes some equipment, funding for uni-Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXCERPTS FROM EARLIER CSTB REPORTS49versity research equipment has come largely from federal sources sincethe 1960s. Between 1981 and 1995, the federal government provided be-
tween 59 and 76 percent of annual research equipment expenditures in
computer science and between 64 and 83 percent of annual research equip-
ment expenditures in electrical engineering.  Such investments have

helped ensure that researchers have access to modern computing facili-
ties and have enabled them to further expand the capabilities of comput-
ing and communications systems.Universities play an important role in the innovation process. Theytend to concentrate on research with broad applicability across compa-
nies and product lines and to share new knowledge openly.  Because they

are not usually subject to commercial pressures, university researchers
often have greater ability than their industrial counterparts to explore
ideas with uncertain long-term payoffs. Although it would be difficult to
determine how much university research contributes directly to indus-
trial innovation, it is telling that each of the case studies and other major
examples examined in [the source] reportÑrelational databases, theInternet, theoretical computer science, artificial intelligence, virtual
reality, SAGE, computer time-sharing, very large scale integrated circuits,
and the personal computerÑinvolved the participation of universityresearchers.  Universities play an especially effective role in disseminat-

ing new knowledge by promoting open publication of research results.
They have also served as a training ground for students who have taken
new ideas with them to existing companies or started their own compa-
nies. Diffusion of knowledge about relational databases, for instance, was
accelerated by researchers at the University of California at Berkeley who
published the source code for their Ingres system and made it available
free of charge. Several of the lead researchers in this project established
companies to commercialize the technology or brought it back to existing
firms where they championed its use.Creating Human Resources(From pp. 140-141): In addition to supporting the creation of newtechnology, federal funding for research has also helped create the hu-
man resources that have driven the computer revolution.  Many industry

researchers and research managers claim that the most valuable result of
university research programs is educated studentsÑby and large, an out-come enabled by federal support of university research.  Federal support
for university research in computer science grew from $65 million to $350
million between 1976 and 1995, while federal support for university re-
search in electrical engineering grew from $74 million to $177 million (in
constant 1995 dollars).  Much of this funding was used to support gradu-Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYate students. Especially at the nationÕs top research universities, the stud-ies of a large percentage of graduate students have been supported by
federal research contracts. Graduates of these programs, and faculty re-
searchers who received federal funding, have gone on to form a number
of companies, including Sun Microsystems, Inc. (which grew out of re-
search conducted by Forest Baskett and Andy Bechtolsheim with spon-
sorship from DARPA) and Digital Equipment Corporation (founded by
Ken Olsen, who participated in the SAGE project). Graduates also staff
academic faculties that continue to conduct research and educate future
generations of researchers.Furthermore, the availability of federal research funding has enabledthe growth and expansion of computer science and computer engineering
departments at U.S. universities, which increased in number from 6 in
1965 to 56 in 1975 and to 148 in 1995.  The number of graduate students in

computer science also grew dramatically, expanding more than 40-fold
from 257 in 1966 to 11,500 in 1995, with the number of Ph.D. degrees
awarded in computer science increasing from 19 in 1966 to over 900 in
1995.  Even with this growth in Ph.D. production, demand for computing

researchers still outstrips the supply in both industry and academia.Beyond supporting student education and training, federal fundinghas also been important in creating networks of researchers in particular
fieldsÑdeveloping communities of researchers who could share ideasand build on each otherÕs strengths. Despite its defense orientation,DARPA historically encouraged open dissemination of the results of spon-
sored research, as did other federal agencies. In addition, DARPA and
other federal agencies funded large projects with multiple participants
from different organizations. These projects helped create entire commu-
nities of researchers who continued to refine, adopt, and diffuse new
technology throughout the broader computing research community. De-
velopment of the Internet demonstrates the benefits of this approach: by
funding groups of researchers in an open environment, DARPA created
an entire community of users who had a common understanding of the
technology, adopted a common set of standards, and encouraged their
use broadly. Early users of the ARPANET created a critical mass of people
who helped to disseminate the technology, giving the Internet Protocol
an important early lead over competing approaches to packet switching.The Organization of Federal Support: A Historical Review(From pp. 85-86): Rather than a single, overarching framework ofsupport, federal funding for research in computing has been managed by
a set of agencies and offices that carry the legacies of the historical periods
in which they were created. Crises such as World War II, Korea, Sputnik,Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXCERPTS FROM EARLIER CSTB REPORTS51Vietnam, the oil shocks, and concerns over national competitiveness haveall instigated new modes of government support. Los Alamos National
Laboratory, for example, a leader in supercomputing, was created by the
Manhattan Project and became part of the Department of Energy. The
Office of Naval Research and the National Science Foundation emerged
in the wake of World War II to continue the successful contributions of
wartime science. The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
(DARPA) and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration
(NASA) are products of the Cold War, created in response to the launch
of Sputnik to regain the nationÕs technological leadership. The NationalBureau of Standards, an older agency, was transformed into the National
Institute of Standards and Technology in response to . . . concerns about
national competitiveness. Each organizationÕs style, mission, and impor-tance have changed over time; yet each organization profoundly reflects
the process of its development, and the overall landscape is the result of
numerous layers of history.Understanding these layers is crucial for discussing the role of thefederal government in computing research.  [The following sections

briefly set] out a history of the federal governmentÕs programmatic in-volvement in computing research since 1945, distinguishing the various
layers in the historical eras in which they were first formed. The objective
is to identify the changing role the government has played in these differ-
ent historical periods, discuss the changing political and technological
environment in which federal organizations have acted, and draw atten-
tion to the multiplicity, diversity, and flexibility of public-sector programs
that have stimulated and underwritten the continuing stream of U.S. re-
search in computing and communications since World War II. In fulfill-
ing this charge, [the following text] reviews a number of prominent fed-
eral research programs that exerted profound influence on the evolving
computing industry. These programs are illustrative of the effects of fed-
eral funding on the industry at different times. Other programs, too nu-
merous to describe here, undoubtedly played key roles in the history of
the computing industry but are not considered here.1945-1960:  Era of Government Computers
(From pp. 86-87): In late 1945, just a few weeks after atomic bombsended World War II and thrust the world into the nuclear age, digital
electronic computers began to whir. The ENIAC (Electronic Numerical
Integrator and Computer), built at the University of Pennsylvania and
funded by the Army Ballistics Research Laboratory, was AmericaÕs firstsuch machine. The following 15 years saw electronic computing grow
from a laboratory technology into a routine, useful one. Computing hard-Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYware moved from the ungainly and delicate world of vacuum tubes andpaper tape to the reliable and efficient world of transistors and magnetic
storage. The 1950s saw the development of key technical underpinnings
for widespread computing: cheap and reliable transistors available in
large quantities, rotating magnetic drum and disk storage, magnetic core
memory, and beginning work in semiconductor packaging and miniatur-
ization, particularly for missiles. In telecommunications, American Tele-
phone and Telegraph (AT&T) introduced nationwide dialing and the first
electronic switching systems at the end of the decade. A fledgling com-
mercial computer industry emerged, led by International Business Ma-
chines (IBM) (which built its electronic computer capability internally)
and Remington Rand (later Sperry Rand), which purchased Eckert-
Mauchly Computer Corporation in 1950 and Engineering Research Asso-
ciates in 1952. Other important participants included Bendix, Burroughs,
General Electric (GE), Honeywell, Philco, Raytheon, and Radio Corpora-
tion of America (RCA).In computing, the technical cutting edge, however, was usuallypushed forward in government facilities, at government-funded research
centers, or at private contractors doing government work. Government
funding accounted for roughly three-quarters of the total computer field.
A survey performed by the Army Ballistics Research Laboratory in 1957,
1959, and 1961 lists every electronic stored-program computer in use in
the country (the very possibility of compiling such a list says a great deal
about the community of computing at the time). The surveys reveal the
large proportion of machines in use for government purposes, either by
federal contractors or in government facilities.The GovernmentÕs Early Role
(From pp. 87-88): Before 1960, governmentÑas a funder and as acustomerÑdominated electronic computing. Federal support had nobroad, coherent approach, however, arising somewhat ad hoc in indi-
vidual federal agencies. The period was one of experimentation, both
with the technology itself and with diverse mechanisms for federal sup-
port. From the panoply of solutions, distinct successes and failures can be
discerned, from both scientific and economic points of view. After 1960,
computing was more prominently recognized as an issue for federal
policy. The National Science Foundation and the National Academy of
Sciences issued surveys and reports on the field.If government was the main driver for computing research and de-velopment (R&D) during this period, the main driver for government
was the defense needs of the Cold War. Events such as the explosion of a
Soviet atomic bomb in 1949 and the Korean War in the 1950s heightenedInnovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXCERPTS FROM EARLIER CSTB REPORTS53international tensions and called for critical defense applications, espe-cially command-and-control and weapons design. It is worth noting, how-
ever, that such forces did not exert a strong influence on telecommunica-
tions, an area in which most R&D was performed within AT&T for civilian
purposes. Long-distance transmission remained analog, although digital
systems were in development at AT&T
Õs Bell Laboratories. Still, the newly
emergent field of semiconductors was largely supported by defense in its
early years. During the 1950s, the Department of Defense (DOD) sup-
ported about 25 percent of transistor research at Bell Laboratories.However much the Cold War generated computer funding, duringthe 1950s dollars and scale remained relatively small compared to other
fields, such as aerospace applications, missile programs, and the NavyÕsPolaris program (although many of these programs had significant com-
puting components, especially for operations research and advanced man-
agement techniques). By 1950, government investment in computing
amounted to $15 million to $20 million per year.All of the major computer companies during the 1950s had significantcomponents of their R&D supported by government contracts of some
type. At IBM, for example, federal contracts supported more than half of
the R&D and about 35 percent of R&D as late as 1963 (only in the late
1960s did this proportion of support trail off significantly, although abso-
lute amounts still increased). The federal government supported projects
and ideas the private sector would not fund, either for national security,
to build up human capital, or to explore the capabilities of a complex,
expensive technology whose long-term impact and use was uncertain.
Many federally supported projects put in place prototype hardware on
which researchers could do exploratory work.Establishment of Organizations(From pp. 88-95): The successful development projects of World WarII, particularly radar and the atomic bomb, left policymakers asking how
to maintain the technological momentum in peacetime. Numerous new
government organizations arose, attempting to sustain the creative atmo-
sphere of the famous wartime research projects and to enhance national
leadership in science and technology. Despite Vannevar BushÕs efforts toestablish a new national research foundation to support research in the
nationÕs universities, political difficulties prevented the bill from passinguntil 1950, and the National Science Foundation (NSF) did not become a
significant player in computing until later in that decade. During the 15
years immediately after World War II, research in computing and com-
munications was supported by mission agencies of the federal govern-
ment, such as DOD, the Department of Energy (DOE), and NASA. InInnovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYretrospect, it seems that the nation was experimenting with different mod-els for supporting this intriguing new technology that required a subtle
mix of scientific and engineering skill.Military Research OfficesContinuity in basic science was provided primarily by the Office ofNaval Research (ONR), created in 1946 explicitly to perpetuate the contri-
butions scientists made to military problems during World War II. In
computing, the agency took a variety of approaches simultaneously. First,
it supported basic intellectual and mathematical work, particularly in
numerical analysis. These projects proved instrumental in establishing a
sound mathematical basis for computer design and computer processing.
Second, ONR supported intellectual infrastructure in the infant field of
computing, sponsoring conferences and publications for information dis-
semination. Members of ONR participated in founding the Association
for Computing Machinery in 1947.ONRÕs third approach to computing was to sponsor machine designand construction. It ordered a computer for missile testing through the
National Bureau of Standards from Raytheon, which became known as
the Raydac machine, installed in 1952. ONR supported Whirlwind, MITÕsfirst digital computer and progenitor of real-time command-and-control
systems. John von Neumann built a machine with support from ONR and
other agencies at PrincetonÕs Institute for Advanced Study, known as theIAS computer. The project produced significant advances in computer
architecture, and the design was widely copied by both government and
industrial organizations.Other military services created offices on a model similar to that ofONR. The Air Force Office of Scientific Research was established in 1950
to manage U.S. Air Force R&D activities. Similarly, the U.S. Army estab-
lished the Army Research Office to manage and promote Army programs
in science and technology.National Bureau of StandardsArising out of its role as arbiter of weights and measures, the Na-tional Bureau of Standards (NBS) had long had its own laboratories and
technical expertise and had long served as a technical advisor to other
government agencies. In the immediate postwar years, NBS sought to
expand its advisory role and help U.S. industry develop wartime technol-
ogy for commercial purposes. NBS, through its National Applied Math-
ematics Laboratory, acted as a kind of expert agent for other government
agencies, selecting suppliers and overseeing construction and delivery ofInnovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXCERPTS FROM EARLIER CSTB REPORTS55new computers. For example, NBS contracted for the three initial UnivacmachinesÑthe first commercial, electronic, digital, stored-program com-putersÑone for the Census Bureau and two for the Air Materiel Com-mand.NBS also got into the business of building machines. When the Univacorder was plagued by technical delays, NBS built its own computer in-
house. The Standards Eastern Automatic Computer (SEAC) was built for
the Air Force and dedicated in 1950, the first operational, electronic,

stored-program computer in this country. NBS built a similar machine,
the Standards Western Automatic Computer (SWAC) for the Navy on the
West Coast. Numerous problems were run on SEAC, and the computer
also served as a central facility for diffusing expertise in programming to
other government agencies. Despite this significant hardware, however,
NBSÕs bid to be a government center for computing expertise ended in themid-1950s. Caught up in postwar debates over science policy and a con-
troversy over battery additives, NBS research funding was radically re-
duced, and NBS lost its momentum in the field of computing.Atomic Energy CommissionNuclear weapons design and research have from the beginning pro-vided impetus to advances in large-scale computation. The first atomic
bombs were designed only with desktop calculators and punched-card
equipment, but continued work on nuclear weapons provided some of
the earliest applications for the new electronic machines as they evolved.
The first computation job run on the ENIAC in 1945 was an early calcula-
tion for the hydrogen bomb project ÒSuper.Ó In the late 1940s, the Los
Alamos National Laboratory built its own computer, MANIAC, based on
von NeumannÕs design for the Institute for Advanced Study computer atPrinceton, and the Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) funded similar
machines at Argonne National Laboratory and Oak Ridge National Labo-
ratory.In addition to building their own computers, the AEC laboratorieswere significant customers for supercomputers. The demand created by
AEC laboratories for computing power provided companies with an in-
centive to design more powerful computers with new designs. In the
early 1950s, IBM built its 701, the Defense Calculator, partly with the
assurance that Los Alamos and Livermore would each buy at least one. In
1955, the AEC laboratory at Livermore, California, commissioned
Remington Rand to design and build the Livermore Automatic Research
Computer (LARC), the first supercomputer. The mere specification for
LARC advanced the state of the art, as the bidding competition required
the use of transistors instead of vacuum tubes.  IBM developed improved
Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYferrite-core memories and supercomputer designs with funding from theNational Security Agency, and designed and built the Stretch
supercomputer for the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, beginning it in
1956 and installing it in 1961. Seven more Stretch supercomputers were
built. Half of the Stretch supercomputers sold were used for nuclear
weapon research and design.The AEC continued to specify and buy newer and fastersupercomputers, including the Control Data 6600, the STAR 100, and the
Cray 1 (although developed without AEC funds), practically ensuring a
market for continued advancements.  AEC and DOE laboratories also

developed much of the software used in high-performance computing
including operating systems, numerical analysis software, and matrix

evaluation routines.  In addition to stimulating R&D in industry, the AEC

laboratories also developed a large talent pool on which the computer
industry and academia could draw. In fact, the head of IBMÕs AppliedScience Department, Cuthbert Hurd, came directly to IBM in 1949 from
the AECÕs Oak Ridge National Laboratory.  Physicists worked on national
security problems with government support providing demand, specifi-
cations, and technical input, as well as dollars, for industry to make sig-
nificant advances in computing technology.Private OrganizationsNot all the new organizations created by the government to supportcomputing were public. A number of new private organizations also
sprang up with innovative new charters and government encouragement
that held prospects of initial funding support. In 1956, at the request of the
Air Force, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) created Project
Lincoln, now known as the Lincoln Laboratory, with a broad charter to
study problems in air defense to protect the nation from nuclear attack.
The Lincoln Laboratory then oversaw the construction of the Semi-Auto-
matic Ground Environment (SAGE) air-defense system.  In 1946, the Air

Force and Douglas Aircraft created a joint venture, Project RAND, to
study intercontinental warfare. In the following year RAND separated
from Douglas and became the independent, nonprofit RAND Corpora-
tion.RAND worked only for the Air Force until 1956, when it began todiversify to other defense and defense-related contractors, such as the
Advanced Research Projects Agency and the Atomic Energy Commis-
sion, and provided, for a time, what one researcher called Òin some sensethe worldÕs largest installation for scientific computing [in 1950].Ó  RAND
specialized in developing computer systems, such as the Johnniac, based
on the IAS computer, which made RAND the logical source for the pro-Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXCERPTS FROM EARLIER CSTB REPORTS57gramming on SAGE. While working on SAGE, RAND trained hundredsof programmers, eventually leading to the spin-off of RANDÕs SystemsDevelopment Division and Systems Training Program into the Systems
Development Corporation. Computers made a major impact on the sys-
tems analysis and game theoretic approaches that RAND and other simi-
lar think tanks used in attempts to model nuclear and conventional
warfighting strategies.Engineering Research Associates (ERA) represented yet another formof government support: the private contractor growing out of a single
government agency. With ERA, the Navy effectively privatized its war-
time cryptography organization and was able to maintain civilian exper-
tise through the radical postwar demobilization. ERA was founded in St.
Paul, Minnesota, in January 1946 by two engineers who had done cryp-
tography for the Navy and their business partners.  The Navy moved its

Naval Computing Machine Laboratory from Dayton to St. Paul, and ERA
essentially became the laboratory.  ERA did some research, but it prima-

rily worked on task-oriented, cost-plus contracts. As one participant re-
called, ÒIt was not a university atmosphere. It was ÔBuild stuff. Make itwork. How do you package it? How do you fix it? How do you document
it?ÕÓ  ERA built a community of engineering skill, which became the
foundation of the Minnesota computer industry. In 1951, for example, the
company hired Seymour Cray for his first job out of the University of
Minnesota.As noted earlier, the RAND Corporation had contracted in 1955 towrite much of the software for SAGE owing to its earlier experience in air
defense and its large pool of programmers. By 1956, the Systems Training
Program of the RAND Corporation, the division assigned to SAGE, was
larger than the rest of the corporation combined, and it spun off into the
nonprofit Systems Development Corporation (SDC). SDC played a sig-
nificant role in computer training. As described by one of the participants,
ÒPart of SDCÕs nonprofit role was to be a university for programmers.Hence our policy in those days was not to oppose the recruiting of our
personnel and not to match higher salary offers with an SDC raise.Ó By
1963, SDC had trained more than 10,000 employees in the field of com-
puter systems. Of those, 6,000 had moved to other businesses across the
country.Observations(From pp. 95-96): In retrospect, the 1950s appear to have been a pe-riod of institutional and technological experimentation. This diversity of
approaches, while it brought the field and the industry from virtually
nothing to a tentative stability, was open to criticisms of waste, duplica-Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYtion of effort, and ineffectiveness caused by rivalries among organizationsand their funding sources. The field was also driven largely by the needs
of government agencies, with relatively little input from computer-ori-
ented scientists at the highest levels. Criticism remained muted during
the decade when the military imperatives of the Cold War seemed to
dominate all others, but one event late in the decade opened the entire
system of federal research support to scrutiny: the launch of Sputnik in
1957. Attacks mounted that the system of R&D needed to be changed, and
they came not only from the press and the politicians but also from scien-
tists themselves.1960-1970:  Supporting a Continuing Revolution
(From p. 96): Several significant events occurred to mark a transitionfrom the infancy of information technology to a period of diffusion and
growth. Most important of these was the launching of Sputnik in 1957,
which sent convulsions through the U.S. science and engineering world
and redoubled efforts to develop new technology. President Eisenhower
elevated scientists and engineers to the highest levels of policy making.
Thus was inaugurated what some have called the golden age of U.S.
research policy. Government support for information technology took off
in the 1960s and assumed its modern form. The Kennedy administration
brought a spirit of technocratic reform to the Pentagon and the introduc-
tion of systems analysis and computer-based management to all aspects
of running the military. Many of the visions that set the research agendas
for the following 15 years (and whose influence remains today) were set
in the early years of the decade.Maturing of a Commercial Industry(From pp. 96-97): Perhaps most important, the early 1960s can bedefined as the time when the commercial computer industry became sig-
nificant on its own, independent of government funding and procure-
ment. Computerized reservation systems began to proliferate, particu-
larly the IBM/American Airlines SABRE system, based in part on prior
experience with military command-and-control systems (such as SAGE).
The introduction of the IBM System/360 in 1964 solidified computer ap-
plications in business, and the industry itself, as significant components
of the economy.This newly vital industry, dominated by ÒSnow WhiteÓ (IBM) and the
ÒSeven DwarfsÓ (Burroughs, Control Data, GE, Honeywell, NCR, RCA,
and Sperry Rand), came to have several effects on government-supported
R&D. First, and most obvious, some companies (mostly IBM) becameInnovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXCERPTS FROM EARLIER CSTB REPORTS59large enough to conduct their own in-house research. IBMÕs Thomas J.Watson Research Center was dedicated in 1961. Its director, Emanuel
Piore, was recruited from ONR, and he emphasized basic research. Such
laboratories not only expanded the pool of researchers in computing and
communications but also supplied a source of applied research that al-
lowed or, conversely, pushed federal support to focus increasingly on the
longest-term, riskiest ideas and on problems unique to government. Sec-
ond, the industry became a growing employer of computer professionals,
providing impetus to educational programs at universities and making
computer science and engineering increasingly attractive career paths to
talented young people.These years saw turning points in telecommunications as well. In1962, AT&T launched the first active communications satellite, Telstar,
which transmitted the first satellite-relay telephone call and the first live
transatlantic television signal. That same year, a less-noticed but equally
significant event occurred when AT&T installed the first commercial digi-
tal-transmission system. Twenty-four digital speech channels were time
multiplexed onto a repeatered digital transmission line operating at 1.5
megabits per second. In 1963, the first Stored Program Control electronic
switching system was placed into service, inaugurating the use of digital
computer technology for mainstream switching.The 1960s also saw the emergence of the field called computer sci-ence, and several important university departments were founded during
the decade, at Stanford and Carnegie Mellon in 1965 and at MIT in 1968.
Hardware platforms had stabilized enough to support a community of
researchers who attacked a common set of problems. New languages
proliferated, often initiated by government and buoyed by the needs of
commercial industry. The Navy had sponsored Grace Hopper and others
during the 1950s to develop automatic programming techniques that be-
came the first compilers. John Backus and a group at IBM developed
FORTRAN, which was distributed to IBM users in 1957. A team led by
John McCarthy at MIT (with government support) began implementing
LISP in 1958, and the language became widely used, particularly for arti-
ficial intelligence programming, in the early 1960s. In 1959, the Pentagon
began convening a group of computer experts from government,
academia, and industry to define common business languages for com-
puters. The group published a specification in 1959, and by 1960 RCA and
Remington Rand Univac had produced the first COBOL compilers.  By

the beginning of the 1960s, a number of computer languages, standard
across numerous hardware platforms, were beginning to define program-
ming as a task, as a profession, and as a challenging and legitimate subject
of intellectual inquiry.Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYThe Changing Federal Role(From pp. 98-107): The forces driving government support changedduring the 1960s. The Cold War remained a paramount concern, but to it
were added the difficult conflict in Vietnam, the Great Society programs,
and the Apollo program, inaugurated by President KennedyÕs 1961 chal-lenge. New political goals, new technologies, and new missions provoked
changes in the federal agency population. Among these, two agencies
became particularly important in computing: the new Advanced Research
Projects Agency and the National Science Foundation.The Advanced Research Projects AgencyThe founding of the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) in1958, a direct outgrowth of the Sputnik scare, had immeasurable impact
on computing and communications. ARPA, specifically charged with pre-
venting technological surprises like Sputnik, began conducting long-
range, high-risk research. It was originally conceived as the DODÕs ownspace agency, reporting directly to the Secretary of Defense in order to
avoid interservice rivalry. Space, like computing, did not seem to fit into
the existing military service structure.  ARPA
Õs independent status notonly insulated it from established service interests but also tended to
foster radical ideas and keep the agency tuned to basic research ques-
tions: when the agency-supported work became too much like systems
development, it ran the risk of treading on the territory of a specific ser-
vice.ARPAÕs status as the DOD space agency did not last long. Soon afterNASAÕs creation in 1958, ARPA retained essentially no role as a spaceagency. ARPA instead focused its energies on ballistic missile defense,
nuclear test detection, propellants, and materials. It also established a
critical organizational infrastructure and management style: a small, high-
quality managerial staff, supported by scientists and engineers on rota-
tion from industry and academia, successfully employing existing DOD
laboratories and contracting procedures (rather than creating its own re-
search facilities) to build solid programs in new, complex fields. ARPA
also emerged as an agency extremely sensitive to the personality and
vision of its director.ARPAÕs decline as a space agency raised questions about its role andcharacter. A new director, Jack Ruina, answered the questions in no un-
certain terms by cementing the agencyÕs reputation as an elite, scientifi-cally respected institution devoted to basic, long-term research projects.
Ruina, ARPAÕs first scientist-director, took office at the same time asKennedy and McNamara in 1961, and brought a similar spirit to theInnovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXCERPTS FROM EARLIER CSTB REPORTS61agency. Ruina decentralized management at ARPA and began the tradi-tion of relying heavily on independent office directors and program man-
agers to run research programs. Ruina also valued scientific and technical
merit above immediate relevance to the military. Ruina believed both of
these characteristicsÑindependence and intellectual qualityÑwere criti-cal to attracting the best people, both to ARPA as an organization and to
ARPA-sponsored research.  Interestingly, ARPA
Õs managerial success didnot rely on innovative managerial techniques per se (such as the comput-
erized project scheduling typical of the NavyÕs Polaris project) but ratheron the creative use of existing mechanisms such as Òno-year money,Óunsolicited proposals, sole-source procurement, and multiyear forward
funding.ARPA and Information Technology.   
From the point of view of comput-ing, the most important event at ARPA in the early 1960s, indeed in all of
ARPAÕs history, was the establishment of the Information ProcessingTechniques Office, IPTO, in 1962. The impetus for this move came from
several directions, including KennedyÕs call a year earlier for improve-ments in command-and-control systems to make them Òmore flexible,more selective, more deliberate, better protected, and under ultimate ci-
vilian authority at all times.Ó  Computing as applied to command and
control was the ideal ARPA programÑit had no clearly established ser-vice affinity; it was Òa new area with relatively little established serviceinterest and entailed far less constraint on ARPAÕs freedom of action,Óthan more familiar technologies.  Ruina established IPTO to be devoted

not to command and control but to the more fundamental problems in
computing that would, eventually, contribute solutions.Consistent with his philosophy of strong, independent, and scientificoffice managers, Ruina appointed J.C.R. Licklider to head IPTO. The

Harvard-trained psychologist came to ARPA in October 1962, primarily
to run its Command and Control Group. Licklider split that group into
two discipline-oriented offices: Behavioral Sciences Office and IPTO.
Licklider had had extensive exposure to the computer research of the time
and had clearly defined his own vision of Òman-computer symbiosis,Ówhich he had published in a landmark paper of 1960 by the same name.
He saw human-computer interaction as the key, not only to command
and control, but also to bringing together the then-disparate techniques of
electronic computing to form a unified science of computers as tools for
augmenting human thought and creativity.  Licklider formed IPTO in this

image, working largely independently of any direction from Ruina, who
spent the majority of his time on higher-profile and higher-funded missile
defense issues. LickliderÕs timing was opportune: the 1950s had produceda stable technology of digital computer hardware, and the big systemsInnovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYprojects had shown that programming these machines was a difficult butinteresting problem in its own right. Now the pertinent questions con-
cerned how to use Òthis tremendous power . . . for other than purelynumerical scientific calculations.Ó  Licklider not only brought this vision
to IPTO itself, but he also promoted it with missionary zeal to the research
community at large. LickliderÕs and IPTOÕs success derived in large partfrom their skills at Òselling the visionÓ in addition to 
Òbuying the re-search.ÓAnother remarkable feature of IPTO, particularly during the 1960s,was its ability to maintain the coherent vision over a long period of time;
the office director was able to handpick his successor. Licklider chose
Ivan Sutherland, a dynamic young researcher he had encountered as a
graduate student at MIT and the Lincoln Laboratory, to succeed him in
1964. Sutherland carried on LickliderÕs basic ideas and made his ownimpact by emphasizing computer graphics. SutherlandÕs own successor,Robert Taylor, came in 1966 from a job as a program officer at NASA and
recalled, ÒI became heartily subscribed to the Licklider vision of interac-tive computing.Ó  While at IPTO, Taylor emphasized networking. The last
IPTO director of the 1960s, Lawrence Roberts, came, like Sutherland, from
MIT and Lincoln Laboratory, where he had worked on the early transis-
torized computers and had conducted ARPA research in both graphics
and communications.During the 1960s, ARPA and IPTO had more effect on the science andtechnology of computing than any other single government agency, some-
times raising concern that the research agenda for computing was being
directed by military needs. IPTOÕs sheer size, $15 million in 1965, dwarfedother agencies such as ONR. Still, it is important to note, ONR and ARPA
worked closely together; ONR would often let small contracts to research-
ers and serve as a talent agent for ARPA, which would then fund promis-
ing projects at larger scale. ARPA combined the best features of existing
military research support with a new, lean administrative structure and
innovative management style to fund high-risk projects consistently. The
agency had the freedom to administer large block grants as well as mul-
tiple-year contracts, allowing it the luxury of a long-term vision to foster
technologies, disciplines, and institutions. Further, the national defense
motivation allowed IPTO to concentrate its resources on centers of scien-
tific and engineering excellence (such as MIT, Carnegie Mellon Univer-
sity, and Stanford University) without regard for geographical distribu-
tion questions with which NSF had to be concerned. Such an approach
helped to create university-based research groups with the critical mass
and stability of funding needed to create significant advances in particu-
lar technical areas. But although it trained generations of young research-
ers in those areas, ARPAÕs funding style did little to help them pursue theInnovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXCERPTS FROM EARLIER CSTB REPORTS63same lines of work at other universities. As an indirect and possibly unin-tended consequence, the research approaches and tools and the generic
technologies developed under ARPAÕs patronage were disseminatedmore rapidly and widely, and so came to be applied in new nonmilitary
contexts by the young M.S. and Ph.D. graduates who had been trained in
that environment but could not expect to make their research careers
within it.ARPAÕs Management Style. To evaluate research proposals, IPTO did not
employ the peer-review process like NSF, but rather relied on internal
reviews and the discretion of program managers as did ONR. These pro-
gram managers, working under office managers such as Licklider,
Sutherland, Taylor, and Roberts, came to have enormous influence over
their areas of responsibility and became familiar with the entire field both
personally and intellectually. They had the freedom and the resources to
shape multiple R&D contracts into a larger vision and to stimulate new
areas of inquiry. The education, recruiting, and responsibilities of these
program managers thus became a critical parameter in the character and
success of ARPA programs. ARPA frequently chose people who had train-
ing and research experience in the fields they would fund, and thus who
had insight and opinions on where those fields should go.To have such effects, the program managers were given enough fundsto let a large enough number of contracts and to shape a coherent research
program, with minimal responsibilities for managing staffs. Program bud-

gets usually required only two levels of approval above the program
manager: the director of IPTO and the director of ARPA. One IPTO mem-
ber described what he called Òthe joy of ARPA. . . . You know, if a pro-gram manager has a good idea, he has got two people to convince that
that is a good idea before the guy goes to work. He has got the director of
his office and the director of ARPA, and that is it. It is such a short chain
of command.ÓPart of ARPAÕs philosophy involved aiming at radical change ratherthan incremental improvement. As Robert Taylor put it, for example,
incremental innovation would be taken care of by the services and their
contractors, but, ARPAÕs aim was Òan order of magnitude difference.ÓARPA identified good ideas and magnified them. This strategy often ne-
cessitated funding large, group-oriented projects and institutions rather
than individuals. Taylor recalled, ÒI donÕt remember a single case wherewe ever funded a single individualÕs work. . . . The individual researcherwho is just looking for support for his own individual work could [poten-
tially] find many homes to support that work. So we tended not to fund
those, because we felt that they were already pretty well covered. Instead,
we funded larger groupsÑteams.Ó NSF
Õs peer-review process workedInnovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYwell for individual projects, but was not likely to support large, team-oriented research projects. Nor did it, at this point in history, support
entire institutions and research centers, like the Laboratory for Computer
Science at MIT. IPTOÕs style meshed with its emphasis on human-ma-chine interaction, which it saw as fundamentally a systems problem and
hence fundamentally team oriented. In TaylorÕs view, the university re-ward structure was much more oriented toward individual projects, so
Òsystems research is most difficult to fund and manage in a university.ÓThis philosophy was apparent in ARPAÕs support of Project MAC, anMIT-led effort on time-shared computing. . . .ARPA, with its clearly defined mission to support DOD technology,could also afford to be elitist in a way that NSF, with a broader charter to
support the countryÕs scientific research, could not. ÒARPA had no com-mitment, for example, to take geography into consideration when it
funded work.Ó  Another important feature of ARPA
Õs multiyear contractswas their stability, which proved critical for graduate students who could
rely on funding to get them through their Ph.D. program. ARPA also paid
particular attention to building communities of researchers and dissemi-
nating the results of its research, even beyond traditional publications.
IPTO would hold annual meetings for its contract researchers at which
results would be presented and debated. These meetings proved effective
not only at advancing the research itself but also at providing valuable
feedback for the program managers and helping to forge relationships
between researchers in related areas. Similar conferences were convened
for graduate students only, thus building a longer-term community of
researchers. ARPA also put significant effort into getting the results of its
research programs commercialized so that DOD could benefit from the
development and expansion of a commercial industry for information
technology. ARPA sponsored conferences that brought together research-
ers and managers from academia and industry on topics such as time-
sharing, for example.Much has been made of ARPAÕs management style, but it would be amistake to conclude that management per se provided the keys to the
agencyÕs successes in computing. The key point about the style, in fact,was its light touch. Red tape was kept to a minimum, and project propos-
als were turned around quickly, frequently into multiple-year contracts.
Typical DOD research contracts involved close monitoring and careful
adherence to requirements and specifications. ARPA avoided this ap-
proach by hiring technically educated program managers who had con-
tinuing research interests in the fields they were managing. This reality
counters the myth that government bureaucrats heavy-handedly selected
R&D problems and managed the grants and contracts. Especially during
the 1960s and 1970s, program managers and office directors were notInnovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXCERPTS FROM EARLIER CSTB REPORTS65bureaucrats but were usually academics on a 2-year tour of duty. Theysaw ARPA as a pulpit from which to preach their visions, with money to
help them realize those visions. The entire system displayed something of
a self-organizing, self-managing nature. As Ivan Sutherland recalled,
ÒGood research comes from the researchers themselves rather than fromthe outside.ÓNational Science FoundationWhile ARPA was focusing on large projects and systems, the Na-tional Science Foundation played a large role in legitimizing basic com-
puter science research as an academic discipline and in funding indi-
vidual researchers at a wide range of institutions. Its programs in
computing have evolved considerably since its founding in 1950, but have
tended to balance support for research, education, and computing infra-
structure. Although early programs tended to focus on the use of comput-
ing in other academic disciplines, NSF subsequently emerged as the lead-
ing federal funder of basic research in computer science.NSF was formed before computing became a clearly defined researcharea, and it established divisions for chemistry, physics, and biology, but
not computing. NSF did provide support for computing in its early years,
but this support derived more from a desire to promote computer-related
activities in other disciplines than to expand computer science as a disci-
pline, and as such was weighted toward support for computing infra-
structure.  For example, NSF poured millions of dollars into university

computing centers so that researchers in other disciplines, such as physics
and chemistry, could have access to computing power. NSF noted that
little computing power was available to researchers at American univer-
sities who were not involved in defense-related research and that Òmanyscientists feel strongly that further progress in their field will be seriously
affected by lack of access to the techniques and facilities of electronic
computation.Ó  As a result, NSF began supporting computing centers at
universities in 1956 and, in 1959, allocated a budget specifically for com-
puter equipment purchases. Recognizing that computing technology was
expensive, became obsolete rapidly, and entailed significant costs for on-
going support, NSF decided that it would, in effect, pay for American
campuses to enter the computer age.  In 1962, it established its first office
devoted to computing, the program for Computers and Computing Science
within the Mathematical Sciences Division.  By 1970, the Institutional

Computing Services (or Facilities) program had obligated $66 million to
university computing centers across the country.  NSF intended that use

of the new facilities would result in trained personnel to fulfill increasing
needs for computer proficiency in industry, government, and academia.Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYNSF provided some funding for computer-related research in its earlyyears. Originally, such funding came out of the mathematics division in
the 1950s and grew out of an interest in numerical analysis. By 1955, NSF
began to fund basic research in computer science theory with its first
grants for the research of recursion theory and one grant to develop an
analytical computer program under the Mathematical Sciences Program.
Although these projects constituted less than 10 percent of the mathemat-
ics budget, they resulted in significant research.In 1967, NSF united all the facets of its computing support into asingle office, the Office of Computing Activities (OCA). The new office
incorporated elements from the directorates of mathematics and engi-
neering and from the Facilities program, unifying NSFÕs research andinfrastructure efforts in computing. It also incorporated an educational
element that was intended to help meet the radically increasing demand
for instruction in computer science.  The OCA was headed by Milton

Rose, the former head of the Mathematical Sciences Section, and reported
directly to the director of NSF.Originally, the OCAÕs main focus was improving university comput-ing services. In 1967, $11.3 million of the officeÕs $12.8 million total budgetwent toward institutional support.  Because not all universities were large

enough to support their own computing centers but would benefit from
access to computing time at other universities, the OCA also began to
support regional networks linking many universities together. In 1968,
the OCA spent $5.3 million, or 18.6 percent of its budget, to provide links
between computers in the same geographic region.  In the 1970s, the

computer center projects were canceled, however, in favor of shifting
emphasis toward education and research.Beginning in 1968, through the Education and Training program, theOCA began funding the inauguration of university-level computer sci-
ence programs. NSF funded several conferences and studies to develop
computer science curricula. The Education and Training program obli-
gated $12.3 million between 1968 and 1970 for training, curricula devel-
opment, and support of computer-assisted instruction.Although the majority of the OCAÕs funding was spent on infrastruc-ture and education, the office also supported a broad range of basic com-
puter science research programs. These included compiler and language
development, theoretical computer science, computation theory, numeri-
cal analysis, and algorithms. The Computer Systems Design program con-
centrated on computer architecture and systems analysis. Other programs
focused on topics in artificial intelligence, including pattern recognition
and automatic theory proving.Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXCERPTS FROM EARLIER CSTB REPORTS671970-1990:  Retrenching and International Competition
(From p. 107): Despite previous successes, the 1970s opened withcomputing at a critical but fragile point. Although produced by a large
and established industry, commercial computers remained the expensive,
relatively esoteric tools of large corporations, research institutions, and
government. Computing had not yet made its way to the common user,
much less the man in the street. This movement would begin in the mid-
1970s with the introduction of the microprocessor and then unfold in the
1980s with even greater drama and force. If the era before 1960 was one of
experimentation and the 1960s one of consolidation and diffusion in com-
puting, the two decades between 1970 and 1990 were characterized by
explosive growth. Still, this course of events was far from clear in the
early 1970s.Accomplishing Federal Missions(From pp. 141-142): In addition to supporting industrial innovationand the economic benefits that it brings, federal support for computing
research has enabled government agencies to accomplish their missions.
Investments in computing research by the Department of Energy (DOE),
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), and the
National Institutes of Health (NIH), as well as the Department of Defense
(DOD), are ultimately based on agency needs. Many of the missions these
agencies must fulfill depend on computing technologies. DOD, for ex-
ample, has maintained a policy of achieving military superiority over
potential adversaries not through numerical superiority (i.e., having more
soldiers) but through better technology. Computing has become a central
part of information gathering, management, and analysis for command-
ers and soldiers alike.Similarly, DOE and its predecessors would have been unable to sup-port their mission of designing nuclear weapons without the simulation
capabilities of large supercomputers. Such computers have retained their
value to DOE as its mission has shifted toward stewardship of the nuclear
stockpile in an era of restricted nuclear testing. Its Accelerated Strategic
Computing Initiative builds on DOEÕs earlier success by attempting tosupport development of simulation technologies needed to assess nuclear
weapons, analyze their performance, predict their safety and reliability,
and certify their functionality without testing them.  In addition, NASA
could not have accomplished its space exploration or its Earth observa-
tion and monitoring missions without reliable computers for controlling
spacecraft and managing data. New computing capabilities, including
the World Wide Web, have enabled the National Library of Medicine to
expand access to medical information and have provided tools for re-
searchers who are sequencing the human genome.Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYEVOLVING THE HIGH PERFORMANCE COMPUTING ANDCOMMUNICATIONS INITIATIVE TO SUPPORT THE NATIONÕSINFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE (1995)CITATION: Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB),National Research Council.  1995
.  Evolving the High Performance Comput-
ing and Communications Initiative to Support the NationÕs Information Infra-structure.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Continued Federal Investment Is Necessary to Sustain Our Lead(From pp. 23-25): What must be done to sustain the innovation andgrowth needed for enhancing the information infrastructure and main-
taining U.S. leadership in information technology? Rapid and continuing
change in the technology, a 10- to 15-year cycle from idea to commercial
success, and successive waves of new companies are characteristics of the
information industry that point to the need for a stable source of expertise
and some room for a long-term approach. Three observations seem perti-
nent.1.Industrial R&D cannot replace government investment in basic research.Very few companies are able to invest for a payoff that is 10 years away.
Moreover, many advances are broad in their applicability and complex
enough to take several engineering iterations to get right, and so the key
insights become ÒpublicÓ and a single company cannot recoup the re-
search investment. Public investment in research that creates a reservoir
of new ideas and trained people is repaid many times over by jobs and
taxes in the information industry, more innovation and productivity in
other industries, and improvements in the daily lives of citizens. This
investment is essential to maintain U.S. international competitiveness. . . .Because of the long time scales involved in research, the full effect ofdecreasing investment in research may not be evident for a decade, but by
then, it may be too late to reverse an erosion of research capability. Thus,
even though many private-sector organizations that have weighed in on
one or more policy areas relating to the enhancement of information in-
frastructure typically argue for a minimal government role in commer-
cialization, they tend to support a continuing federal presence in relevant
basic research.2.It is hard to predict which new ideas and approaches will succeed. Over
the years, federal support of computing and communications research in
universities has helped make possible an environment for exploration
and experimentation, leading to a broad range of diverse ideas from which
the marketplace ultimately has selected winners and losers. . . .  [I]t is
Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXCERPTS FROM EARLIER CSTB REPORTS69difficult to know in advance the outcome or final value of a particular lineof inquiry. But the history of development in computing and communica-
tions suggests that innovation arises from a diversity of ideas and some
freedom to take a long-range view.  It is notoriously difficult to place a

specific value on the generation of knowledge and experience, but such
benefits are much broader than sales of specific systems.3.Research and development in information technology can make good useof equipment that is 10 years in advance of current ÒcommodityÓ practice. 
Whenit is first used for research, such a piece of equipment is often a
supercomputer. By the time that research makes its way to commercial
use, computers of equal power are no longer expensive or rare. . . .The large-scale systems problems presented both by massive parallel-ism and by massive information infrastructure are additional distinguish-
ing characteristics of information systems R&D, because they imply a
need for scale in the research effort itself. In principle, collaborative ef-
forts might help to overcome the problem of attaining critical mass and
scale, yet history suggests that there are relatively few collaborations in
basic research within any industry, and purely industrial (and increas-
ingly industry-university or industry-government) collaborations tend to
disseminate results more slowly than university-based research.The government-supported research program . . . is small comparedto industrial R&D . . . but it constitutes a significant portion of the research
component, and it is a critical factor because it supports the exploratory
work that is difficult for industry to afford, allows the pursuit of ideas
that may lead to success in unexpected ways, and nourishes the industry
of the future, creating jobs and benefits for ourselves and our children.
The industrial R&D investment, though larger in dollars, is different in
nature: it focuses on the near termÑincreasingly so, as noted earlierÑandis thus vulnerable to major opportunity costs. The increasing tendency to
focus on the near term is affecting the body of the nationÕs overall R&D.Despite economic studies showing that the United States leads the world
in reaping benefits from basic research, pressures in all sectors appear to
be promoting a shift in universities toward near-term efforts, resulting in
a decline in basic research even as a share of university research.  Thus, ageneral reduction in support for basic research appears to be taking place.It is critical to understand that there are dramatic new opportunitiesthat still can be developed by fundamental research in information tech-
nologyÑopportunities on which the nation must capitalize. These in-clude high-performance systems and applications for science and engi-
neering; high-confidence systems for applications such as health care, law
enforcement, and finance; building blocks for global-scale information
utilities (e.g., electronic payment); interactive environments for applica-Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYtions ranging from telemedicine to entertainment; improved user inter-faces to allow the creation and use of ever more sophisticated applications
by ever broader cross sections of the population; and the creation of the
human capital on which the next generationÕs information industries willbe based. Fundamental research in computing and communications is the
key to unlocking the potential of these new applications.How much federal research support is proper for the foreseeable fu-ture and to what aspects of information technology should it be devoted?
Answering this question is part of a larger process of considering how to
reorient overall federal spending on R&D from a context dominated by
national security to one driven more by other economic and social goals.
It is harder to achieve the kind of consensus needed to sustain federal
research programs associated with these goals than it was under the
national security aegis.  Nevertheless, the fundamental rationale for fed-

eral programs remains:That R&D can enhance the nationÕs economic welfare is not, by itself,sufficient reason to justify a prominent role for the federal governmentin financing it. Economists have developed a further rationale for gov-ernment subsidies. Their consensus is that most of the benefits of inno-
vation accrue not to innovators but to consumers through products thatare better or less expensive, or both.  Because the benefits of technologi-
cal progress are broadly shared, innovators lack the financial incentive
to improve technologies as much as is socially desirable.  Therefore, the
government can improve the performance of the economy by adoptingpolicies that facilitate and increase investments in research.  [Linda R.

Cohen and Roger G. Noll.  1994.  
ÒPrivatizing Public Research,Ó ScientificAmerican 271(3): 73]
Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.71What Is CSTB?As a part of the National Research Council, the Computer Science andTelecommunications Board (CSTB) was established in 1986 to provide
independent advice to the federal government on technical and public
policy issues relating to computing and communications.  Composed of

leaders from industry and academia, CSTB conducts studies of critical
national issues and makes recommendations to government, industry,
and academia.  CSTB also provides a neutral meeting ground for consid-

eration of complex issues where resolution and action may be premature.
It convenes discussions that bring together principals from the public and
private sectors, assuring consideration of key perspectives.  The majority

of CSTBÕs work is requested by federal agencies and Congress, consistentwith its National Academies context.A pioneer in framing and analyzing Internet policy issues, CSTB isunique in its comprehensive scope and effective, interdisciplinary ap-
praisal of technical, economic, social, and policy issues.  Beginning with

early work in computer and communications security, cyber-assurance
and information systems trustworthiness have been a cross-cutting theme
in CSTBÕs work.  CSTB has produced several reports known as classics in
the field, and it continues to address these topics as they grow in impor-
tance.To do its work, CSTB draws on some of the best minds in the countryand from around the world, inviting experts to participate in its projects
as a public service.  Studies are conducted by balanced committees with-

out direct financial interests in the topics they are addressing.  Those
Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYcommittees meet, confer electronically, and build analyses through theirdeliberations.  Additional expertise is tapped in a rigorous process of

review and critique, further enhancing the quality of CSTB reports.  By

engaging groups of principals, CSTB gets the facts and insights critical to
assessing key issues.The mission of CSTB is to¥Respond to requests from the government, nonprofit organizations,
and private industry for advice on computer and telecommunications
issues and from the government for advice on computer and telecommu-
nications systems planning, utilization, and modernization;¥Monitor and promote the health of the fields of computer science and
telecommunications, with attention to issues of human resources, infor-
mation infrastructure, and societal impacts;¥Initiate and conduct studies involving computer science, technology,and telecommunications as critical resources; and¥Foster interaction among the disciplines underlying computing and
telecommunications technologies and other fields, at large and within the
National Academies.CSTB projects address a diverse range of topics affected by the evolu-tion of information technology.  Recently completed reports include

Beyond Productivity: Information Technology, Innovation, and Creativity;
Cybersecurity Today and Tomorrow: Pay Now or Pay Later; Youth, Pornogra-phy, and the Internet; Broadband: Bringing Home the Bits; The Digital Dilemma:Intellectual Property in the Information Age; IDsÑNot That Easy: QuestionsAbout Nationwide Identity Systems; The Internet Under Crisis Conditions:

Learning from September 11; and IT Roadmap to a Geospatial Future.
  For
further information about CSTB reports and active projects, see <http://

cstb.org>.