DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/10803The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the21st Century190 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-08719-3 | DOI 10.17226/10803Organizing Committee for the Workshop on the Environment; Committee onChallenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st Century; Board on ChemicalSciences and Technology; Division on Earth and Life Studies; National ResearchCouncilThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ORGANIZING COMMITTEE FOR THE WORKSHOP ONTHE ENVIRONMENTCOMMITTEE ON CHALLENGES FOR THE CHEMICAL SCIENCESIN THE 21ST CENTURY
BOARD ON CHEMICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGYDIVISION ON EARTH AND LIFE STUDIESTHE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSWashington, D.C.www.nap.eduCHALLENGES FOR THE CHEMICAL SCIENCESIN THE 21ST CENTURYThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS ¥ 500 Fifth Street, N.W. ¥ Washington, D.C. 20001NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing
Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of
the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Insti-tute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible for the report were chosenfor their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.Support for this study was provided by the National Research Council, the U.S.Department of Energy (DE-AT-010EE41424, BES DE-FG-02-00ER15040, andDE-AT01-03ER15386), the National Science Foundation (CTS-9908440), the Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DOD MDA972-01-M-0001), the U.S. EnvironmentalProtection Agency (R82823301 and X83080801), the American Chemical Society, theAmerican Institute of Chemical Engineers, the Camille and Henry Dreyfus Foundation,
Inc. (SG00-093), the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NA1341-01-2-1070and 43NANB010995), the National Institutes of Health (NCI-N01-OD-4-2139 andNIGMS-N01-OD-4-2139), the Green Chemistry Institute, and the chemical industryAll opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed herein are thoseof the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the organizations or agencies thatprovided support for this project.International Standard Book Number 0-309-08719-8 (Book)International Standard Book Number 0-309-52666-3 (PDF)Additional copies of this report are available from:The National Academies Press500 Fifth Street, N.W.
Box 285Washington, DC 20055800-624-6242
202-334-3313 (in the Washington Metropolitan Area)http://www.nap.eduCopyright 2003 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Printed in the United States of AmericaThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of
distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to thefurtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare.  Upon the

authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandatethat requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters.Dr.Bruce M. Alberts is president of the National Academy of Sciences.
The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the
National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers.  It is
autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the
National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government.The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meet-ing national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior

achievements of engineers.  Dr. Wm. A. Wulf is president of the National Academy of
Engineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciencesto secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examinationof policy matters pertaining to the health of the public.  The Institute acts under the respon-
sibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to be an
adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medicalcare, research, and education.  Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of
Medicine.The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in
1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the Academyspurposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government.  Functioning in

accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the Council has become theprincipal operating agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the NationalAcademy of Engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the
scientific and engineering communities.  The Council is administered jointly by both
Academies and the Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts and Dr. Wm. A. Wulf are
chair and vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.www.national-academies.orgThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ivORGANIZING COMMITTEE FOR THEWORKSHOP ON THE ENVIRONMENTMARIO J. M
OLINA, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Co-ChairJOHN H. S
EINFELD, California Institute of Technology, Co-ChairPHILIP H. B
RODSKY, Pharmacia (retired)
JEAN H. F
UTRELL, Pacific Northwest National LaboratoryPARRY M. N
ORLING, RAND CorporationCHRISTINE S. S
LOANE, General Motors CorporationISIAH M. W
ARNER, Louisiana State UniversityLiaisonsMARK A. B
ARTEAU, University of Delaware (Steering Committee Liaison)A. WELFORD CASTLEMAN, JR., The Pennsylvania State University (BCST
Liaison)JOSEPH M. D
ESIMONE, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, and NorthCarolina State University (BCST Liaison)JEFFREY J. S
IIROLA, Eastman Chemical Company (Steering Committee Liaison)ROBERT M. S
USSMAN, Latham & Watkins (BCST Liaison)Staff
JENNIFER J. J
ACKIW, Program OfficerSYBIL A. P
AIGE, Administrative AssociateDOUGLAS J. R
ABER, Senior ScholarDAVID C. R
ASMUSSEN, Program AssistantThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.v1Committee member until July 2001; subsequently the Board on Chemical Sciences and Tech-nology (BCST) liaison to the committee in her role as BCST co-chair.2Committee member until March 2002, following his retirement from DuPont.COMMITTEE ON CHALLENGES FOR THE CHEMICAL SCIENCESIN THE 21ST CENTURYRONALD BRESLOW, Columbia University, Co-ChairMATTHEW V. T
IRRELL, University of California at Santa Barbara, Co-ChairMARK A. B
ARTEAU, University of DelawareJACQUELINE K. B
ARTON, California Institute of TechnologyCAROLYN R. B
ERTOZZI, University of California at BerkeleyROBERT A. B
ROWN, Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyALICE P. G
AST,1 Stanford University
IGNACIO E. G
ROSSMANN, Carnegie Mellon UniversityJAMES M. M
EYER,2 DuPont Co.
ROYCE W. M
URRAY, University of North Carolina at Chapel HillPAUL J. R
EIDER, Amgen, Inc.WILLIAM R. R
OUSH, University of MichiganMICHAEL L. S
HULER, Cornell UniversityJEFFREY J. S
IIROLA, Eastman Chemical CompanyGEORGE M. W
HITESIDES, Harvard UniversityPETER G. W
OLYNES, University of California, San DiegoRICHARD N. Z
ARE, Stanford UniversityStaffJENNIFER J. J
ACKIW, Program OfficerCHRISTOPHER K. M
URPHY, Program OfficerSYBIL A. P
AIGE, Administrative AssociateDOUGLAS J. R
ABER, Senior ScholarDAVID C. R
ASMUSSEN, Program AssistantThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viBOARD ON CHEMICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGYALICE P. G
AST, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Co-ChairWILLIAM KLEMPERER, Harvard University, Co-ChairARTHUR I. B
IENENSTOCK, Stanford UniversityA. WELFORD CASTLEMAN, JR., The Pennsylvania State University
ANDREA W. C
HOW, Caliper Technologies Corp.THOMAS M. C
ONNELLY, JR., E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Co.
JEAN DE GRAEVE, Institut de Pathologie, Lige, BelgiumJOSEPH M. D
ESIMONE, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, and NorthCarolina State UniversityCATHERINE FENSELAU, University of MarylandJON FRANKLIN, University of MarylandMARY L. G
OOD, University of Arkansas, Little RockRICHARD M. G
ROSS, Dow Chemical CompanyNANCY B. J
ACKSON, Sandia National LaboratorySANGTAE KIM, Eli Lilly and CompanyTHOMAS J. M
EYER, Los Alamos National LaboratoryPAUL J. R
EIDER, Amgen, Inc.ARNOLD F. S
TANCELL, Georgia Institute of TechnologyROBERT M. S
USSMAN, Latham & WatkinsJOHN C. T
ULLY, Yale UniversityCHI-HUEY WONG, Scripps Research InstituteStaffJENNIFER J. J
ACKIW, Program OfficerCHRISTOPHER K. M
URPHY, Program OfficerSYBIL A. P
AIGE, Administrative AssociateDOUGLAS J. R
ABER, Senior ScholarDAVID C. R
ASMUSSEN, Program AssistantERIC L. S
HIPP, Postdoctoral AssociateDOROTHY ZOLANDZ, DirectorThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiPreface
The Workshop on the Environment was held in Irvine, California, on No-vember 17-19, 2002. This workshop was the third in a series of six workshops
that make up the study Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st Century.
The task for each of the workshops was defined as follows:Each workshopand its subsequent reportwill address a series of com-mon themes:Discovery: Identify major discoveries or advances in the chemical sci-ences during the last several decades.Interfaces: Identify the major discoveries and challenges at the interfacesbetween chemistry/chemical engineering and such areas as biology, environmen-
tal science, materials science, medicine, and physics.Challenges: Identify the grand challenges that exist in the chemical sci-ences.Infrastructure: Identify the issues and opportunities that exist in the chemi-cal sciences to improve the infrastructure for research and education, and demon-
strate the value of these activities to society.The Workshop on the Environment brought together a diverse group ofparticipants (Appendix F) from the chemical sciences who were addressed by
invited speakers in plenary session on a variety of issues and challenges for the
chemical sciences as they relate to environmental science and technology (Ap-
pendix C). These presentations served as a starting point for discussions and com-
ments by the participants. The workshop participants were then divided into small
groups that met periodically during the workshop to further discuss and analyzeThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiiPREFACEthe relevant issues. Each group reported its discussions to the workshop as awhole.This report is intended to reflect the concepts discussed and opinions ex-pressed at the Workshop on the Environment and is not intended to be a compre-
hensive overview of all of the potential challenges that exist for the chemical
sciences in the areas of environmental science and technology. The organizing
committee has used this input from workshop participants as a basis for the con-
clusions expressed in this report. However, sole responsibility for these conclu-
sions rests with the organizing committee.Although much progress has been achieved toward detailed mechanisticunderstanding in all environmental sciences, the greatest advances appear to have
occurred in the atmospheric chemistry field, reflecting most likely the greater
complexity of aquatic and terrestrial systems and their biological components.This study was conducted under the auspices of the National ResearchCouncils Board on Chemical Sciences and Technology, with assistance providedby its staff. The committee acknowledges this support.A number of our colleagues across the chemical sciences community pro-vided the committee with helpful input. The committee thanks Patrick G. Hatcher,
Robert G. Keesee, Karl T. Mueller, and Paul Ziemann.Mario J. Molina and John H. Seinfeld, Co-Chairs,Organizing Committee for the Workshop on the Environment
Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ixAcknowledgment of Reviewers
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for theirdiverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures ap-
proved by the National Research Councils (NRCs) Report Review Committee.The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical com-
ments that will assist the institution in making the published report as sound as
possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity,
evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. The review comments and draft

manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process.
We wish to thank the following individuals for their participation in the review of
this report:Heather C. Allen, The Ohio State UniversityLiese Dallbauman, Gas Technology Institute
Thom H. Dunning, Jr., Oak Ridge National Laboratory and University ofTennesseeWilliam H. Glaze, Oregon Health & Science University
George M. Hornberger, University of Virginia
Henry T. Kohlbrand, The Dow Chemical Company
Stephen G. Maroldo, Rohm and Haas Company
Peggy ODay, University of California, MercedEd Yeung, Iowa State UniversityAlthough the reviewers listed above have provided many constructivecomments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or
recommendations nor did they see the final draft of the report before its release.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERSThe review of this report was overseen by George E. Keller II (Union Carbide,retired). Appointed by the National Research Council, he was responsible for
making certain that an independent examination of this report was carried out in
accordance with institutional procedures and that all review comments were care-
fully considered. Responsibility for the final content of this report rests entirely
with the authoring committee and the institution.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiContentsEXECUTIVE SUMMARY1
1INTRODUCTION7

2SUCCESSES AND DISCOVERIES IN ENVIRONMENTAL
CHEMICAL SCIENCE10

Analytical Capabilities, 10
Fundamental Chemical Science, 11
Models and Databases, 12
Pollution Control, Remediation, and Purification, 12
Pollution Prevention: Synthesis, Manufacturing, and Process Advances, 15
Identification of Problems, 17Atmosphere, 17
Water, 20
Soil, 20Interdisciplinary Discoveries, 203CHALLENGES IN ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMICAL SCIENCE22
Fundamental Understanding, 25Human Influence on the Natural Environment, 25
Water and Sediment Chemistry, 26
Gas-to-Particle Conversion and Combustion Aerosol Formation, 30
Putting It All Together: Understanding Biogeochemical Cycles, 32The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiCONTENTSInstrumentation and Research Tools, 33Measurement Tools, 35
Modeling, Simulation, and Computational Chemistry, 41Approaches to Solutions, 44Pollution Prevention: Green Process Technology, 44
Remediation, 46
Cost-effectiveness, 48Interfaces and Infrastructure, 484CONCLUSIONS AND KEY OPPORTUNITIES50

APPENDIXES
ASTATEMENT OF TASK57
BBIOGRAPHIES OF THE ORGANIZING COMMITTEE MEMBERS58

CWORKSHOP AGENDA62

DWORKSHOP PRESENTATIONS
James G. Anderson, 66
Thomas W. Asmus, 75
Ruben G. Carbonell, 80
Uma Chowdhry, 85
Barry Dellinger, 97
David A. Dixon, 102
William H. Farland, 113
Janet G. Hering, 119
Charles E. Kolb, 127
Franois M.M. Morel, 136Michael K. Stern, 140
Mark H. Thiemens, 144EBIOGRAPHIES OF WORKSHOP SPEAKERS149

FWORKSHOP PARTICIPANTS155

GREPORTS FROM BREAKOUT SESSION GROUPS158
Discovery, 158
Interfaces, 162
Challenges, 168
Infrastructure, 172HLIST OF ACRONYMS176
The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Executive Summary
The chemical sciences have made enormous contributions to the well-beingof our nation and to that of the worldÑas an economic driver and through the
manufactured substances that range from life-saving pharmaceuticals to materi-
als that improve the safety of our automobiles. At the same time, the relationship
between the chemical sciences and the environment is on less firm ground. Indeed,
to a great extent the environmental movement in the 1970s began in response to
harmful effects of certain industrial chemicals. It matters little that those harmful
effects were unintentional, because the harm was real.Over the last several decades, chemists and chemical engineersÑindeed, theentire chemical enterpriseÑhave made remarkable progress on several fronts.
Earlier practicesÑof disposing of chemical waste directly into the air, water-
ways, and soilÑlargely have been replaced with approaches that have much lower
environmental impact. Industrial and automotive smog have been greatly reduced,
our rivers and streams are much cleaner than they were three decades ago, and we
have almost completely eliminated the use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and
other halogenated compounds that cause ozone depletion in the stratosphere.

Modern pesticides are safer for the environment and are used in much smaller
quantities, and the chemical industry has adopted a program of Responsible Care1in which it practices stewardship of the chemicals it produces from cradle to
grave. Perhaps most importantly, the research activities of chemists and chemical
engineers have made huge strides toward understanding the chemistry of the envi-
ronment at a fundamental level.1http://www.americanchemistry.com/The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2THE ENVIRONMENTHowever, much remains to be done. The challenge is global in nature: notonly do countries around the world face environmental problems, but pollutants
generated in one location are transported across continents and oceans. Similarly,
the different parts of the environment are interconnected, and attempting to man-
age environmental sinks separately will only move the problem from one phase
to another. The magnitude and scope of the problem is huge, and the inescapability
of environmental problems demands major effort  in science and engineering. In
November 2002, as part of Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st
Century, the Board on Chemical Sciences and Technology convened the Work-
shop on the Environment in Irvine, California. The workshop organizing com-
mittee assembled a group of top environmental scientists to deliver plenary lec-
tures (Appendix C), and an outstanding group of chemical scientists and
engineersÑfrom academia, government, national laboratories, and industriallaboratoriesÑwas recruited to participate in the workshop (Appendix F). Throughthe use of extensive discussion periods and breakout sessions, input from the
entire group of participants was obtained during the course of the workshop. The
results of the breakout sessions are presented in Appendix G, and written versions
of the speakersÕ presentations are provided in Appendix D. In combination with
other references cited in this report, the data collected at the workshop provide
the basis for this report.The structure of the Workshop on the Environment followed that of the par-ent project and each of the other workshops that were held as part of the study of
Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st Century (Materials and Manu-
facturing, Energy and Transportation, National Security and Homeland Defense,
Information and Communications, and Health and Medicine). Under this struc-
ture, the workshop addressed four specific themes:1.Discovery:What major discoveries or advances related to the environ-ment have been made in the chemical sciences during the last several decades?2.Interfaces:What are the major environment-related discoveries and chal-lenges at the interfaces between chemistryÐchemical engineering and other disci-plines, including biology, information science, materials science, and physics?3.Challenges:What are the environment-related grand challenges in thechemical sciences and engineering?4.Infrastructure:What are the issues at the intersection of environmentalstudies and the chemical sciences for which there are structural challenges and
opportunitiesÑin teaching, research, equipment, codes and software, facilities,and personnel?Workshop participants provided a broad range of experience and perspec-tive, and their discussions and presentations identified a wide variety of opportu-
nities and challenges in chemistry and chemical engineering. These opportunities
and challenges, which are documented throughout this report (including many ofThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY3the specifics described in Appendix D and Appendix G), led the committee to itsoverarching conclusions.Conclusion: Chemistry and chemical engineering have made major con-tributions to solving environmental problems.Specific areas of accomplishment include¥major increases in analytical capabilitiesÑdetection, monitoring, andmeasurement;¥increased understanding of biogeochemical processes and cycles;¥advances in industrial ecologyÑnew attitudes about pollution prevention;¥development of environmentally benign materials (e.g., CFC replace-ments);¥new methods for waste treatment and pollution prevention;¥green chemistry and new chemical processes;¥discovery of environmental problems and identification of their underly-ing causes and mechanisms; and¥development of improved modeling and simulation techniques.Conclusion: Collaboration of chemists and chemical engineers with sci-entists and engineers in other disciplines has led to important discover-
ies.These contributions have enhanced both basic understanding and the solu-tion of environmental problems through work at the interfaces of the chemical
sciences with biology, physics, engineering, materials science, mathematics, com-
puter science, atmospheric science, meteorology, and geology.Conclusion: Manifold challenges and opportunities in chemistry andchemical engineering exist at the interface with the environmental sci-
ences.By responding to these opportunities and challenges, the chemical sciencescommunity will be able to make substantial contributions to¥fundamental understanding of the environment,¥remediation of environmental problems that currently exist,¥prevention of environmental problems in the future, and¥protection of the environment.The stakes for responding to these challenges are high because regulatorydecisions might cost or preserve billions of dollars, impact millions of human
lives, or even determine the fate of entire species.Much of the discussion at the workshop emphasized the interrelated natureof the many parts of the environment. Typically, it is not possible to take action inThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4THE ENVIRONMENTone area without creating at least the possibility of impacting other areas as well.In order to avoid such undesired consequences, a systems approach will be needed
for the discovery and management of problems of the atmosphere, water, and
soil. This will be necessary not only for understanding the complexity of each
medium but for avoiding regulatory-driven tendencies to simply shift impacts
from one medium to another.A life-cycle systems approach, similar to what has been developed to evalu-ate energy impacts, will facilitate sound management of environmental impacts.
This will provide a clear understanding of both where and when environmental
impacts occur in the life of a product, process, or service. It also will make it
possible to appreciate all impacts, and to see how interactions and alternatives at
each point in a life cycle can influence other parts of the life cycle. For chemical
processing and manufacturing, significant impact can occur at various stages,
including extraction and preparation of raw materials, conversion of raw materi-
als into products, separation and purification of materials, product distribution,
end use of products, and final disposition after the useful life of products.Conclusion: A systems approach is essential for solution of environmen-tal problems.The systems approach will be needed in several areas, including¥actions that affect any of the three principal environmental sinks (air, wa-ter, and soil) and the biological systems with which they interact, where attempts
to manage each of them separately will surely transfer impacts from one medium
to another;¥spatial management of environmental-impact sourcesÑwhere the impactsare generated in a processing and manufacturing sequence; and¥temporal management of environmental-impact sourcesÑwhen the im-pacts are generated in a processing and manufacturing sequence.The use of systems approaches will necessitate simulation and modeling ofenormously large and complex systems. This will require significant computa-
tional resources, intensive efforts in complex optimization, and formulation of
mathematical models. Input and expertise from a broad array of scientific, engi-
neering, and social disciplines will be an essential part of developing the neces-
sary tools.Conclusion: Solving environmental problems will require intensivemathematical modeling, complex optimization, and computational re-
sources.Systems approaches will necessitate extensive collaborations among a widerange of scientific, engineering, and social disciplines. Modeling of large envi-The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY5ronmental systems (e.g., climate modeling that spans large temporal and spatialranges) will generate massive datasets, fast  and robust networks, and powerful

computers for processing the data arrays.A broad array of research challenges face the chemical sciences, both inareas of fundamental understanding and for specific environmental problems.Conclusion: Important opportunities exist for chemists and chemical en-gineers to contribute to a better understanding of the environment.Many of these research opportunities will involve work at the interfaces withother disciplines or interdisciplinary collaborations with scientists and engineers
from those disciplines. Just as these collaborations have led to significant progress
in the past, they should be expected to play an important role in the future to fully
understand and solve environmental problems. Examples include the need to un-
derstand (or better understand)¥structure-toxicity relations;¥chemical processes at the molecular level;¥biological and physicochemical interactions in response to environmentalstresses;¥fate and transport of anthropogenic chemicals;¥biogeochemical cycles;¥gas-to-particle conversion in the atmosphere;¥functional genomics and the chemical processes that govern organism-environment relationships; and¥chemical-gene interactions in the real environment.As we continue to better understand the underlying science of the environ-ment, further advances will require new tools and instruments.Conclusion: Chemists and chemical engineers will need to develop newanalytical instruments and tools.These tools and instruments will have to function effectively in an increas-ingly complex research arena that involves measurements of vanishingly small
quantities of substances in the presence of contamination from other chemicals,
under circumstances that make sample acquisition difficult. They will have to
address three principal areas of measurement:1.laboratory analyses
2.field measurements

3.theoretical tools for modeling and comparison with experiment
Conclusion: Improved methods for sampling and monitoring must bedeveloped.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6THE ENVIRONMENTChemists and chemical engineers will have to address the challenges ofsampling and monitoringÑair, water, and soilÑmore extensively and morefrequently than can be done now. This will require improvements in instrumenta-
tion, in sampling methodology, and in techniques for remote measurements.Conclusion: The new approaches of green chemistry and sustainablechemistry offer the potential for developing chemical and manufactur-
ing processes that are environmentally beneficial.We are still in the early stages, but successful examples already have beenreported. If the necessary investment is made in these new directions, chemists
and chemical engineers will be able to make major strides in improving environ-
mental quality.Conclusion: Strong and continued support of the chemical sciences willbe an essential part of the federal research investment for understand-
ing, improving, and protecting the environment.Chemists and chemical engineers will be able to respond effectively to thechallenges described here only if they have the resources needed to carry out the
necessary research. This impact of support will be enhanced if it facilitates inter-
disciplinary research and encourages industrial partnerships. The scientific
progress resulting from such support will inform and enable the policy-making
and decision process that is essential to future environmental improvement.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.71IntroductionFor millennia, advances in human progress have been tied to our ability toprotect ourselves from the harmful effects of the wastes we produceÑranging
from human waste to the organic and inorganic by-products of everyday living.
Across the world, cultures learned to bury their dead away from their homes and
to burn their waste or make certain that it was carried away by streams and rivers
flowing downstream from their homes. Those cultures that learned this most ef-
fectively thrived. When the industrial revolution took place in the nineteenth cen-
tury, rivers again enabled progress. They provided water needed for power and
energy, and they carried away the waste materials from industrial processes.However, things had changed by the middle of the twentieth century. Theincrease in human population and the growth of modern industry were leading to
signs that the system was overloaded. There were reports of rivers that had turned
orange or had caught on fire, the smog over some cities was becoming intoler-
able, and there were signs of negative health consequences from buried waste.
The methods of waste disposal that had helped us build our modern society were
turning back on us. Public attention was captured by Rachel CarsonÕs book SilentSpring,1 and events surrounding the Vietnam war were changing the political
landscape. In 1970 the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency was formed, and
the Clean Air Act was passed later that same year. Additional legislation fol-
lowed to cover other areas of the environment.Many of the problems that needed to be solved were chemical in nature, andthe chemical industry was seen by many as the source of our environmental prob-1Rachel Carson, Silent Spring; Houghton Mifflin: New York, 1962.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8THE ENVIRONMENTlems. Suddenly we had moved beyond industry and modern technology as thesource of our high quality of life. The chemical industry was no longer viewed in
a positive light. As with most such situations, there were conflicts between regu-
latory policy and the financial interests of the companies being regulated, and
progress was sometimes slow. But changes have been made. The rivers are
cleaner, and the smog has decreased. Bird populations are no longer suffering the
effects of DDT, and disposal of chemical waste is carried out in a safer and more
reliable manner. The chemical industry, through the American Chemistry Coun-
cil, has established a strong industry standard with its Responsible Care program.
The committee organized a workshop that was held in Irvine, California, inNovember 2002, to address ways in which chemists and chemical engineers could
focus their R&D efforts on the solution of environmental problems. This report is
part of a broader project, Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st Cen-
tury. The overview report for the project includes a chapter on Atmospheric and
Environmental Chemistry.2 A series of speakers (Appendix F) presented lectures
(Appendix D) on topics that covered all parts of the environmentÑthe biosphere,the atmosphere, soil, and water. They addressed issues in manufacturing, energy
production, and remediation of those parts of the environment that already have
suffered damage. Considerable input for the report was also provided by a series
of breakout sessions (Appendix G) in which all workshop attendees participated
(Appendix E). These breakout sessions explored the ways in which chemists and
chemical engineers already have contributed to solving environmental problems,
the technical challenges that they can help to overcome in the future, and the
barriers that will have to be overcome for them to do so. The specific questions
addressed in the four breakout sessions were the following:¥Discovery:What major discoveries or advances related to the environ-ment have been made in the chemical sciences during the last several decades?¥Interfaces:What are the major environment-related discoveries and chal-lenges at the interfaces between chemistryÐchemical engineering and other disci-plines, including biology, information science, materials science, and physics?¥Challenges:What are the environment-related grand challenges in thechemical sciences and engineering?¥Infastructure:What are the issues at the intersection of environmentalstudies and the chemical sciences for which there are structural challenges and
opportunitiesÑin teaching, research, equipment and instrumentation, facilities,and personnel?2Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, National
Research Council, The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2003.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION9WeÕve seen much progress in the past few decades, but more remains to be done.Some regulations are in place, while others are still being developed. The anxiety
over global climate change has introduced an entirely new set of concerns in the
last decade, with conflicting proposals about how the world should respond. One
thing is certain, however, and that is the need for the chemical sciences commu-
nity to participate in solving the problems.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102Successes and Discoveries in
Environmental Chemical Science
Progress in environmental science during the last several decades has de-pended heavily on contributions from chemistry and chemical engineering. These
contributions range from understanding fundamental concepts of the behavior of
materials in the environment to the development of procedures for protecting the
environment and remediating environmentally contaminated sites. In the areas of
fundamental science and engineering, the contributions fall into the categories of
new or enhanced analytical capabilities, advances in fundamental science, and
the development of new models and databases. Chemical contributions in the
areas of environmental protection and remediation can be classified into tech-
nologies for pollution control and remediation and for pollution prevention via
synthesis, manufacturing, and process advances.ANALYTICAL CAPABILITIESDevelopments in analytical capabilities have allowed chemists and chemicalengineers to detect ever smaller quantities of chemical substances. One hundred
years ago, chemists were challenged by the task of carrying out analysis on
samples smaller than a gram. But in some cases it is now possible to detect and
measure the presence of substances at the level of single molecules, an improve-
ment of some 20 orders of magnitude. Increases in time resolution have been
similarly astonishing, from a situation in which it was difficult to measure events
taking place at a time scale of less than a second to the investigation of processes
that take place on the femtosecond (10Ð15 s) time scale. Often the measurements
must be made remotely or must examine substances that are present in vanish-
ingly small concentrations.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUCCESSES AND DISCOVERIES IN ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMICAL SCIENCE11Some of the improvements in detection, monitoring, and measurementscience that have contributed to advances in environmental science include the
development of the electron-capture detector (with its high sensitivity for haloge-
nated organic compounds), the application of gas chromatography-mass spec-
trometry (which combines separation of mixtures with reliable identification of
their components), advances in sensor technology, and the availability of syn-
chrotron-based methods for x-ray studies. Improved mass spectrometric methods
have made it possible to characterize single aerosol particles in the atmosphere
and have provided improved time resolution for atmospheric measurements. Sat-
ellite-based technology and remote sensing have enabled monitoring and space-
based measurements that are far more comprehensive than those that were pos-
sible using aircraft and balloons.FUNDAMENTAL CHEMICAL SCIENCEAdvances in the understanding of basic chemical science have been respon-sible for substantial progress in environmental science. Similarly, progress in
environmental chemistry has driven fundamental science, as illustrated by the
vastly improved understanding of the nature of complex bimolecular reactions
brought about by investigations of important atmospheric chemical processes.
Key contributions include the following:¥advances in fundamental understanding of the chemistry of free radicals,which play key roles in a variety of atmospheric, aquatic, and terrestrial chemical
processes;¥advances in surface chemistry that have provided a better understandingof reactions on surfaces and in microporous regions;¥better understanding of homogeneous gas-phase chemistry;¥establishing structure-activity relationships for the activity and fate ofchemical species in the environment;¥advances in genetics at the molecular level that have made it possible touse bioremediation to clean up environmentally contaminated sites and to under-
stand generic gene-environment relationships in the environment;¥fundamental understanding of the internal combustion process, which hasled to improved engine efficiency; and¥advances in chemically based technologies (e.g., fuel cells, batteries, andphotovoltaics) that have contributed to environmental improvements in the en-
ergy and transportation sectors.11 Also see the related report in this series: 
Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st Cen-tury: Energy and Transportation, National Research Council, The National Academies Press, Wash-ington, D.C., 2003.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12THE ENVIRONMENTSome of the advances in fundamental science  that have led to new attitudesand approaches to environmental problems include the use of correlated chemical
measurements to investigate environmental processes, development of industrial
ecology as a framework for studying issues, use of life-cycle analysis to evaluate
the impact of substances in the environment, recognition of the importance of
speciation (in contrast to total concentration) of chemical substances, and recog-
nition that a systems approach is often necessary to address complex environ-
mental issues.MODELS AND DATABASESBy any criteria one might employ, the environment is a large and complexsystem. As a consequence, there are large barriers to developing predictive capa-
bilities, even for localized portions of the environment. However, these barriers
have been partially surmounted by the substantial progress that has been made in
computing-related areas, enabled in large part by the tremendous growth over the
last several decades in computing speed and capabilities. Specific areas of ac-
complishment include the generation of databases of kinetic and thermodynamic
data, new software and modeling techniques (at scales from molecular to global),
development of computational models that permit the simulation of both funda-
mental and complex systems with ever increasing fidelity, and to some extent,
advances in predicting risk and taking risk-based corrective action.POLLUTION CONTROL, REMEDIATION, AND PURIFICATIONTechnical solutions have been developed to a number of important environ-mental problems. One of the most important contributions to human health has
been the chemical purification of drinking water, which has nearly eliminated
water-borne diseases in developed countries.2 Disinfection with chlorine and
ozonation have been used to eliminate pathogens, and advances in membrane
science have enabled removal of various substances from water. Many of the
technical solutions have been developed in response to unexpected problems cre-
ated by other technical advances.Solutions have not been limited to water, however. Atmospheric pollutionfrom automobiles has decreased dramatically in the last 25 years since the devel-
opment and deployment of the catalytic converter (Box 2-1). Modern three-way
catalysts can simultaneously reduce the concentrations of carbon monoxide, hy-
drocarbons, and nitrogen oxides in the automobileÕs exhaust stream. Also, newmethods for remediation of contaminated soils have been provided by the selec-
tion of unique plants and microbes for this purpose.2Greatest Engineering Achievements of the 20th Century; National Academy of Engineering:Washington, DC, 2000; http://www.greatachievements.org/.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUCCESSES AND DISCOVERIES IN ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMICAL SCIENCE13BOX 2-1Automotive Exhaust Emission ControlAutomotive emissions have declined markedly over the past 15 yearsas illustrated in the chart below. With advances in combustion and after-treatment technologies, the period 1990-2005 will have seen an 80%
reduction in hydrocarbon emissions and a more than 90% reduction in
nitrogen oxide emissions. This remarkable improvement follows a com-parable reduction in the preceding 15-year interval. The success of auto-
motive emissions control has required a systems approach involving fuelquality, engine control theory, engine control computation power andsoftware, engine control hardware, and catalytic converter technology.continued 0100200300400500Tier 0
Tier I
NLEVTier 2
FTP NMHC Emissions, g/mile
83-9494-0004-1099-06FEDERAL STANDARDS
U.S. Hydrocarbon Standards 
Passenger Cars020040060080010001200Tier 0
Tier I
NLEVTier 2
FTP NO
x Emissions, g/mileU.S. NOx StandardsPassenger CarsCatalytic Converter Technology for TodayÕs Gasoline EnginesThe three-way exhaust catalytic converter is used to complete thecombustion of carbon monoxide and unburned fuel elements and toremove the NO and NO2 produced during combustion. The primary com-
ponents of the catalytic converter are the catalyst and its physical sup-
port. The catalyst is composed of a high-surface-area support that incor-porates the primary catalytically active materials, typically mixtures ofone or more of platinum, palladium, or rhodium (precious group metals,

PGMs). The catalyst also contains promoters that improve the efficiencyand stability of the PGM. Of these, the most important is cerium oxide, aThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14THE ENVIRONMENTpromoter that is used to buffer small compositional swings in the exhaustcomposition within the catalytic converter.Major improvements in hydrocarbon oxidation activity and overallthermal durability were achieved through the use of more palladium-richformulations as lead disappeared from the fuel supply. Palladium is highlyprone to lead-based deactivation. The dramatic increase in palladium in

the late 1990s caused a significant supply-demand imbalance in the PGMmarkets in 2000, driving up palladium prices tenfold. The recent effort toreduce requirements for palladium without affecting hydrocarbon perfor-

mance restored the market balance.Additional improvement has come from 3-4 times faster warm-up of
the catalytic converter to 250 C, the temperature at which it becomes
active.  The majority of vehicle emissions occur during this catalyst 
Òlight-offÓ period. Two features led to faster light-off. The catalyst was posi-
tioned closer to the engine to experience higher-temperature exhaust,
and the thermal mass of the catalyst was reduced. This required catalystmaterials with enhanced thermal durability and resistance to sinteringand chemical poisoning from exhaust gas components. Neither thermal

degradation nor chemical degradation is particularly well understood.A key was the development of more thermally stable forms of ceriumoxide. Unstabilized cerium oxide degrades rapidly at exhaust tempera-

tures in excess of 800 C, and this degradation significantly reduces the
efficiency of the catalyst for NO-NO2 reduction. Greater thermal stability
was achieved by forming solid solutions of stabilizers such as zirconium
oxide and lanthanum oxide in cerium oxide. Hence, these new materialsare the most significant enablers for the lower NO-NO2 standards re-
quired for 2004 and beyond.Reduced thermal mass came from changes to the catalyst support.
The catalyst materials are deployed as a thin coating on a ceramic hon-eycomb substrate. The surface area for the deployment of the catalytic
coating, and the mass of the substrate both contribute to the overall per-formance of the catalytic converter. The surface area was increased byreducing the thickness of the channel walls, thereby increasing the flow
channel density and reducing the thermal mass of the substrate.Catalytic Converter Technology: Lean-Burn EnginesThe three-way catalyst works in a narrow range of air-fuel ratio, ap-
proximately the stoichiometric ratio. Hence, it is not effective with lean-burn engines that offer higher fuel efficiency at the expense of higher
NOx emissions.  Catalytic systems under development for post-2004 U.S.
NOx emission regulations are based on NO
x traps, which adsorb NO
x as
nitrates. These emission control systems are Òactive.Ó They require peri-BOX 2-1 ContinuedcontinuedThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUCCESSES AND DISCOVERIES IN ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMICAL SCIENCE15odic temperature increases and injection of reductant to regenerate theNOx traps by release and catalytic conversion of the adsorbed nitrates to
free the adsorption sites for further activity. Gasoline lean-burn engines
can be controlled for periodic stoichiometric operation, but other strate-gies are required for lean-burn diesel engine systems. Prototype sys-tems have used post-engine injections of urea or fuel as the triggering
reductant with marginal success. Similarly, particles in diesel exhaustrequire filters where the particles are removed either continuously with acatalyst coating that promotes their oxidation or by periodic high-tem-
perature excursions in engine conditions to incinerate particles trappedon a filter. Combustion in diesel engines is carefully controlled to balanceNOx and particulate matter (PM). Several prototype PM filter systems
have been demonstrated successfully with diesel engines, but NOx con-
trol remains a challenge for engine operation and catalyst technology.The key chemical science challenge is kinetics. How does one ob-tain quantitative kinetic information for real, commercial, heterogeneouscatalysts without resorting to time-consuming experiments?  Similarly,
simulations are required to design catalyst systems for performance at
end of life, 150,000 miles.  Simulations currently use empirically derived,
aged-catalyst parameters. Driving vehicles to end of life to acquire datafor variants of aftertreatment systems is laborious and does not provide
sufficient statistical confidence. Hence, the science of accelerated agingand simulation tools for complex flow in chemically active heterogeneous
systems is key to addressing challenges for bringing lean-burn, fuel-effi-
cient engines to U.S. roads.POLLUTION PREVENTION:SYNTHESIS, MANUFACTURING, AND PROCESS ADVANCESEnvironmental contributions from the chemical sciences have not been lim-ited to cleaning up existing problems. Major contributions have been also been
made in pollution prevention, so that the undesired components are never gener-ated in the first place. Some of the contributions include¥using life-cycle analysis to identify more clearly where and when envi-ronmental impacts occur in the cycle of raw material production and product
manufacture, packaging, storage, use, and disposal;¥improving existing processes, such as the development of cleaner-burningfuels, for which less exhaust-stream treatment is needed;BOX 2-1 ContinuedThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16THE ENVIRONMENT¥using substitutesÑfor example, replacing organic solvents with water orsupercritical carbon dioxide to reduce emissions of organic solvents into the envi-
ronment; other substitutes include replacement for heavy metals and chlorofluoro-

carbon (CFC) replacements as discussed in Box 2-2;¥enhancing energy efficiency and development of improved photovoltaicdevices;¥developing degradable materials such as pesticides and polymers to reducepotential problems associated with persistent chemicals and materials;¥using biomass rather than petroleum as a feedstock for chemical processes;and¥employing atom economy as a strategy in chemical processes, therebyminimizing the amounts of waste for disposal.Much of the contribution that has been made in these areas is encom-passed by the phrase green chemistry,which is an approach to doing chemistryand chemical engineering that minimizes negative impacts on the environment
through pollution prevention. It has been defined as the Òdesign of chemical prod-ucts and processes that reduce or eliminate the use and generation of hazardous
substances.Ó3 Such processes continue to be developed, and they demonstrate
that such technologies can be both economically and environmentally viable. Sev-
eral speakers at the workshop presented examples of green process technologies
(see Appendix D):¥Development of new catalysts eliminates carbon tetrachloride as a by-product in the production of phosgene from carbon monoxide and chlorine (U.
Chowdhry);¥Manufacture of new high-solids enamel for automotive coatings reducesvolatile organic compound emissions, reduces odor emissions by 86%, and
reduces total raw materials use by 20% (U. Chowdhry);¥The use of a bio-based catalyst to make a key intermediate (5-cyano-valeramide) in the production of a new herbicide has increased the yield from
20% to 93% and greatly reduced the quantity of catalyst waste (U. Chowdhry);¥Polymerization of fluoroolefins in liquid and supercritical carbon dioxideeliminates the use of water and C-8 surfactant that has been identified as a persis-
tent organic pollutant (R. Carbonell);¥The development of surfactants for CO2 has made possible the commer-
cialization of a dry cleaning process replacing perchloroethylene (R. Carbonell);¥The use of new catalyst in the process for manufacture of glyphosate (aherbicide with desirable environmental properties) results in the use of reduced
waste, raw materials with lower toxicity and volatility, and lower energy con-
sumption (M. Stern); and3http://www.epa.gov/opptintr/greenchemistry/The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUCCESSES AND DISCOVERIES IN ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMICAL SCIENCE17¥Genetic modification of soybeans, corn, canola, and cotton has producedglyphosate-resistant crops that lead to lower pesticide use, yield improvement,
and improved water quality (M. Stern).The Presidential Green Chemistry Challenge Awards Program4 has rec-
ognized a wide range of accomplishments that include the following:¥Cost-effective production of 1,3-propanediol, a new feedstock for polyes-ters, using a genetically engineered fermentation pathway (DuPont, 2003);¥Polylactic acid, a polymer for fibers and packaging that is derived fromrenewable resources  (Cargill Dow LLC, 2002);
¥Waste-free manufacture of an environmentally friendly chelating agent(Bayer Corporation and Bayer AG, 2001);¥Enzymes and processes for large-scale organic synthesis (Chi-HueyWong, 2000);¥A new catalyst for oxidation in pharmaceutical manufacturing that re-duces chromium waste and solvent usage (Lilly Research Laboratories, 1999);¥The concept of atom economy (Barry M. Trost, 1998);¥Surfactants for supercritical CO2 (Joseph M. DeSimone, 1997); and
¥Manufacturing of polystyrene foam with CO2 replacing CFCs as the blow-
ing agent (Dow Chemical Company, 1996).IDENTIFICATION OF PROBLEMSEnvironmental problems cannot be solved if they have not first been de-tected. Many environmental problems have been chemical in nature, but they
have occurred as unexpected consequences of other processes or developments.
Discovering such problemsÑincluding identification of their underlying causesand elucidation of the details of the chemical processes involvedÑhas reliedheavily on the work of chemists and chemical engineers.AtmosphereChemically related atmospheric problems have had high visibility in recentyears. No matter how cautious one may be on the topic of global warming, it is
clear that the greenhouse effect of carbon dioxide, methane, ozone, nitrous oxide,
and the CFCs must be considered as a factor in global climate change. The mo-
lecular behavior of the greenhouse gases explain their ability to absorb infrared
radiation from the earth and convert it to heat. Similarly, the photochemistry of
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs)Ñmolecules originally believed to be completelybenignÑprovided the explanation for stratospheric ozone depletion.4 http://www.epa.gov/opptintr/greenchemistry/docs/award_recipients_1996_2002.pdfThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18THE ENVIRONMENTBOX 2-2 CFC Replacements
 a,bFor nearly half a century, chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) were regarded
as versatile wonder chemicals. Originally developed in the 1930s as non-toxic and nonflammable alternatives to hazardous chemicals such asammonia and sulfur dioxide for refrigeration applications, in subsequent
decades they found a host of applications ranging from cleaning and
degreasing agents, to polymer foam blowing agents, to aerosol propel-
lants. As the connection of these compounds to stratospheric ozone
depletion was made, and the understanding of the chemical and physicalprocesses behind this phenomenon developed, phase-out of the use andmanufacture of these compounds was mandated, beginning with the
Montreal Protocol of 1987 and its subsequent amendments.In the decade and a half since, a number of application-specific al-ternatives have been developed. Cleaning and degreasing agents in-
clude liquid CO2, citric acid, and other compounds for demanding appli-cations such as microelectronics manufacturing. Blowing and propellantagents include CO2 and butane, among others. Significant capture and
recycling efforts have also been implemented, since release and large-scale accumulation of any chemical, CFCs or their replacements, in the
environment is likely to have some negative impact, whether in the strato-

sphere or not.The most visible consequence of CFC elimination for the consumerhas been in refrigeration and air-conditioning applications. CFCs in late-

model refrigerators, and home and automobile air conditioners have beensupplanted by hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) and hydrochlorofluorocarbons(HCFCs). CFC-12 (CF2Cl2) has been eliminated in automotive units infavor of HFC-134a (CF3CH2F). While this changeover has occurred in aremarkably short period, the magnitude of the scientific and technologi-cal challenges surmounted should not be understated. Ideal specifica-
tions for a CFC replacement include thermophysical properties of boththe liquid and gaseous states that match those of the CFC in use, non-flammability, nontoxicity, compatibility with system components and lu-

bricants, ease of manufacture, low cost, and of course, greatly reduced
potential for depletion of stratospheric ozone. Meeting all of these chal-lenges to come up with the alternatives that we use today required sig-

nificant theoretical and experimental efforts. Advanced theoretical andcomputational tools were needed to calculate the thermodynamic prop-erties of candidate CFC replacements and to model their transport, reac-
tion, and ozone-depleting potential in the atmosphere. Experimental stud-ies developed databases of HFC and HCFC property measurements,and created new catalysts and processes for manufacturing these com-

pounds. New manufacturing facilities were constructed for commercialproduction.Why is HFC-134a instead of CFC-12 in our cars and homes today?The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUCCESSES AND DISCOVERIES IN ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMICAL SCIENCE19The simple answer is that it has practically no impact (zero ozone deple-tion potential) on the stratosphere. The reason for this involves severaldifferent characteristics of the HFC molecule. First, it contains no chlo-
rine, and therefore cannot release the principal ozone-depleting photo-chemical product of CFC-12, chlorine atoms, into the atmosphere. Sec-ond, because it incorporates hydrogen, HFC-134a is less stable than
CFCs in the atmosphere. The strategy here may seem counterintuitive at
first. If the deleterious effects of CFCs are due to their degradation prod-
ucts, one might attempt to make their replacements more stable and
thereby reduce the release of such products. Yet the key is not just whatand how much is released, but where. Part of the lower ozone depletion
potential of HFC-134a is that it degrades sooner (i.e., at lower elevation)
and does not reach the stratosphere to react with ozone there.HFCs and HCFCs both act as greenhouse gases, so environmental
concerns about those effects have not yet been resolved by using them
as replacements for CFCs. However, their atmospheric lifetimes are onlya few years, in contrast to those of the CFC, which may be many de-
cades.What lessons can we learn from this example? First, no compound,however wonderful, is likely to be entirely benign when released into theenvironment in large quantities and over a significant length of time.
Sooner or later its effects will be felt because of its accumulation, appear-ance, and action in unexpected places (and often by unexpected mecha-nisms). The inertness of CFCs that made them appealing in a wide range

of applications, including consumer products, allowed them to reach the
stratosphere in significant quantities before degrading. Moreover the chlo-
rine atoms released there act as catalysts for ozone destruction, greatly
amplifying their impact. Thus, a second lesson has to do with the persis-tence and the action of compounds in the environment. It is desirable thatthese compounds exhibit limited lifetimes and that they and their degra-
dation products not act by catalytic or self-replicating processes that
amplify their environmental impact. Yet another lesson is that the pro-cess of reduction of the environmental impact of human creations is a
continuous one. Although HFCs are in wide use today, some see these
as merely the first step away from CFCs toward even more environmen-
tally desirable alternatives. These and other challenges will continue to
require the best efforts of chemists, chemical engineers, environmentalscientists, atmospheric modelers, and investigators from a host of other
disciplines, for (and on behalf of) generations to come.aSee The Ozone Depletion Phenomenon, Beyond Discovery, The NationalAcademies, Washington, DC, 1996; http://www.beyonddiscovery.org/.bAlso see Box 3-2.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20THE ENVIRONMENTChemists and chemical engineers have also contributed to the recognition ofthe importance of particulate matter in the atmosphere and the heterogeneous
atmospheric chemistry that the particulate matter enables. Similarly, chemists
and chemical engineers have provided the basic science that led to an understand-
ing of photochemical smog formation and acid rain. This further helped to estab-
lish the role of biogenic emissions in the formation of smog.WaterMany environmental problems in water result from chemical species that arepresent in only trace quantities. Consequently, chemical analysis and detection
have made major contributions to discovering and understanding these problems.
Examples include the problems of bioaccumulation of certain chemicals, persis-
tent organic pollutants, pesticide residues, and the health effects of arsenic and
lead as well as other trace metals.SoilSoil contamination also can be very difficult to detect. New analytical meth-ods have made it possible to detect and analyze dioxins, polyaromatic hydrocar-
bons (PAHs), and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). Analytical techniques have
made it possible to detect the presence of these substances, determine whether
remediation is needed, and evaluate the extent to which it has been carried out.
Chemistry has provided or contributed to the remediation technologies that have
been developed,Chemists and chemical engineers have helped to develop a better under-standing of interfacial processes. These govern the behavior of pollutants at the
soil-water interface, and understanding them is essential to any remediation ef-
fort. Such interfacial processes can be of particular importance for the radioac-
tively contaminated sites that were created over many years in the nationÕs nuclearweapons program.INTERDISCIPLINARY DISCOVERIESChemists and chemical engineers do not work in isolation, and much of thework described here has involved collaboration with scientists and engineers in
other disciplines. In many cases these collaborations have enabled particularly
important advances in environmental science, as illustrated by the examples in
the following list:The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUCCESSES AND DISCOVERIES IN ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMICAL SCIENCE21Biology¥Microbial in situ bioremediation and microbial community genomics¥Proteomics and metabolomics¥Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and revolutions in molecular biologyPhysics and Engineering¥Tools: new instrumentation; sensors, measurement systems and platformsMaterials Science¥New catalystsMathematics and Computer Science¥Multiscale computing (time and space)¥Bioinformatics (handling huge databases); analysis of high-throughputdatasets¥Development and implementation of efficient molecular modeling soft-ware on advanced computersAtmospheric Science, Meteorology, and Geology¥Biogeochemical cycles (carbon, nitrogen, etc.)¥Mechanisms and impact of contaminantsMany additional examples of collaborative work were brought up during theworkshop, and these are summarized in Appendix G (Interfaces). It is frequently
difficult to identify the particular scientific accomplishment that have led to envi-
ronmental improvements or enhanced environmental understanding, in large part
because environmental studies are inherently multidisciplinary. Consequently,
cooperation across disciplinesÑas described above and in Appendix GÑwillcontinue to be necessary to fully understand and solve environmental problems,
so the list also represents research opportunities for the future.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.223Challenges in Environmental
Chemical ScienceChemical scientists and engineers have a particularly strong stake in the fu-ture of the environment. Many of the most important environmental threats are
causedÑor at least perceived to be causedÑby release of undesirable chemicals
into the air, water, or soil. In some cases, the source of such chemicals is natural,as in the highly publicized case of arsenic-contaminated groundwater inBangladesh1 and also in some parts of the United States.
2 Chronic exposure to
small amounts of arsenic in drinking water increases a personÕs risk of cancer and
other diseases.3 High concentrations of arsenic found in the aquifers in
Bangladesh and West Bengal pose serious threats to public health; estimates of
population at risk run from 30,000,000 to a high of 80,000,000.4 In other in-
stances, human activity has been the origin of the chemical release. Some of the
most important cases are also the most ironicÑbecause the harmful effects on the
environment were a direct consequence of a technological innovation that was
intended to enhance environmental quality. Two compelling examples are pro-
vided by DDT (Box 3-1) and chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs, Box 3-2).1Arsenic Contamination of Groundwater in Bangladesh; Kinniburgh, D. G.; Smedley, P. L., Eds.;Volume 1: Summary, BGS and DPHE, British Geological Survey Technical Report WC/00/19, Brit-
ish Geological Survey: Keyworth, UK, 2001.2Focazio, M. J.; Welch, A. H.; Watkins, S. A.; Helsel, D. R.; Horn, M. A., A Retrospective Analysison the Occurrence of Arsenic in Ground-Water Resources of the United States and Limitations in
Drinking-Water-Supply Characterizations: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigation
Report 99-4279, 1999; http://co.water.usgs.gov/trace/pubs/wrir-99-4279/.3Arsenic in Drinking Water: 2001 Update, National Research Council, National Academy Press,
Washington, D.C., 2001.4Smith, A. H.; Lingas, E. O.; Rahman, M. Bulletin of the World Health Organization 2000, 78(9),1093-1103.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHALLENGES IN ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMICAL SCIENCE23How can environmental problemsÑsuch as those associated with arsenic,DDT, and CFCsÑbe solved? More specifically, how can the problems be re-solved, how can release of pollutants into the environment be reduced or stopped,
and how can harmful materials be removed from the environment? The complex-
ity of the issue is even greater if the question is extended to, Should efforts bemade to remove the material from the environment? Ultimately, this leads to the
question, How can such problems be prevented in the future?
BOX 3-1
DDT and MalariaaMalaria is a serious disease throughout much of the tropical world.In Ceylon (now Sri Lanka), for example, an epidemic in the mid-1930s

resulted in nearly 50,000 deaths. The discovery by the Swiss chemistlarge-scale use of the compound around the world. The ability to control
the mosquito population responsible for the spread of malaria led to wide-spread application of DDT in Sri Lanka starting in 1958. Nearly complete
elimination of malaria resulted, with the rate of infection decreasing from
more than a million cases each year to fewer than 20 cases reported in1963. The battle appeared to have been won, and the spraying programwas ended. This seemed to provide ample justification for the award of
ery.However, the story does not have a simple and happy ending. Evi-dence was mounting that the mosquito population was becoming resis-tant to DDT. Elsewhere, concerns were developing that DDT might haveharmful effects on other organisms. In the first example of an environ-
mental contaminant that might have significant ecological effects, DDTwas linked to defective eggshells in avian populations.By 1967, a resurgence of malaria in Ceylon led to a renewed DDTprogram, but it was ineffective against a resistant mosquito population. Inthe late 1990s, the malaria infection rate increased to more than 200,000cases annually.The problems in this example have no easy solution. DDT use be-gan as the apparent solution to a long-time scourge, but the success wasshort-lived. The challenge for chemical scientists now is to find new ap-

proaches to preventing or curing the diseaseÑbut without harmful ef-fects elsewhere in the environment.aSee http://plantpath.wisc.edu/ent371/Lect11%202002.pdf;  http://info-pollution.
com/ddtban.htm; http://users.rcn.com/jkimball.ma.ultranet/BiologyPages/I/Insecti-cides. html.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24THE ENVIRONMENTBOX 3-2
CFCs and the Ozone Holea,bStratospheric ozone depletion is one of the best-established phe-nomena arising from anthropogenic influence on the global environment.

As chlorofluorocarbons and other chlorinated and brominated substancesare emitted into the atmosphere, those that are not subject to attack inthe troposphere may reach the stratosphere where UV radiation breaks
the molecules apart, releasing their halogen atoms. These halogen at-oms initiate catalytic cycles that destroy stratospheric ozone; one chlo-rine atom can destroy as many as 100,000 ozone molecules before fi-

nally being removed from the stratosphere.
The introduction of these substances in the 1930s was viewed as animpressive step forward for human welfare. As working fluids for refrig-

eration, CFCs had ideal physical properties, and they were chemically
inert and nontoxic. By replacing ammonia as the standard working fluid,
a tremendous improvement in safety had been achieved. Once again,
however, the story does not end on this happy note. A half-century later,it was found that these materials were the major contributors to ozonedepletion in the stratosphere and the growing ozone hole over Antarc-
tica, a phenomenon that threatened the well-being of life at the EarthÕssurface as a consequence of increased exposure to UV radiation.
While the inertness of CFCs was initially viewed as an asset, their
long chemical lifetime enables them to diffuse into the upper atmosphere,where they undergo photochemical reactions when exposed to short-wavelength radiation from the sun. These reactions in turn lead to the

destruction of stratospheric ozone and the weakening of the UV protec-
tion that ozone provides to Earth. For their work in elucidating thesechemical pathways, the 1995 Nobel Prize in Chemistry was awarded to
Paul Crutzen, Mario Molina, and Sherwood Rowland.The ozone hole still exists, but the scientific discovery of the chem-istry behind the problem has made a solution possible. CFCs and related

persistent chlorinated and brominated organic materials are no longerbeing released in the massive quantities that were previously typical.Once again, the original problems remainÑcan we develop safe, non-
toxic, and environmentally benign replacement materials for such usesas refrigeration, manufacturing, and fire suppression?aSee The Ozone Depletion Phenomenon, Beyond Discovery, The National Acad-emies, Washington, DC, 1996; http://www.beyonddiscovery.org/.bAlso see Box 2-2.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHALLENGES IN ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMICAL SCIENCE25If science and engineering are to be employed in solving and preventingproblems, then scientists and engineers will need to greatly increase the level of
understanding of the relevant issues. Society will need to develop a far more
comprehensive knowledge of the environment, from a global scale down to the
chemical reactions that take place in air, water, and soil and within living organ-
isms. New and more powerful methods for detecting and analyzing chemical
substances will be needed, and it will be essential to develop a systems approach
to the complex network of interacting chemical, physical, and biological pro-
cesses that must be monitored and evaluated. Only with this greatly expanded
knowledge will it become possible to fully protect, restore, and preserve our envi-
ronment.FUNDAMENTAL UNDERSTANDINGHuman Influence on the Natural EnvironmentEvidence of anthropogenic influence on the natural environment is wide-spread: Examples include pesticide use (see Box 3-1), stratospheric ozone deple-
tion (see Box 3-2), intercontinental transport of wind-borne dust and air pollut-
ants, drinking water disinfection (see Box 3-3), and increasing levels of
anthropogenic emissions into soils and groundwater.Intercontinental transport of wind-borne dust has been observed for manyyears,5 and satellites have tracked plumes of smoke from forest fires and biomass
burning over thousands of kilometers.6 More than two generations ago, it be-
came recognized that lead, principally associated with the use of tetraethyl lead as
a motor fuel additive, was being distributed globally. Likewise, long-range trans-
port of chemical pesticides, such as DDT and other organic chlorine compounds,
and the associated ecological damage have been a subject of study for decades. In
the 1980s, ozone pollution was identified as not just an urban problem, and trans-
port of ozone across national boundaries became an international issue in North
America, Europe, and most recently, Asia. Surface measurements have shown
that ozone pollution from North America is easily detectable 3000 km downwind
from the North American source region.7 Similar observations have been made
of transport of Asian pollution across the Pacific.8 Long-range transport of poly-
chlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and dioxins has been extensively documented.
Recently, polybrominated diphenyl ether (PBDE) chemicals used as flame retar-
dants in consumer products appear to be contaminating pristine areas of the Arctic5 Prospero, J. M.; Savoie, D. L. 
Nature 1989, 339, 687-689.6 Wotawa, G.; Trainer, M. 
Science 2000, 288, 324-328.
7 Parrish, D. D.; Trainer, M.; Holloway, J. S.; Yee, J. E.; Warshawsky, M. S.; Fehsenfeld, F. C.;
Forbes, G. L.; Moody, J. L. J. Geophys. Res. 1998, 103, 13357-13376.
8 Jacob, D. J.; Logan, J. A.; Murti, P. P. 
Geophysical Research Letters 1999, 26, 2175-2178.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26THE ENVIRONMENTBOX 3-3Drinking Water Disinfection and Disinfection By-ProductsaWaterborne pathogens were responsible for tens of thousands ofdeaths during the first 150 years of U.S. history, with more than 50,000
deaths from typhoid fever as late as 1900-1904.
b Worldwide, cholera
outbreaks were eventually traced to contaminated water. Disinfection ofwater in the early 1900s with chlorine compounds and then with elemen-tal chlorine nearly eliminated waterborne diseases such as cholera, ty-
phoid, dysentery, and hepatitis in U.S. cities. Together with improvements
in sewage treatment, this ranks among the most important contributionsmade by science and engineering to the improvement of human health.cDisinfection with chlorine not only is effective against waterbornebacteria and viruses at the site of treatment but also provides residualprotection by inhibiting microbial growth in the distribution system. While
chlorine has been a true lifesaver, its use to treat drinking water also cangenerate disinfection by-products (DBPs) such as trihlomethanes (THMs)
that may pose risks to human health. DCPs are of particular concern

when treating surface water (from rivers, lakes, and streams) that is more
likely to contain organic materials that can react with chlorine.Under the requirements of the Safe Drinking Water Act and subse-quent amendments, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regu-lates DBPs in drinking water. A research effort has been established to
facilitate decisions on drinking water safety by identifying and reducing
amounts of DBPs found to be hazardous.d Currently, all public water
even more rapidly than either PCBs or dioxins.9 The most comprehensive assess-
ment to date of PBDEs in the breast milk of North American women indicates
that the body burden in Americans and Canadians is the highest in the world, 40
times greater than the highest levels reported for women in Sweden.10 Fluori-
nated organic compounds are globally distributed, environmentally persistent,
and bioaccumulative.11Water and Sediment ChemistryEnvironmental chemistry has progressed significantly over the past four tofive decades from a science that was concerned primarily with measurements of
trends in the distribution of problematic species in the environment to the more9Ikonomou, M. G.; Rayne, S.; Addison, R. F. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2002, 36, 1886-1892.
10Betts, K. S. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2002, 36, 50A-52A.
11Giesy, J. P.; Kannon, K. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2002, 36, 147A-152A.
The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHALLENGES IN ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMICAL SCIENCE27modern approach that seeks to understand processes on a fundamental chemicaland physical basis. Accordingly, our ability to understand environmental pro-
cesses hinges on our ability to recognize the factors responsible for the complex
biogeochemical interactions that are collectively acting to modify the systems.
Analytical chemistry plays a huge role in providing us access to methodologies
that will enlighten our abilities to recognize the responsible factors. Therein lies
the future in environmental chemistry, especially if one can apply developing
methodologies to solve new problems. There are some critical thrust areas that
have to be developed further. First is the need to understand chemical processes
at a molecular level of detail. We need to move from empirical observations that
feed well into large-scale models of transport, circulation, biodegradation, and
other processes, to developing a fundamental understanding of the biogeochemi-
cal processes at a molecular level. It is only then that we can truly understand the
factors governing such processes. We now have some very powerful analytical
tools to do this, and we should strive to become proficient and knowledgeable in
their application, especially with regard to solving some important environmental
problems.systems that provide disinfection are required to test for THMs and meet
the limits set by EPA. Water utilities have adjusted the type and amount
of chlorine-based disinfectant used as well the site of application. In ad-
dition, the treatment process has been expanded to remove the naturallyoccurring organic matter that could react to produce THMs.Chlorine is not the only means of disinfection available, but other
methods can also produce toxic by-products. In addition, alternative dis-infectants do not provide the residual protection offered by chlorine-baseddisinfectants, so they must be used in combination with chlorine. Drink-
ing water treatment must satisfy the competing objectives of maximummicrobial decontamination and minimum production of toxic by-products.
This is a difficult task that will require research by chemists and chemical
engineers in collaboration with a variety of other experts to continuouslyimprove the safety and quality of the worldÕs drinking water.aMinnesota Department of Health fact Sheet: Drinking Water Disinfection By-Products, January 1998, www.mrwa.com/mdh-drinkingwaterdisinfection.htm.bMcTigue, Bill, ÒHard to SwallowÉ The effects of water chlorination
Ó www.homeenv.com/Art_chlorination.htmcGreatest Engineering Achievements of the 20th Century, National Academy ofEngineering, 2000, 
http://www.greatachievements.org/greatachievements/ga_4_2.html.dRichardson, Susan ÒDisinfection By-Products of Health Concern in DrinkingWater: Results of a Nationwide Occurrence Study, www.epa.gov/ORD/scienceforum/PDFs/water/richardson_s.pdf.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28THE ENVIRONMENTOne problem that requires attention is developing a molecular-level under-standing of how carbon turns over in soils, sediments, and waters. Much of our
understanding of how our planet will cope with rising CO2 levels and global
warming trends is based on models that describe the behavior of carbonÑitslocation, form (e.g., as carbon dioxide, carbonate, or organic plant matter), and
rate of conversion through biogeochemical cyclesÑamong various environmen-tal compartments. One huge variable in predicting outcomes from models is the
molecular manner in which carbon turnover occurs. The input data are based on
uptake and evolution of CO2 and nitrogenous components that provide only total
rates. We really have little understanding of the factors that control turnover.
Humic substances and their production from plant materials are important factors
and we need to know more about the relevant biological and chemical processes
down to the molecular level. Related to this is the nature of dissolved organic
matter in natural watersÑa huge reactive and storage reservoir for carbon. Wealso need to better understand the biological and physicochemical interactions
that occur in response to global greenhouse gas augmentations. We also must not
fail to consider effects that climate change might have on environmental chemi-
cal processes.The major goals of environmental bioinorganic chemistry are to elucidate
the structures, mechanisms, and interactions of important ÒnaturalÓ
metalloenzymes and metal-binding compounds in the environment and to
assess their effects on major biogeochemical cycles such as those of carbon
and nitrogen. By providing an understanding of key chemical processes in
the biogeochemical cycles of elements, such a molecular approach to the
study of global processes should help unravel the interdependence of life
and geochemistry on planet Earth and their coevolution through geologi-
cal times.[Fran“ois Morel, Appendix D]Dissolved organic matter (DOM) in water leads to the binding and transportof organic and inorganic contaminants, produces undesirable by-products through
reaction with disinfection agents, and mediates photochemical processes. DOM
is also a major reactant in and product of biogeochemical processes and controls
levels of dissolved oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus, sulfur, numerous trace metals,
and acidity.12 DOM can range in molecular weight from a few hundred to 100,000
Da, which is in the colloidal size range, and generally has similar characteristics
to humic substances in soil. Moreover, contaminants of a bewildering array are12Leenheer, J. A.; Crou”, J.-P. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2002, 36, 19A-26A.
The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHALLENGES IN ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMICAL SCIENCE29being found in aquatic environments. These include detergents, disinfectants, in-sect repellents, fire retardants, plasticizers, reproductive hormone mimics, ste-
roids, antibiotics, and numerous other prescription and nonprescription drugs.13Another important area is understanding the fate and transport of anthropo-genic chemicals in soils and sediments. Organic chemicals, including pharma-
ceuticals, fertilizers, herbicides, and pesticides, are at the top of the list. It is
important to develop ties among environmental chemists and engineers who
model processes associated with fate and transport. Most models employ empiri-
cally derived parameters for the kinds of interactions that accelerate or retard
such processes. These models are often poorly developed for lack of a better
understanding of molecular-level processes. We need to know how contaminants
are hydrologically transported in a medium where they continually interact at the
molecular level with DOM and with mineral, biological, and organic phases of
soils and sediments.The occurrence and mobility of harmful chemical substances, whether of
natural origin or anthropogenic contaminants, in the subsurface environ-
ment pose both an intellectual and fundamental scientific challenge and
practical concerns for the use and management of groundwater resources.
The chemical sciences offer powerful approaches toward understanding
and mitigating the problems of groundwater contamination. Society has
benefited and will continue to benefit from this important application of
chemistry to environmental problems.[Janet Hering, Appendix D]Another area that deserves attention is natural attenuationÑthe diminutionof pollutants in soil and groundwater by such natural processes as adsorption,
dilution, dispersion, chemical or biological degradation, radioactive decay, and
vaporization that take place without human intervention. This work has gained
popularity in recent years, mainly because it is being used to justify corporate and
governmental decisions. We need to evaluate the process in depth, again at the
molecular level. The Earth system may well be capable of remediating itself, but
we need to know the time scale and the outcome associated with such an approach.
Chemistry plays a monumental role along with biology and environmental engi-
neering in developing the crucial experiments to evaluate the fate of individual
contaminants. Once the underlying science is well-understood, it may be possible
to develop low-cost enhancements or acceleration of the natural processes.13Erickson, B. E., Environ. Sci. Technol. 2002, 36, 141A-145A.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30THE ENVIRONMENTChemistry has and should continue to play a leading role in developing anunderstanding of the toxicological effects of our industrializationÑeffects re-sulting from petrochemicals, specialty chemicals, nuclear wastes, natural geo-
chemical hazards, and, foremost, from the processing of our drinking water and
foods. Developments in analytical methodologies and approaches can signifi-
cantly extend our knowledge of the harmful effects of anthropogenic chemicals
in the environment. Of specific concern and importance is the molecular-level
relationship between bioavailability and the chemical speciation of various
chemicals of environmental concern. Currently, there is great interest in under-
standing how organisms utilize, in either a beneficial or a deleterious fashion,
specific compounds in their surroundings. The specific form of the compound is
crucial to understanding whether it is harmful, beneficial, or benign. The flurry
of activity in bio-inorganic chemistry is central to this issue, but the importance
also extends to the speciation of organic compounds, including organometallic
compounds. Not only does chemistry play an important role in characterizing
the compounds of interest (a challenge for analytical chemists who often must
do this at subpicomolar concentrations), but it is central to understanding the
processes by which bioavailable forms become incorporated into cellular struc-
tures in organisms.Gas-to-Particle Conversion and Combustion Aerosol FormationThe major processes for creating atmospheric fine particles (diameter < 2.5m) are combustion and gas-to-particle conversion (GPC). Whereas combustionparticles are emitted directly to the atmosphere (primary aerosol), gas-to-particle
conversion refers to the chemistry that leads to particulate matter by converting
volatile gases into condensable substances under atmospheric conditions. Gas-to-
particle conversion leads to an increase in the mass of preexisting particles and
under some circumstances may lead to the creation of new particles. Particulate
material produced by GPC is referred to as secondary aerosol.Understanding GPC entails identifying precursor gases, elucidating the chem-istry that converts them (in the gas phase, on surfaces, or in solution) into con-
densable species, and determining the processes by which those species are then
converted into particulate matter (e.g., by nucleation, condensation, or direct pro-
duction on an existing particle). One can make a distinction between GPC pro-
cesses that lead to new particles where gas-phase chemistry produces supersatu-
rated conditions followed by nucleation into a single-component or, more likely,
a multicomponent condensed phase and processes that chemically age a preexist-
ing aerosol by heterogeneous or multiphase reactions and condensation.An understanding of GPC (both nucleation and growth) requires knowledgeof which of the possible species participate in nucleation, their concentrations,
and their thermodynamic and nucleation properties. For the atmosphere, one needs
the concentrations not only of precursor gases but also of the oxidants, ozone,The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHALLENGES IN ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMICAL SCIENCE31hydroxyl radicals, and nitrate radicals that initiate the process. Important gas pre-cursors that have been identified include sulfur species such as sulfur dioxide and
dimethyl sulfide, volatile organic compounds (VOCs) such as aromatics in urban
areas and monoterpenes in forested regions, and ammonia and nitric acid. Reac-
tions of these species lead to low-volatility products such as sulfuric acid, ammo-
nium sulfate, ammonium nitrate, and multifunctional organic compounds con-
taining acid, carbonyl, hydroxyl, and nitrate groups.Formation of combustion particles also involves nucleation and condensa-tion of vapors, although the processes occur at elevated temperatures inside the
combustion source and during cooling of the plume. Like secondary aerosols,
combustion particles have a major semivolatile component composed of sulfates
from sulfur dioxide oxidation and organic oxidation products, and of unburned
fuel and oil as well. Furthermore, they contain a large non-volatile component
consisting of soot, metals, and metal oxides.The most important problems involving fine particles involve their potentialimpacts on global climate and human health. Climate effects can occur through
direct scattering and absorption of radiation and by altering cloud radiative prop-
erties and lifetimes through the action of particles as cloud condensation nuclei.
The mechanisms by which particles impact human health, such as respiratory and
cardiovascular function, are not yet fully understood, particularly in relation to
particle size. Nevertheless, epidemiologic studies have been sufficiently convinc-
ing to result in implementation by the EPA of new air quality standards for fine
particulate matter.The properties of particles that determine their impacts on both global cli-mate and human health include number, concentration, size, composition, mass,
and surface area. An aerosol may be chemically inhomogeneous from particle to
particle, resulting from a mix of processes. Consequently, characterization of in-
dividual atmospheric particles, rather than of bulk particulate matter, is most de-
sirable for sorting out these details. In addition, there is a need to characterize the
chemical structure within particles. Whether individual particles are chemically
homogeneous or have organic coatings or inorganic incrustations, for example,
will affect their radiative properties, atmospheric removal, heterogeneous reac-
tions, and role as nuclei for cloud droplet formation and growth, as well as their
health consequences.Although environmental chemists have traditionally flourished in the realmof atmospheric processes, some new discoveries have confounded explanation.
For example, scientists have begun to recognize the important role of black car-
bon (small particulate matter formed as a by-product in combustion of fossil fu-
els) in greenhouse trend reversal. The absorption of sunlight by aerosols contain-
ing black carbon can result in simultaneous warming of the atmosphere and
cooling of the EarthÕs surface. However, evaluating the role of black carbon isdifficult due to the lack of good measurement methodologies. The evolution of
arctic smog during the summer season is an enigma not easily understood, but itThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32THE ENVIRONMENTis clear that understanding the molecular-level chemistry and photochemistry inaerosols is crucial.The utilization of mass-independent isotopic measurements of atmospheric,
hydrospheric, and geologic species has advanced understanding of a wide
range of environmental processes. The future development of the utiliza-
tion and understanding of this new technique clearly will have numerous
applications that should, and will, be advanced. Issues in climate change,
health, agriculture, biodiversity, and water quality all may be addressed.
Simultaneous with the acquisition of new environmental insight will be the
enhancement of the understanding of fundamental chemical physics.[Mark Thiemens, Appendix D]Finally, there is an important role that environmental chemists can play inhomeland security,14 especially in areas such as radioactive contamination; de-
liberate contamination of water, food, air, and soil; and detection of potentially
harmful devices. It is likely that the future of our society depends on our ability to
respond to the effects induced by acts of terror. Environmental chemists, employ-
ing state-of-the-art analytical tools, can play a leading role in prevention, mitiga-
tion, and prediction of harmful effects. Dual-use technologies will have applica-
tions in monitoring environmental change, alerting society to homeland security
threats, and characterizing dangerous agents. The integration of environmental
measurements in a network could also identify when and where something un-
usual occurs.Putting It All Together: Understanding Biogeochemical Cycles
The real grand challenge is to understand fully the operation of biogeochemi-cal cycles and the implications of human use of chemical feedstocks. Most of
todayÕs environmental issues evolved from ignorance or disregard of the fates ofthe chemical by-products of human endeavors, and a full understanding of the
complex interrelationships will be a necessary foundation for resolving the is-
sues. This will be a difficult task, because the biogeochemical cycles cross a
variety of boundaries. They involve the different scientific disciplines of chemis-
try, biology, and geology; they cover water, soil, and air; and they include differ-
ent scales from nanometers to kilometers.14Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st Century: National Security & Homeland De-fense, National Research Council, The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2002.
The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHALLENGES IN ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMICAL SCIENCE33INSTRUMENTATION AND RESEARCH TOOLSChemists and chemical engineers are uniquely situated to help advance un-derstanding of the environment, largely because of their molecular approach.
Moreover, tremendous progress has been made in the levels of precision and
accuracy that chemical measurements can provide. This has been made possible
by the development of fundamental theory and a good understanding of the ther-
modynamics, kinetics, and transport properties that govern the interactions of
molecules. From a chemical perspective, the fundamental challenges in environ-
mental problems arise from expanding this understanding to enormously greater
scales of time and space while maintaining an accurate representation of both
physical and chemical processes. A few years ago, even contemplation of such an
achievement was hopeless, but recently the combined advances in analytical in-
strumentation and computational tools have allowed some of the challenges to be
addressed. The value of instrumentation for measurement, coupled with robust
computational and mathematical tools for modeling, can hardly be overestimated.
Without measurement and modeling, understanding of environmental phenom-
ena cannot be achieved. Without modeling, experiments cannot be designed and
tested.Chemists and chemical engineers use three basic tools to measure and de-scribe the chemistry that is taking place in our environment:1.laboratory measurements and devices to simulate and characterize that
chemistry;2.theoretical and computational tools to check experimental results, extrapo-
late, and codify what we know in environmental models; and3.field observations and experiments to make direct environmental mea-
surements and learn the impact of human activities.The components of our environmentÑatmosphere, water, and soil, as wellas the biological systems with which they interactÑare all critically important toour well-being and are markedly undersampled. Much remains to be learned about
the behavior and effects of aerosols, micrometer-size particles, and trace mol-
ecules in air and water. Understanding such phenomena is important to human
health, ecology, and climate. Moreover, understanding the chemical basis for their
biological effects is within our grasp. We are developing the capabilities for mea-
suring the environment on a worldwide basis, and the global migration of pollut-
ants is being documented for the first time. Success in these endeavors will de-
pend on rapid advancement in measurement and modeling.In measurement science, the desired signal is often very small and may beembedded in highly variable samples. Environmental samples are seldom con-
trolled. They are likely to contain complex mixtures of compounds in a wide
variety of matrices that can further complicate the sampling problem. Further-The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34THE ENVIRONMENTmore, knowing only the composition is inadequate. To fully comprehend the prob-lem, one must have information on horizontal and vertical fluxes of the species
being studied. The sources, sinks, and fluxes between reservoirs must also be
understood, including their variation over time in response to atmospheric and
terrestrial perturbations.As noted by Dellinger (Appendix D), combustion sources are responsible fora major fraction of air pollution problems. This understanding began with the
recognition that NOx and organic materials from combustion sources are the pri-mary source of photochemically induced air pollution, and it was also found that
SOx and NO
x emissions are responsible for acid rain. Particulate emissions, ini-
tially considered to be mainly a nuisance, are known to be primarily responsible
for atmospheric hazes. Through use of refined analytical measurements, biologi-
cal assays, and epidemiological studies, it was gradually recognized that particu-
late matter had human health impacts, first as a lung irritant, then as a source of
PAHs, and now a source of other, yet undefined, biologically active pollutants
contained primarily in the carbonaceous fraction. It was also found that PAHs are
carcinogens, and combustion is again their principal source in the environment.Although combustion and thermal processes are necessary to provide for
the essential needs of our existence, they are intrinsically ÒdirtyÓ and emit
a variety of air pollutants. Some of these pollutants are well known, well
understood, and subject to significant control.However, combustion is a complex process that results in formation ofmany pollutants that are not well characterized as to their nature or origin.
As a responsible society, it is incumbent upon us to examine these issues,
determine their importance, and endeavor to eventually resolve and address
each of them.[Barry Dellinger, Appendix D]It is now generally accepted that combustion is the almost exclusive sourceof the carcinogen and endocrine-disrupting chemical family of polychlorinated
dibenzo-p-dioxins and polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDD/F or dioxins for
short). Dioxins are part of a broader class of chlorinated organic air pollutants
that are produced by most combustion sources. All that is necessary are a small
source of chlorine (that may even be in the combustion makeup air), a catalytic
metal, and a hydrocarbon.Extensive research, enabled by improved analytical measurements, has beencarried out on the mechanism of formation of dioxins and other chlorinated or-
ganics. Researchers discovered that many combustion-generated pollutants actu-
ally are formed after the flame zone not only by surface catalyzed reactions but
also in the gas phase by high- and medium-temperature thermal processes. TheseThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHALLENGES IN ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMICAL SCIENCE35discoveries were highly dependent on improvements in measurement tools andbetter mathematical models.Measurement ToolsIn carefully controlled laboratory environments, it is possible to use suchmethods as mass spectrometry and laser spectroscopy to make sophisticated mea-
surements to reach the ultimate limit of detectionÑthe detection and character-ization of single molecules. However, these limits are not easily achieved with
environmental samples, where sampling and separations challenges are as impor-
tant as detection sensitivity. Moreover, laboratory investigations in controlled
environments by skilled investigators are important, but they cannot approach the
needs for environmental sampling in real time.Atmospheric measurements are also challenging because they must deal
with low to extremely low concentrations of trace chemical species. The
major components (>99.999%) of the lowest portions of the atmosphere
(the troposphere up to ~10 km in altitude and the stratosphere between ~10
and ~50 km) are molecular nitrogen, molecular oxygen, argon, water va-
por, and carbon dioxide. Chemists will recognize that all of these species
are very stable, strongly bonded molecules or atoms that are essentially
inert gases at normal atmospheric temperatures (190-310 K). Indeed, with-
out solar photons to break up selected molecules, atmospheric chemistry
would be very dull indeed.Atmospheric chemistry is dominated by trace species, ranging in mix-ing ratios (mole fractions) from a few parts per million, for methane in the
troposphere and ozone in the stratosphere, to hundredths of parts per tril-
lion, or less, for highly reactive species such as the hydroxyl radical. It is
also surprising that atmospheric condensed-phase material plays very im-
portant roles in atmospheric chemistry, since there is relatively so little of
it. Atmospheric condensed-phase volume to gas-phase volume ratios range
from about 3  10
Ð7 for tropospheric clouds to ~3 
 10
Ð14 for background
stratospheric sulfate aerosol.[Charles Kolb, Appendix D]The challenges in monitoring the environment are enormous. The surfacearea of the Earth is about 500 million square kilometers, two-thirds of which is
ocean. The relevant volume of the atmosphereÑthe troposphere where we liveand the stratosphere above thatÑis 25 billion cubic kilometers, and its composi-tion is constantly changing. Many millions of dollars are spent for instruments on
planes, satellites, and ground stations, just to obtain meteorological data forThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36THE ENVIRONMENTweather forecasting. To study chemicals in the atmosphereÑas gases, mists, andparticles, with their fluxes and phase changesÑpresents a monumental challengefor environmental and analytical chemists as well as those who will develop the
necessary instrumentation.How can we meet this challenge with the tools we have or the tools we mightbe able to develop? Three strategies are available:1.Very fast sensors. By mounting such sensors on mobile platforms and
moving them to sample over a range of space and time, it would be possible to
understand how a system is actually responding.2.Remote sensing. This works well for the atmosphere, sometimes for the
oceans, and for the first 10 cm of the soil. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA) and National Aeronautics and Space Administration
(NASA) have enormously successful, albeit expensive, satellite programs for
monitoring and understanding the EarthÕs environment on an ongoing basis.3.Sensor arrays. By linking a large number of sensors in an intelligent way,
the value of the information that is gathered can be greatly amplified. However,
implementation of such an approach will require that both the sensors and the
necessary communications system be inexpensive.One possible solution to real-time global sampling would be a combinationof widely distributed robust measurement systems; highly mobile sensing plat-
forms; and satellite, shipboard, and aircraft-mounted instruments. These remote
sampling stations and platforms would have to be backed up by high-perfor-
mance laboratory-scale instrumentation to verify field results. In addition, they
would have to be connected via information technology networks to central pro-
cessing computers, and these large data arrays would require extensive process-
ing using chemometric approaches.The information needed from the chemistry community on combustion par-ticles and GPC in order to significantly advance understanding of the impact of
aerosols on global climate and human health, and possibly ameliorate these ef-
fects, includes the following:¥Thermochemical data from either measurements or computations on or-ganic compounds, including vapor pressures and solubility in organic and aque-
ous salt solutions. Data on cluster properties of organics and the sulfuric acid-
water-ammonia system are necesary for understanding nucleation.¥Heterogeneous reactions. Knowledge of atmospherically relevant hetero-
geneous reactions is far from complete. Important reactions probably still remain
to be identified and their rates and mechanisms determined. Just as ignorance of
heterogeneous chemistry contributed to the failure of stratospheric ozone models
to anticipate the formation of the antarctic ozone hole, much still is to be discov-
ered and learned about the role of heterogeneous reactions in the troposphere.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHALLENGES IN ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMICAL SCIENCE37¥Advanced methods for particle analysis. The state of the art in quantita-
tive methods includes semicontinuous analysis of major inorganic cations (NH4+,Na+, K+, etc.), anions (SO42_, NO3_, Cl_, etc.), and organic acids using particlecollection and ion chromatography, and real-time particle mass spectrometry us-
ing thermal desorption-electron ionization. These methods do not analyze single
particles or refractory materials. A number of instrument designs based on laser-
vaporizationÐtime-of-flight mass spectrometry are now available for analyzingthe size and composition of single aerosol particles (including refractory compo-
nents) in real time. Although these instruments are quite powerful, their limita-
tions include the following: (1) they are generally limited to analysis of particles
larger than ~50 nm in diameter, (2) they measure the composition of an uncon-
trolled and unknown fraction of a particle, and (3) measurements are not quanti-
tative.For public drinking water, groundwater is a significant resource. In the UnitedStates, 46% of drinking water comes from groundwater resources, and 54% comes

from surface water. Groundwater is considerably less vulnerable to pathogens,
but its greater opportunity to interact with soil minerals allows various dissolved
species to accumulate in the water supply. The problems associated with lead and
arsenic are well known, but to fully understand the evolution of groundwater
composition, it will be necessary to obtain a much greater insight into the bio-
geochemical processes by which various chemical constituents are partitioned
between mobile and immobile phases in the aquifer.Analytical needs and opportunities in this area are challenging, particularlyfor pollutants of emerging concern such as endocrine disrupting compounds and
pharmaceutical derivatives. Direct spectroscopic measurements of the sort than
can be used for atmospheric measurements are not usually applicable. Sample
collection, preparation, and analysis typically have been carried out in separate
steps. Consequently, the development of techniques for in situ measurement ca-
pability, remote sensing and detection, and sensors for monitoring in soil and
water would afford significant progress.Analytical InstrumentationA broad range of developments, generally described as laboratory-on-a-chiptechnologies, have been described and are being explored in several laborato-
ries.15 A variety of lab-on-a-chip combinations can be used to multiplex a variety
of separations with multiple detectors. Techniques such as molecular imprinting
offer considerable promise for reducing the cost of these devices while maintain-15Ramsey, J. M. Nature 1999, 17, 1061-1062.
The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38THE ENVIRONMENTing high sensitivity in a robust and compact package. More sophisticated versionsof the devices have used micro-versions of laser-induced fluorescence and
microscale ion-trap mass spectrometers. The latter two detection methods are
among the most versatile and sensitive means for characterizing molecules. Labo-
ratory versions are capable of both single-molecule sensitivity and a very high
degree of specificity. Miniaturized versions of such devices lose some but not all
of their versatility and sensitivity. Soon these approaches will emerge as robust,
field-deployable measurement tools.16A particle-sampling mass spectrometer could provide a useful approach tomeasuring inhalation exposure to pollutants in a wide variety of environments.
One example17 employs an aerodynamic lens that samples very fine particles andcreates a beam that can be modulated to give a crude time-of-flight mass distribu-
tion. The particles impinge on a hot surface, causing vaporization of constituents
that can be ionized (by electron impact or photoionization) and subjected to mass
analysis by any of several kinds of mass analyzers.Combinations of spectroscopies, such as nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)and fluorescence or mass spectrometry to obtain visual and time evolution infor-
mation (NMR) and high specificity and sensitivity (optical and mass spectrom-
etry) are also highly promising new approaches for measurement science. How-
ever, it is beyond the scope of this report to list the many other recent advances in
measurement sciences that are highly promising and clearly applicable to envi-
ronmental problems. Many are at an early stage of development, and progress
will require cross-disciplinary teams of chemists, physicists, engineers, computer
scientists, and instrument specialists. Since the potential market is undefined and
the number of people with the requisite skills is limited, ways and means must be
devised to bring the best ideas of academia, industry, and federal laboratories to
bear on this problem.The cavity ring-down laser (see J. Anderson, Appendix D) is an exciting newdevelopment with great potential. One method18 uses highly reflective mirrors
mounted about a meter apart; the laser beam transits the cavity more than a mil-
lion times, giving an effective detector path of about 10 km. Such complex and
sensitive devices are not yet ready for widespread implementation, but their use
in aircraft has been demonstrated. Reducing their size, incorporating commercial
infrared lasers, and downsizing them into a shoebox-size package will be the next
challenge.16Patterson, G. E.;  Guymon, A. J.;  Riter, L. S.;  Everly, M.; Griep-Raming, J.; Laughlin, B. C.;
Ouyang, Z.; Cooks, R. G. Analytical Chemistry 2002, 74, 6145-6153.
17Jayne, J. T.; Leard, D. L.; Zhang, X.; Davidovits, P.; Smith, K. A.; Kolb, C. E.; Worsnop, D. R.Aerosol Science and Technology 2000, 33, 49-70.
18OÕKeefe, A.; Scherer, J. J.; Paul, J. B.; Saykally, R. J. Cavity-ringdown Spectroscopy: anUltratrace-Absorption Measurement Technique; Busch, K. W.; Busch, M. A. editors;
 ACS Sympo-sium Series 720; American Chemical Society, Washington, D.C., 1999, pp. 71-92; Provencal, R. A.;Paul, J. B.; Chapo, C. N.; Saykally, R. J. Spectroscopy 1999, 14, 24.
The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHALLENGES IN ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMICAL SCIENCE39Individual instruments will not be used to solve most environmental prob-lems. It will be necessary to develop suites of instruments that can be cross-
calibrated and cross-correlated to show that the same part of the environment is
being examined and that the measurements are taking place at the same time. It is
likely that in situ and remote sensing will be used concurrently, while the result-
ing data are evaluated in a model in real time. For example, impressive and ex-
pensive mobile measurement systems were used in evaluating the problem of
stratospheric ozone depletion by simultaneously measuring several different radi-
cal species (halogen, hydrogen-oxygen, and nitrogen oxide) in real time, with 1-
to 5-s resolution.19 Similarly, in Mexico City a mobile laboratory was used for
real-time measurements of fine particle and gas-phase species, looking at emis-
sion sources, process studies, mapping, and understanding how one part of the
city differs from another both in emissions and the chemical reactions taking
place in the atmosphere.20Additional analytical capabilities needed include the following:¥Instruments for remote sensing that are robust, portable, and miniaturized.¥High-throughput instrumentation for sampling and analyzing large num-bers of samples.¥Instruments and methods that can measure single-particle composition inreal time down to sizes of fresh nuclei (~1 nm).¥Instruments and methods that can in near real time characterize more fullythe speciated organic composition of secondary and combustion aerosols and that
of the gas phase. In conjunction with laboratory studies, one may hope to use
these techniques to elucidate the pathways and connect precursor volatile organic
compounds to the nature of particulate matter.¥Instruments and methods that can provide information on the compositionand structure of particle surfaces. These would have to be real-time or near-real-
time measurements because surfaces of collected particles would be prone to
alteration.¥Improved methods for collection of semivolatile compounds. State-of-the-art denuder systems are still prone to adsorption-desorption artifacts. Because
of the high costs of particle mass spectrometers, most studies of organics will
probably rely on particle collection with off-line analyses by gas chromatogra-
phy-mass spectrometry (GC-MS), so reliable collection methods are important.¥Instruments and methods for measuring atmospheric particle water con-tent, which is quite difficult because of the volatile nature of water.19Brune, W. H.; Anderson, J. G.; Chan, K. R  J. Geophys. Res. 1989, 94(D14), 16,649-16,663.
20Jayne, J. T.; Leard, D. C.; Zhang, X.; Davidovits, P.; Smith, K. A.; Kolb, C. E.; Worsnop, D. R.Aerosol Sci. Technol. 2000, 33, 49-70.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40THE ENVIRONMENT¥Instruments and methods for measuring particle pH. In light of recentstudies indicating that acid-catalyzed particle-phase polymerization reactions may
be important in secondary organic aerosol formation, ambient particle pH must
be known to evaluate and model such reactions.¥Identification of chemical tracers for the wide variety of organic combus-tion and secondary aerosol sources, which can be used to identify and quantify
source contributions to ambient aerosol. For the health effects community, it

would especially valuable to have simple indicators of sources, which need not be
highly accurate but can be easily measured and used to correlate source contribu-
tions with health criteria.Computing Tools and ApplicationsThe introduction last year of the Earth Simulator in Japan, which leapfroggeddevelopment of high-performance computing in this country, has provoked con-
siderable discussion among academic and federal agencies. This computer is a
general purpose, vector computer that is applicable to a wide range of problems
in science and engineering, and it is more than a hundred times faster than the
fastest computer accessible to nondefense scientists in the United States. David
Dixon (Appendix D) described a high-performance computer with almost one-
third of the computing power of the Earth Simulator that should be readily adapt-
able to general environmental applications.With such higher-performance computers, accurate quantum mechanical cal-culations should be possible with heavy elements for which relativistic correc-
tions are significant, accurate zero-point energies can be calculated to improve
the accuracy of thermodynamic calculations dramatically, and rate equations can
be used to search more accurately for transition states and to study interfacial
reactions (including those at the cellular interfaces of biological systems). The
importance of improving accuracy in these basic calculations can hardly be over-
estimated. As an example, consider an error of 0.2 kcal/mol in the activation
energy to form the water dimer. When propagated during a calculation of nucle-
ation phenomena the initial error could be expanded by 40 orders of magnitude,
leading to an error of 1012 in rate constants for nucleation.Progress using this class of computer requires teams of experts in computa-tional science, computational chemistry, applied mathematics, and software engi-
neering to adapt and effectively use these tools. A major role for chemists is
defining the problems to be tackled with such tools. Modeling toolsÑmany ofwhich require developmentÑwill be essential to traverse all relevant length andtime scales, and computation will have to be coupled with measurement to con-
firm models and make predictions. With success in this realm, modeling increas-
ingly will replace experiments that are too difficult, too dangerous, or too expen-
sive.Data storage and integration are major challenges for computer science andThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHALLENGES IN ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMICAL SCIENCE41mathematics specialists. These challenges must be addressed before the sophisti-cated instrumentation described above can be employed with optimal effective-
ness. Thus, except for demonstration units, few such instruments exist. Connec-
tion to sophisticated computer networks and informatics processing are critical
requirements for converting raw data into useful information.Modeling, Simulation, and Computational Chemistry21What can theory and simulation accomplish? They greatly enhance our un-derstanding of known systems, providing qualitative and quantitative insights
that can enable new experiments or new systems. Computational chemistry has
the goal of providing quantitative results that can eliminate the need for experi-
ments that are too difficult, dangerous, or expensive or can extend into temporal
or spatial domains where the necessary experimental tools are not available. Cal-
culations have become increasingly reliable, providing valuable methods for solv-
ing NewtonÕs laws of motion for molecular dynamics and SchroedingerÕs equa-tion for electronic motion. Extending these capabilities and solving the nuclear
motion problem will be an important challenge in the coming decades. Progress
will enable calculation of molecular structures and energetics, reaction equilibria,
substitution effects, spectroscopic properties, rates of reactions, and reaction
mechanisms.Computational chemistry can play a key role in advancing the scientific
enterprise. It can provide the data input for many larger, more complex
models and provide us with unique insights into molecular behavior so that
we can design and construct new molecules for specific tasks. Computa-
tional chemistry has become an established tool in the chemistÕs toolboxand is being used in broad areas of chemistry to replace experimental mea-
surements and to provide us with improved understanding of molecular
behavior. Computation will be the major tool that will enable us to cross
the many temporal and spatial scales that characterize environmental sci-
ence.[David Dixon, Appendix D]When applying computational chemistry to complex environmental prob-lems, major challenges are encountered in scaleÑboth in time and in space. Thisis illustrated in for atmospheric chemistry in Figure 3-1. Current methodologies21Many of the relevant issues are covered in one of the other reports in this series, Challenges forthe Chemical Sciences in the 21st Century: Information and Communications, National Research
Council, The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2003.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42THE ENVIRONMENTdo not connect the molecular scales with all of the subsequent scales above them.We lack the tools, theories, and methods to make the connections. Increasing the
scale of the models will require increased computing power, and advances will
rely on collaboration with mathematicians and computer scientists. These prob-
lems of scale are analogous to those encountered in a chemical plant, where mod-
eling and simulation must span the range from molecular processes and chemical
kinetics through process optimization. Applications that range from climate mod-
eling to bioinformatics and genomics also will require new developments in the
analysis and manipulation of  increasingly massive datasets.
Many important environmental questions or problems will necessitate com-putational study if they are to be solved. Such problems include¥the urban-to-regional migration of nitrate, sulfate, heavy metals, and or-ganic soot into the broader environmentÑand the associated public health issues;¥forecasting climate changeÑand testing the forecast in a way that isacceptable to decision makers in science and in public policy;¥ultraviolet dosage and its relationship to ozone depletion;¥structure-toxicity relationships;¥forecasting adaptation to global climate change;¥chemical behavior and trends in oceans and estuaries;¥molecular origins of toxicity (including gene-toxicant interactions);FIGURE 3-1
 Dimensions of integration and the problem of scale as illustrated for atmo-
spheric chemical calculation.-10-9-8-7-6-5-4-3-2-1012345678-12-11-10-9-8-7-6-5-4-3-2-10123456789
1 ps                       1 ns                     1 s1 ms                         1 s                                hr          day       mon         yr          century
                                                                                                        Time Scale103 km1 km1 m1 mm1 m1 nm1 AoClimatechange   andclimatemodels  GasesNuclei and clustersAerosols and particles
Dropletsin cloudsRegional climate models Precipitation- rain drops
   Turbulence
measurementsSynoptic weather
Regionalurbanweather
and airqualityParticle + gas
measurementsClouds andcloud systems Length ScaleTime line for light
Visible light
Mean free path in gas at STPThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHALLENGES IN ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMICAL SCIENCE43¥integration of massive datasets dealing with many variables;¥systems modeling of the environment, accounting for coupled transportprocesses and reactions in air, water, soil, and their interfaces; and¥extrapolation of laboratory results over orders of magnitude in length andtime.Each of these problems, many of which are linked, must be attacked withboth observations and modeling. Consider for example the first three entries in
the preceding list. The issue of global warming depends on carbon sources and
sinks, and it ties back directly to the questions of nitrate, sulfate, heavy-metal,
and organic-soot emissionsÑfrom regional to global extent. The experimentalrequirements for addressing the three problems require high spatial resolution of
fluxes, isotopes, and reactive intermediates. The details of molecular fluxesÑhow they interact with the boundary layer and how the boundary links into the
free troposphereÑhave not yet been addressed properly.An entirely new level of sophisticationÑnot only in experiments but also inmodelingÑwill be required for particles, aerosols, and the associated radiationfield sets. New mid-IR laser-based instrumentation and use of long-duration bal-
loons have helped make major advances in observations. The balloons can sit in
the upper stratosphere and then be lowered to the lower stratosphere with power
from fuel cells and solar panels. The modeling elements are equally important: it
is necessary to test the model and its validity, and the model must link the mea-
surements. The observations must be linked to trajectories, the trajectories must
be initialized, and sources of specific chemicals must be identified along with the
positions of those sources. Considerable progress has been made on observations
and refinement of models to help explain low ozone loss at the mid-altitudes, the
increase in UV dosage, the appearance of water vapor in the stratosphere, and
possibly, of climate changes 50 million years ago.The future in advanced molecular modeling offers the opportunity to solvegrand challenge problems in environmental science:¥Fundamental advances in theory and computation will radically changethe way we do science. Simulation science will become even more multidisci-
plinary. Simulation and computation will fully come of age as the third branch of
science, fulfilling the promise of the past 20 years. Simulation will be key to
coupling multiple temporal and spatial scales while maintaining accuracy. New
models will emerge that will completely replace the techniques that have been
used so far. For example, new, fast methods will replace 50 years of traditional
quantum chemistry approaches and we will have new solvation models.¥The challenges will involve quantitative ab initio prediction of molecular-level chemistry of thermodynamics and kinetics with no empirical scaling, bridg-
ing the gap from the molecular scale to the microscopic (nano- and biological)The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44THE ENVIRONMENTlength and time scales. The current deficiencies in theory, computers, and soft-ware will require computational chemists to develop radical new approaches.APPROACHES TO SOLUTIONSPollution Prevention: Green Process TechnologyGreen chemistry focuses on the design, at the molecular level, of manufac-turing processes and products that are environmentally benignÑreducing oreliminating the use of hazardous materials. A common definition of green chem-
istry is Òthe design, development and implementation of chemical processes andproducts to reduce or eliminate substances hazardous to human health and the
environment.Ó22 Guided by a set of 12 principles,
23 green chemistry offers the
potential to develop technologies that could provide an important new approach
to environmental protection through pollution prevention.We believe that the low viscosity of CO2, coupled with its excellent wettingproperties, will enable whole new classes of thin-film coating operations
that will at the same time be environmentally responsible. These are likely
to be important, not just for microelectronics applications but also for bio-
medical and nanotechnology formulations. Even though there are still many
technical and economic barriers to the total acceptance of these technolo-
gies, we believe that environmental pressures as well as technical require-
ments for pure component systems with high uniformity will over time help
ÒdryÓ CO
2-based processes play an increasingly important role in indus-trial environments.[Ruben Carbonell, Appendix D]As shown in Figure 3-2, green process technologies build on the input frommultiple scientific disciplines. Many of the breakthroughs in green chemistry take
place at the interfaces among these disciplines. Moreover, the contributions are
not limited to the traditional interactions in which chemists, chemical engineers,
physicists, and analytical chemists work together to develop a new process. The
necessary collaboration may involve biologists, molecular biologists, and com-
putational scientists as well.For the chemical industry to thrive in the United States we will need im-22Anastas, P. T.; Warner, J. Green Chemistry Theory and Practice, Oxford University Press, Ox-ford, UK, 1998.23Poliakoff, M.; Fitzpatrick, J. M.; Farren, T. R.; Anastas,P. T. 
Science 2002, 297, 807-810.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHALLENGES IN ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMICAL SCIENCE45proved efficiency and better ways of meeting regulatory hurdles. Otherwise eco-nomic decisions will be made to move our manufacturing offshoreÑwhich maynot be a desirable outcome. One approach is to invest in better processes, and in
many cases, in green process technologies. This is beginning to happen, with
examples such as those described in Chapter 2.A recent report from the RAND Science and Technology Policy Institutelists four major barriers to the development and implementation of new green
technologies.24 Finding ways to overcome these barriers will  be a significant
challenge to chemists and chemical engineers as they pursue their R&D agenda
in the environmental arena:¥Need for additional research, technology development, or process engi-neering;FIGURE 3-2
Sources of green process technologies. Influence diagram showing the in-formation flow from scientific disciplines to green chemistry and engineering and then togreen chemistry process technology and then environmentally benign products and pro-cesses.24Lempert, R. J.; Norling, P.; Pernin, C.; Resetar, S.; Mahnovski, S. Next Generation Environmen-tal Technologies: Benefits and Barriers, RAND, Arlington, VA, 2003; 
http://www.rand.org/publica-tions/MR/MR1682/.Environmentally BenignProducts and ProcessesGreen Process Technologies
Green EngineeringBio-Civil-Chemical-Mechanical-Electrical-        Green Chemistry    Sustainable ChemistryModeling & SimulationElectrochemistryMathematicsPhysicsBiological SciencesBacteriologyBiochemistryInorganicchemistryBiotechnologyPolymer ChemistryMaterials ScienceGeneticsToxicology
CatalysisInnovation:Research/Technology
ManagementEconomicsPhotochemistry12 Principles; 7 Areas
Inherently Safer Processes  InformationSciencesLife CycleAnalysesOtherDisciplinesThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46THE ENVIRONMENT¥Need to surmount infrastructure and integration barriers;¥Need to make the up-front investment; and¥Regulatory barriers.The RAND report provides detailed analyses for a variety of case studies onnext-generation technologies that demonstrate significant contributions by chem-
ists and chemical engineers. Examples include¥Water purification: development of technologies such as new chemicalmethods, membrane technology, and ultraviolet irradiation could greatly reduce
the quantities of chlorine from present levels;¥Liquid and supercritical CO2 as reaction solvent: development of new
processes could reduce the use of halogenated and other organic solvents;¥Depolymerization of polymers to monomers: conversion of polymers tothe corresponding monomers can provide an alternative to recycling of the poly-
mer, reduce landfill burden, and provide a new source of monomer with lower
consumption of new raw materials;¥Biobased processes: the use of renewable feedstocks and biocatalytic pro-cesses reduce waste and greenhouse gas emissions while providing greater en-
ergy efficiency;¥New routes to hydrogen peroxide: new methods for direct synthesis ofhydrogen peroxide (from hydrogen and oxygen) in a controlled, safe manner

could provide a lower cost oxidant that reduces the use of chlorine. For example,
in situ generation of hydrogen peroxide can be used to produce propylene oxide
in place of the chlorohydrin route; and¥Dimethyl carbonate: new methods for synthesis and use of dimethyl car-bonate could greatly reduce the use of highly toxic feedstocks such as phosgene;
other waste streams (such as HCl) would be reduced as well.RemediationSoil and groundwater contaminated with hazardous materials create specialchallenges for chemists and chemical engineers. Determination of the composi-
tion and mobility of the contaminants, and the risks they pose to humans and the
environment, often requires specialized analytical techniques. In some cases the
hazardous nature of the contaminants may be reduced by natural attenuation due
to chemical or biological activity in the soil, and a better understanding of the
mechanism of attenuation can help to predict or accelerate the rate of hazard
reduction. When remediation of the site is deemed necessary, cleanup or contain-
ment procedures must be tailored to the specific characteristics of the site.The nation has a contamination legacy that results from practices by both thegovernment and the private sector. Waste chemicals were dumped into trenches
and waterways, contaminating hundreds of millions of tons of soil and water. ItThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHALLENGES IN ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMICAL SCIENCE47will also be necessary to dispose of the enormous radioisotope burden in tankwastes in the DOE complex. DOE is spending billions of dollars annually on
cleanup of contaminated nuclear sites, but current methodologies may not be
adequate to complete the task, even over a 50-year time span.25  Extensive re-
search efforts in biogeochemistry and reactive transport will be needed, based on
the best ideas of geologists, chemists, chemical engineers, and microbiologists.Catalysis and catalytic processes account for nearly 20% of the U.S. gross
domestic product and nearly 20% of all industrial products. Chemical
transformations in industry take a cheap feedstock (usually some type of
hydrocarbon) and convert it into a higher-value product by rearranging
the carbon atoms and adding functional groups to the compound. About 5
quads per year are used in the production of the top 50 chemicals in the
United States and catalytic routes account for the production of 30 of these
chemicals, consuming 3 quads. Improved catalysts can increase efficiency
leading to reduced energy requirements, while increasing product selectiv-
ity and concomitantly decreasing wastes and emissions. A process yield
improvement of only 10% would save 0.23 quad per year! In addition, pro-
duction of the top 50 chemicals leads to almost 21 billion pounds of CO2emitted to the atmosphere per year.  Improved catalysts can help reduce

this carbon burden on the atmosphere. As new products become ever more
sophisticated, the need to quickly develop new catalysts grows rapidly in
importance. A fundamental understanding of chemical transformations is
needed to enable scientists to address the grand challenge of the precise
control of molecular processes by using catalysts.[David Dixon, Appendix D]Factors that must be considered in developing a remediation strategy includethe chemical nature, quantity, and location of the contaminants; the permeability
of the soil and how soil interacts with contaminants; and how various cleanup or
containment methods may impact workers, the community, and remediation costs.For shallow sites, it may be preferred to remove the contaminated soil andincinerate it or wash it ex situ. For deeper sites with porous soils it may be pos-sible to flush out the contaminants with surfactants or solvents and treat the haz-
ardous materials at the surface. If the contaminants are volatile, it may be pos-
sible to heat the soil and/or pump air or steam into the soil and capture the
vaporized chemicals at the surface. In some cases, treatment chemicals may be25See D. Dixon in Appendix D.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48THE ENVIRONMENTinjected into the soil to react with the contaminants and produce a nonhazardousproduct. In other cases it may be preferable to immobilize the contaminants in
situ by injecting a material that tightly binds to them or by heating the soil to form
a virtually impermeable glass. In some cases an impermeable cap may be put
over the contaminated site to mitigate the problem.Innovative methods are under development to reduce remediation costs andto deal with particularly difficult sites. For example, electro-osmosis is being
developed to move and treat contaminants in deep, low-porosity soils. Bio-
remediation is being developed to treat soils with microbes, and phytoremediation
is being developed to utilize plants to remediate surface contamination. Novel
chemical treatments are being developed to convert difficult contaminants, such
as chlorinated hydrocarbons, to benign by-products. Permeable reaction barriers
are being developed to trap or convert chemicals that pass through the barrier via
natural migration or by electric field or pressure gradients. Improved geotextiles,
landfill liners, and materials to contain radioactive wastes are being developed to
enhance waste containment effectiveness.Many challenges still remain to cost-effectively treat contaminants such asradioactive materials, and inert, tightly bound chemicals such as PCBs. The
chemical community will play a major role in developing solutions to these and
other complex contamination problems. In some casesÑas with radioactive ma-terialsÑit may not be feasible to destroy the waste, so long-term storage must beconsidered as an alternative. For such situations, chemists and chemical engi-
neers will play an important role in developing safe and reliable approaches to
containment of the waste (e.g., with improved materials for containers or in situ
barriers that could limit migration of pollutants).Cost-effectivenessA major challenge to the chemists and chemical engineers in developingsolutions to environmental problems is that of cost. Any solution that is proposed
for a problem ultimately must be  both technically and economically feasible. If

cost precludes its implementation, then it is not an actual solution. Regulations
sometimes require action that is accompanied by increased cost, but voluntary
implementation of major change is unlikely without an accompanying economic
advantage.INTERFACES AND INFRASTRUCTUREMany examples of collaborative work were discussed up during the work-shop (Appendix G). These efforts have made substantial contributions to the de-
velopment of environmental science and to improvements in the environment. In
many ways environmental studies are inherently multidisciplinary as illustrated
by Table G-2 in Appendix G. Finding ways to facilitate and enable such cross-The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHALLENGES IN ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMICAL SCIENCE49disciplinary work will constitute a significant challenge, but it is one worth ad-dressing because chemistry and chemical engineering will continue to contribute
to fully understanding and solving environmental problems.Workshop participants enumerated a variety of problems that currently in-hibit effective collaborations, ranging from difficulty in communication across
disciplines and the need for more cross-disciplinary educational programs to ad-
ministrative barriers that inhibit research teams. Interdisciplinary activity in the
academic environment would be enhanced by a reward structure that better rec-
ognizes the value of such collaborative efforts.Enhancements in the infrastructure for education and research will be essen-tial to future environmental progress. There was considerable sentiment among
workshop participants that the current disciplinary structure of academic depart-
ments and funding agencies inhibits advances in the environmental arena. Com-
munication and collaboration among federal funding agencies will also contrib-
ute to future progress. Research investment will need to address interdisciplinary
activities, the need for development of new instruments, improved computational
capabilities, and shared user facilities  that may be too expensive for individual

institutions.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.504Conclusions and Key Opportunities
The Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st Century Workshop onthe Environment brought together chemical scientists and engineers from
academia, government, national laboratories, and industrial laboratories, who pro-
vided a broad range of experience and perspective. Their discussions and presen-
tations identified a wide variety of opportunities and challenges in chemistry and
chemical engineering. These are documented throughout this report (see Appen-
dix D and Appendix G for specific examples) and led the committee to its
overarching conclusions:Conclusion: Chemistry and chemical engineering have made major con-tributions to solving environmental problems.Specific areas of accomplishment include¥major increases in analytical capabilitiesÑdetection, monitoring, and
measurement;¥increased understanding of biogeochemical processes and cycles;

¥advances in industrial ecologyÑnew attitudes about pollution prevention;

¥development of environmentally benign materials (e.g., CFC replace-
ments);¥new methods for waste treatment and pollution prevention;

¥green chemistry and new chemical processes;

¥discovery of environmental problems and identification of their underly-
ing causes and mechanisms; and¥development of improved modeling and simulation techniques.
The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND KEY OPPORTUNITIES51Conclusion: Collaboration of chemists and chemical engineers with sci-entists and engineers in other disciplines has led to important discover-
ies.These contributions have enhanced both basic understanding and the solu-tion of environmental problems through work at the interfaces of the chemical
sciences with biology, physics, engineering, materials science, mathematics, com-
puter science, atmospheric science, meteorology, and geology.Conclusion: Manifold challenges and opportunities in chemistry andchemical engineering exist at the interface with the environmental sci-
ences.By responding to these opportunities and challenges, the chemical sciencescommunity will be able to make substantial contributions to¥fundamental understanding of the environment,¥remediation of environmental problems that currently exist,¥prevention of environmental problems in the future, and¥protection of the environment.The stakes for responding to these challenges are high because regulatorydecisions might cost or preserve billions of dollars, impact millions of human
lives, or even determine the fate of entire species.Much of the discussion at the workshop emphasized the interrelated natureof the many parts of the environment. Typically, it is not possible to take action in
one area without creating at least the possibility of impacting other areas as well.
In order to avoid such undesired consequences, a systems approach will be needed
for the discovery and management of problems of the atmosphere, water, and
soil. This will be necessary not only for understanding the complexity of each
medium but for avoiding regulatory-driven tendencies to simply shift impacts
from one medium to another.A life-cycle systems approach, similar to what has been developed to evalu-ate energy impacts, will facilitate sound management of environmental impacts.
This will provide a clear understanding of both where and when environmental
impacts occur in the life of a product, process, or service. It also will make it
possible to appreciate all impacts, and to see how interactions and alternatives at
each point in a life cycle can influence other parts of the life cycle. For chemical
processing and manufacturing, significant impact can occur at various stages,
including extraction and preparation of raw materials, conversion of raw materi-
als into products, separation and purification of materials, product distribution,
end use of products, and final disposition after the useful life of products.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52THE ENVIRONMENTConclusion: A systems approach is essential for solution of environmen-tal problems.The systems approach will be needed in several areas, including¥actions that affect any of the three principal environmental sinks (air, wa-ter, and soil) and the biological systems with which they interact, where attempts
to manage each of them separately will surely transfer impacts from one medium
to another;¥spatial management of environmental impact sourcesÑwhere the impactsare generated in a processing and manufacturing sequence; and¥temporal management of environmental impact sourcesÑwhen the im-pacts are generated in a processing and manufacturing sequence.The use of systems approaches will necessitate simulation and modeling ofenormously large and complex systems. This will require significant computa-
tional resources, intensive efforts in complex optimization, and formulation of
mathematical models. Input and expertise from a broad array of scientific, engi-
neering, and social disciplines will be an essential part of developing the neces-
sary tools.Conclusion: Solving environmental problems will require intensivemathematical modeling, complex optimization, and computational re-
sources.Systems approaches will necessitate extensive collaborations among a widerange of scientific, engineering, and social disciplines.Workshop participants identified a broad array of research challenges, bothin areas of fundamental understanding and for specific environmental problems.Conclusion: Important opportunities exist for chemists and chemical en-gineers to contribute to a better understanding of the environment.Many of these research opportunities will involve work at the interfaces withother disciplines or interdisciplinary collaborations with scientists and engineers
from those disciplines. Just as these collaborations have led to significant progress
in the past, they should be expected to play an important role in future efforts to
fully understand and solve environmental problems. Examples include the need
to understand (or better understand)¥structure-toxicity relations;¥chemical processes at the molecular level;The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND KEY OPPORTUNITIES53¥biological and physicochemical interactions in response to environmentalstresses;¥fate and transport of anthropogenic chemicals;¥biogeochemical cycles;¥gas-to-particle conversion in the atmosphere;¥functional genomics and the chemical processes that govern organism-environment relationships; and¥chemical-gene interactions in the real environment.As we continue to better understand the underlying science of the environ-ment, further advances will require new tools and instruments.Conclusion: Chemists and chemical engineers will need to develop newanalytical instruments and tools.These tools and instruments will have to function effectively in an increas-ingly complex research arena that involves measurements of vanishingly small
quantities of substances in the presence of contamination from other chemicals,
under circumstances that make sample acquisition difficult. They will have to
address three principal areas of measurement:1.laboratory analyses
2.field measurements

3.theoretical tools for modeling and comparison with experiment
Conclusion: Improved methods for sampling and monitoring must bedeveloped.Chemists and chemical engineers will have to address the challenges of sam-pling and monitoringÑair, water, and soilÑmore extensively and more fre-quently than can be done now. This will require improvements in instrumenta-
tion, in sampling methodology, and in techniques for remote measurements.Conclusion: The new approaches of green chemistry and sustainablechemistry offer the potential for developing chemical and manufactur-
ing processes that are environmentally beneficial.We are still in the early stages, but successful examples already have beenreported. If the necessary investment is made in these new directions, chemists
and chemical engineers will be able to make major strides in improving environ-
mental quality.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54THE ENVIRONMENTConclusion: Strong and continued support of the chemical sciences willbe an essential part of the federal research investment for understand-
ing, improving, and protecting the environment.Chemists and chemical engineers will be able to respond effectively to thechallenges described here only if they have the resources needed to carry out the
necessary research. This impact of support will be enhanced if it facilitates inter-
disciplinary research and encourages industrial partnerships. The scientific
progress resulting from such support will inform and enable the policy-making
and decision process that is essential to future environmental improvement.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendixes
The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.57 AStatement of Task
The Workshop on The Environment is one of six workshops held as part ofÒChallenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st Century.Ó The workshop top-
ics reflect areas of societal needÑmaterials and manufacturing, energy and trans-
portation, national security and homeland defense, health and medicine, informa-
tion and communications, and environment. The charge for each workshop was
to address the four themes of discovery, interfaces, challenges, and infrastructure
as they relate to the workshop topic:¥DiscoveryÑmajor discoveries or advances in the chemical sciences dur-
ing the last several decades¥InterfacesÑinterfaces that exist between chemistryÐchemical engineer-
ing and such areas as biology, environmental science, materials science, medi-
cine, and physics¥ChallengesÑthe grand challenges that exist in the chemical sciences to-
day¥InfrastructureÑinfrastructure that will be required to allow the potential
of future advances in the chemical sciences to be realizedThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BBiographies of the Organizing
Committee MembersMario J. Molina (Co-Chair) is Institute Professor at the Massachusetts Insti-
tute of Technology (MIT). He holds a chemical engineering degree from the
Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico; a postgraduate degree from the
University of Freiburg, Germany; and a Ph.D. in physical chemistry from the
University of California, Berkeley. He joined MIT in 1989 with appointments in
both the Department of Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary Sciences and the De-
partment of Chemistry and was named MIT Institute Professor in 1997. Prior to
joining MIT, he held teaching and research positions at the Universidad Nacional
Autonoma de Mexico; the University of California, Irvine; and the Jet Propulsion
Laboratory at the California Institute of Technology. He is a member of the Pon-
tifical Academy of Sciences. He has served on the U.S. PresidentÕs Committee ofAdvisors in Science and Technology, the Secretary of EnergyÕs Advisory Board,the National Research Council (NRC) Board on Environmental Studies and Toxi-
cology, and boards of the U.S.-Mexico Foundation of Science and other non-
profit environmental organizations. He is a member of the National Academy of
Sciences and the Institute of Medicine. He has received several awards for his
scientific work including the 1995 Nobel Prize in Chemistry.John H. Seinfeld (Co-Chair) is the Louis E. Nohl Professor in the Divisions
of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering and Engineering and Applied Science at
the California Institute of Technology. He is a graduate of the University of Roch-
ester, where he received a B.S. degree in chemical engineering, and  Princeton

University, where he received a Ph.D. in chemical engineering. In 1967, he joined
the faculty of the California Institute of Technology. Through both experimental
and theoretical studies, Seinfeld has made numerous contributions to our knowl-
edge of the chemistry of the urban atmosphere; the formation, growth, and dy-
namics of atmospheric aerosols; and the role of aerosols in climate. His founding58The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B59work in the field of mathematical modeling of the atmosphere eventually becamewritten into the U.S. Clean Air Act. Seinfeld has received numerous honors and
awards including the American Chemical Society Award for Creative Advances
in Environmental Science and Technology, the 2001 Nevada Medal, and the
Fuchs Award of the International Aerosol Research Assembly in 1998. He is a
fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science and the
American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and was president of the American
Association for Aerosol Research. He was chairman of the NRC Panel on Tropo-
spheric Ozone and the NRC Panel on Aerosols and Climate. Seinfeld is the au-
thor of more than 400 scientific papers and several books. He is a member of the
National Academy of Engineering.Mark A. Barteau (Steering Committee Liason) is Robert L. Pigford Profes-
sor and Chair of the Department of Chemical Engineering at the University of
Delaware. He received his B.S. degree from Washington University in 1976 and
his M.S. (1977) and Ph.D. (1981) from Stanford University. His research area is
chemical engineering with specialized interests in application of surface tech-
niques to reactions on nonmetals, hydrocarbon and oxygenate chemistry on met-
als and metal oxides, scanning probe microscopies, and catalysis by metal oxides.Philip H. Brodsky retired from Pharmacia in 2002 as vice president respon-
sible for corporate research and environmental technology, a position he held at
Monsanto prior to its merger with Pharmacia and Upjohn. He received a Ph.D. in
chemical engineering from Cornell University and has held various positions in
research and research management at Monsanto. He serves as chair of the Ameri-
can Chemical SocietyÕs Committee on Chemistry and Public Affairs and on theindustrial advisory boards of the Department of Chemical and Environmental
Engineering at the University of Arizona and the Department of Chemical Engi-
neering at Washington University. He has served on numerous advisory and re-
view committees for the Department of Defense, Department of Energy, Envi-
ronmental Protection Agency, and NRC and was a member of the boards of
directors of the Industrial Research Institute, Inroads St. Louis, and MetaPhore
Pharmaceuticals.A. Welford Castleman, Jr. (BCST Liaison) is Evan Pugh Professor of
Chemistry and Physics and Eberly Distinguished Chair in Science at the Pennsyl-
vania State University and holds a joint appointment as professor in the Depart-
ment of Physics. He has been a member and on the Advisory Board for the Par-
ticulate Materials Center at the Pennsylvania State University, currently serves in
that capacity for the Consortium for Nanostructured Materials (VCU), and is a
member of the Penn State Center for Materials Physics. He received a B.Ch.E.
from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and his Ph.D. degree at the Polytechnic
Institute of New York. He has been on the staff of the Brookhaven National
Laboratory (1958-1975), adjunct professor in the Departments of Mechanics and
Earth and Space Sciences, State University of New York, Stony Brook (1973-
1975), and professor of chemistry and fellow of the Cooperative Institute forThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60APPENDIX BResearch in Environmental Sciences, University of Colorado, Boulder (1975-1982). Castleman is a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and
was a Fulbright senior scholar in 1989. He received the 1988 American Chemical
Society Award for Creative Advances in Environmental Science and Technology
and was awarded a Doktors Honoris Causa from the University of Innsbruck,
Austria, in 1987. He is a member of the National Academy of Sciences.Joseph M. DeSimone  (BCST Liaison) is William R. Kenan, Jr., Distin-
guished Professor of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering  at North Carolina

State University and the University of North Carolina. He is also director of the
National Science Foundation Science and Technology Center for Environmen-
tally Responsible Solvents and Processes. He received his B.S. in chemistry form
Ursinus College and his Ph.D. in chemistry from Virginia Polytechnic Institute
and State University. His areas of interest include polymer synthesis in
supercritical fluids, surfactant design for applications in interfacial chemistry,
and polymer synthesis and processingÑfrom fundamental aspects of chemicalsystems to the most efficient and environmentally friendly ways to manufacture
polymers and polymer products.Jean H. Futrell is Senior Battelle Fellow and Chief Science Officer at Pa-
cific Northwest National Laboratory. Previously he was Willis F. Harrington Pro-
fessor of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of Delaware. He received
a B.S. from Louisiana Polytechnic Institute and a Ph.D. from University of Cali-
fornia at Berkeley. FutrellÕs research program focuses on the application of reac-tion dynamics methodsÑparticularly the use of crossed molecular beamsÑtoinvestigate the detailed mechanism of ion activation in tandem mass spectrom-
etry. He has served on the NRCÕs Chemical Sciences Roundtable and was chairof the Council for Chemical Research in 1999.Parry M. Norling is American Association for the Advancement of Science
(AAAS) Fellow at the RAND corporation. He retired in December 1998 after 33
years with the DuPont Company, where he held a number of R&D and manufac-
turing management positions and spent two years as corporate director of health
and safety. From 1999 to 2001 he served part-time as Corporate Technology
Adviser at DuPont supporting the chief science and technology officer. He is
chairman of the Union of Pure and Applied ChemistryÕs CHEMRAWN(CHEMical Research Applied to World Needs) committee and a member of the
IUPAC Bureau; he was chairman of the Industrial Research Institute (IRI) 1999-
2000 and is currently a member of the Board of Directors of the American Cre-
ativity Association. He received an A.B. from Harvard University in physical
sciences and a Ph.D. from Princeton University in polymer chemistry. His fields
of expertise include R&D management, the functioning of human networks or
communities of practices, improving the quality and effectiveness of innovation
processes, assessing environmental technologies for sustainable development,
understanding near-term nanotechnologies, and developing icephobic coatings.Jeffrey J. Siirola (Steering Committee Liason) is a research fellow in the
The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B61Chemical Process Research Laboratory at Eastman Chemical Company inKingsport, Tennessee. He received his B.S. in chemical engineering from the
University of Utah in 1967 and his Ph.D. in chemical engineering from the Uni-
versity of Wisconsin-Madison in 1970. His research centers on chemical process-
ing, including chemical process synthesis, computer-aided conceptual process
engineering, engineering design theory and methodology, chemical technology
assessment, resource conservation and recovery, artificial intelligence,
nonnumeric (symbolic) computer programming, and chemical engineering edu-
cation. He is a member of the National Academy of Engineering.Christine S. Sloane is director of FreedomCAR and Advanced Technology
Strategy at General Motors  (GM) Corporation where she is responsible for tech-

nical strategy in advanced technology development programs and for the devel-
opment and demonstration of technologies for energy efficiency and reduced

emissions under the FreedomCAR program. Prior to 2002, Sloane served as di-
rector, Technology Strategy for Advanced Technology Vehicles, focused on elec-
tric drive and hybrid drive systems. Earlier she served as director, Environmental
Policy and Programs, responsible for global climate issues and for mobile emis-
sion issues involving advanced technology vehicles. From 1994 to 1999, Sloane
served as chief technologist for the development and demonstration team for Pre-
cept, GMÕs 80 mile-per-gallon 5-passenger demonstration vehicle. She alsoserved as GMÕs technical director for the Partnership for a New Generation ofVehicles (PNGV) where she was responsible for guiding and implementing the
development of energy conversion and materials technologies through research
and development at national laboratories, universities, and automotive suppliers.
Her earlier research interests included aerosol chemistry and physics, air quality
and visibility, manufacturing and vehicle emissions, and environmental policy.
Sloane has authored more than 80 technical papers and coedited one book. She
has served as department head of atmospheric sciences at Battelle Pacific North-
west Laboratories. She received her Ph.D. from MIT in chemical physics.Isiah M. Warner is Boyd Professor and Philip W. West Professor of Ana-
lytical and Environmental Chemistry at Louisiana State University (LSU). He
received his B.S. from Southern University in 1968 and worked as a research
chemist with Battelle Northwest for five years before receiving his Ph.D. from
the University of Washington in 1977. He served on the faculties of Texas A&M
University and Emory University before joining LSU in 1992. WarnerÕs researchfocuses on the areas of molecular spectroscopy and separation science. He has
published more than 200 peer-reviewed manuscripts and several book chapters,
and has coedited two books. He has won numerous awards for his research, teach-
ing, and mentoring, including the year 2000 Eastern Analytical Symposium
Award for Outstanding Achievements in the Fields of Analytical Chemistry; the
1997 Presidential Award for Excellence in Science, Mathematics, and Engineer-
ing Mentoring; the year 2000 AAAS Lifetime Mentor Award; and the year 2000
Council for Advancement and Support of Education (CASE) Louisiana Professor
of the Year Award from the Carnegie Foundation.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CWorkshop Agenda
AgendaWorkshop on the EnvironmentChallenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyNational Academy of SciencesArnold and Mabel Beckman CenterIrvine, CaliforniaSUNDAY, NOVEMBER 17
7:30Breakfast and Registration
SESSION 1:T
HE CHEMISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT8:10Introductory remarks by organizers
Ñbackground of project8:15DOUGLAS J. R
ABER, National Research Council8:20MATTHEW V. T
IRRELL, Co-Chair, Steering Committee, Challengesfor the Chemical Sciences in the 21st Century8:25MARIO J. M
OLINA, JOHN H. S
EINFELD, Co-Chairs, OrganizingCommittee, Workshop on the Environment8:30BARRY DELLINGER, Louisiana State UniversityOrigin and Control of Toxic Combustion By-Products9:05DISCUSSION

9:25CHARLES E. K
OLB, Aerodyne Research, Inc.Measurement Challenges and Strategies in Atmospheric and
Environmental Chemistry10:00DISCUSSION
10:20BREAK62The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C6310:50JANET G. H
ERING, California Institute of TechnologyBiogeochemical Controls on the Occurrence and Mobility of Trace
Metals in Groundwater11:25DISCUSSION

11:45Lunch
Session 2: The Chemistry of the Environment (Part 2)1:00MARK THIEMENS, University of California, San DiegoMeasurements of Stable Isotopes in Atmospheric Species1:30DISCUSSION

1:50FRAN‡OIS M. M. M
OREL, Princeton UniversityChemistry of Trace Elements in Natural Waters2:20DISCUSSION
2:40B
REAKOUT SESSION: DISCOVERYWhat major discoveries or advances related to the environmenthave been made in the chemical sciences during the last several
decades?3:45BREAK4:00Reports from breakout sessions (and discussion)

5:00R
ECEPTION6:00B
ANQUETSpeaker: WILLIAM F. F
ARLAND, Acting Deputy AssistantAdministrator for Science, U.S. Environmental Protection AgencyMONDAY, NOVEMBER 18
7:30Breakfast
Session 3: Manufacturing and Green Chemistry8:00UMA CHOWDHRY, DuPontSustainable Growth in the Chemical Industry8:30DISCUSSION

8:50RUBEN G. C
ARBONELL, North Carolina State UniversityCO2-Based Technologies9:20DISCUSSION
The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64APPENDIX C9:40B
REAKOUT SESSION: INTERFACESWhat are the major environment-related discoveries andchallenges at the interfaces between chemistryÐchemical
engineering and other disciplines, including biology, information
science, materials science, and physics?10:45BREAK11:00Reports from breakout sessions (and discussion)

12:00Lunch
Session 4: Manufacturing and Green Chemistry (Part 2)1:00THOMAS W. A
SMUS, DaimlerChrysler CorporationDiesel Engines for a Clean Car?1:30DISCUSSION

1:50MICHAEL K. S
TERN, Monsanto CompanyEnvironmentally Sound Agricultural Chemistry: From Process
Technology to Biotechnology2:20DISCUSSION
2:40B
REAKOUT SESSION: CHALLENGESWhat are the environment-related grand challenges in thechemical sciences and engineering?3:45BREAK4:00Reports from breakout sessions and discussion

5:00A
DJOURN FOR DAYTUESDAY, NOVEMBER 19
7:30Breakfast
Session 5: Environmental Remediation and Modeling8:00JAMES G. A
NDERSON, Harvard UniversityA Developing Generation of Observation and Modeling Strategies8:30DISCUSSION

8:50DAVID A. D
IXON, Pacific Northwest National LaboratoryModeling and Simulation for Environmental Science9:20DISCUSSION
The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C659:40B
REAKOUT SESSION: INFRASTRUCTUREWhat are the issues at the intersection of environmental studiesand the chemical sciences for which there are structural
challenges and opportunitiesÑin teaching, research, equipmentand instrumentation, facilities, and personnel?10:45BREAK11:00Reports from breakout sessions (and discussion)

12:00Wrap-up and closing remarks
MARIO J. M
OLINA, JOHN H. S
EINFELD, Co-Chairs, WorkshopOrganizing Committee12:15A
DJOURNThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66DWorkshop Presentations
A DEVELOPING GENERATION OF OBSERVATION ANDMODELING STRATEGIESJames G. AndersonHarvard UniversityIn the next few decades, several problems of considerable societal interestwill emerge with a central theme of the balance between societal objectives and
scientific curiosity-driven research, both of which are very important for the fu-
ture. Three problems of key importance in the area of observations and modeling
are:¥Migration of nitrate, sulfate, heavy metals, and organic soot from urban or
regional areas into the broader environment and associated public health issues;¥Forecasting climate change and testing the forecast in a way that is ac-
ceptable to a much broader range of individuals involved both in science and in
public policy; and¥Ultraviolet dosage, which is in many ways a statement of what it is that
society really cares about, particularly in connection with the ozone question.The way in which we attack these problemsÑthe observations, the model-ing, and the way public understanding evolvesÑare crucial issues. For example,
Charles KolbÕs presentation provides a beautiful introduction to the issue of
undersampling and the requirement for significant advances in core technology
that must underpin the scientific case leading to effective public policy.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.JAMES G. ANDERSON67The issue of carbon sources and sinks is strategically tied back to the ques-tion of nitrate, sulfate, heavy metal, and organic soot emission. If we can attack
one problem and solve it, we will be attacking both. The question of how nitrate
will affect human health is closely tied to carbon sources and sinks, which in turn
are linked to climate. Consequently, answering the carbon-nitrate-sulfate question
requires very high spatial resolution of fluxes, isotopes, and reactive intermediates.There are particular problems with region-specific studies (Box 1). For ex-ample, the Indian subcontinentÑas it links into the tropical region during themonsoon seasonÑis as different from the other seasons as any two regions onEarth. In addition, the way in which these systems couple from the regional to the
global scale are extremely important for the issue of prediction. Describing a
system and understanding it well enough to predict really separate the strategies
of observations and modeling.In addition to seasonal signatures, we want to understand vertical fluxes andurban regional source sinks driven by human activity. We understand chemical
transformations very well as illustrated by the Los Angeles basin. We know ex-
actly what reactions are taking place, but the lack of specificity on the location
and strength of sources and the way those couple into the chemical transforma-
tion serves to prevent a link between science and public policy on that question.BOX 1
Experimental Requirements¥High spatial resolution observation of fluxes, isotopes, reactive inter-
mediates, tracers, particles, aerosol, radiation field, etc.
¥Regional and national budgets of carbon, photochemical oxidants, par-
ticulates¥Region-specific studies:
US and its boundaries, inner tropicsÐIntertropical ConvergenceZone (ITCZ)Indian OceanÐIndian subcontinent, Asia¥Seasonal signature:
Winter-summer monsoons, wet-dry tropicalWinter-summer temperate and high latitudes¥Scientific objectives:
Vertical fluxes from biogenic sources and sinks
Urban and regional sources and sinks driven by human activity;gas-to-particle conversion mechanismsConvective redistribution of water vapor, sulfates, nitrates, soot,carbon, heavy metals; free-radical catalysis and associated
photochemical mechanisms¥Structure: extremely sharp gradients, localized fluxes, discontinuities
across specific trajectoriesThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68APPENDIX DThe strategy for analyzing NOx across the globe by comparing satellite ob-
servations, models, and in situ aircraft observations hinges on the fact that the NO
to NO2 ratio goes up dramatically with increasing height in the troposphere. For
example, NO2 measurements from the European Space Agency
Õs Global OzoneMonitoring Experiment (GOME) satellite provide a way of analyzing NO2 in the
boundary layer and just above the boundary layer. Therefore it possible to test the
differences between the GOME satellite measurements and global chemical mod-
els. Those differences tell us where we have to attack the problem with a more
sophisticated set of measurements. In particular, the large differences between
the modeled and satellite-observed concentration fields establish the priorities for
aircraft field campaigns that are the only means by which we can adjudicate these
differences.Now consider the third questionÑthat of UV dosage. Here we have anemerging marriage between the atmospheric dynamics, chemistry, and medical
communities because malignant melanoma, as weÕll see in a moment, is a hugeand increasing health issue. In fact, skin cancers are the only cancers worldwide
that are increasing in a statistically important way in the face of developing medi-
cal methods. So itÕs this union between the dynamics and the loss of ozone atmidlatitudes (Figure 1) that provides the fundamental information that most of
the ozone loss is taking place in the very lower part of the stratosphere. This leads
to several questions:¥Which mechanisms are responsible for the continuing erosion of ozoneover mid latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere?¥Will rapid loss of ozone over the arctic in late winter worsen? Are theselarge losses coupled to midlatitudes?¥How will the catalytic loss of ozone respond to changes in boundary con-ditions on water and temperature forced by increasing CO2, CH4, and so forth?How we respond in the future requires an understanding of the mechanismsthat control the long-term erosion of ozone at midlatitudes. We know why ozone
is destroyed over the Antarctic and over the arctic, but there is also a seasonally
dependent midlatitude ozone loss. The months of March, April, and May define a
key periodÑwhen schools let out, final exams are over, and the younger popula-tion gets a large episodic dose of ultraviolet radiation. This March-April-May
period shows the largest long-term erosion over the past 20 years, approaching
10% ozone loss per decade. However, the strategy one takes depends, to an ex-
tent, on whether this is a societal or a scientific issue.LetÕs take the position that we donÕt know the mechanisms that control ozoneerosion over midlatitudes (which at this juncture is true) and assume that the
erosion of ozone will continue as it has in the past decades. Then weÕre going tolook at the coupling with the large ozone losses in the arctic triggered by conver-
sion of inorganic chlorine to free-radical form on ice particles or cold liquid aero-The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.JAMES G. ANDERSON69sols each winter in the polar vortex. We come to the conclusion, in such an analy-sis, that itÕs the dynamical structure of the atmosphere that underlies the funda-mental cause of this midlatitude ozone loss, not chemistry directly.From the societal perspective, the raw numbers are large and important forbasal cell carcinoma: 800,000 cases per year. Until we understand the mechanism
of midlatitude ozone loss, a simple extrapolation may be inaccurate, but it pro-
vides an important reference for discussion (Figure 2). By simple extrapolation
there would be an increase from 800,000 cases of basal cell carcinoma in the
United States annually to nearly 1.9 million by 2060. The logarithmic depen-
dence of the cross section results in a 2% increase in UV at these optical depths
for a 1% decrease in ozone. The biological amplification factor emerges from the
medical community, and itÕs a change in human morbidity. For malignant mela-noma, the numbers are very much smaller, but the fractional death rate, as op-
posed to morbidity, is much greater.Consider the pattern of ozone over the Northern Hemisphere, and ask if thissimply results from large ozone concentrations over the arctic migrating back
into midlatitudes. That would correspond to chlorine- and bromine-catalyzedFIGURE 1
Midlatitude ozone loss.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70APPENDIX Dozone destruction over the winter arctic merging back into midlatitudes. ItÕs acompletely reasonable, simple, understandable hypothesis, and it emerges from
the fact that in the early 1970s we had this dome of ozone that represented the
sequestration of ozone moving from the low latitudes into the high latitudes. As
the ozone moves northward and downward, itÕs sequestered in this dome, andthatÕs the way the world has worked for millions and millions of years. Until thelate 1990s, as the ozone layer began to thin in many winters, it was emulating the
Antarctic in a dramatic way. Does this low-ozone air created in the winter vortex
flow back into midlatitudes, causing the observed minimum in the March-April-
May period? An analysis of data from the last National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA) arctic mission indicates clearly that this does not occur.There are indeed large ozone losses in the vortex, but all of the large-scaleflow is from the tropics northward and downward. Also, because we know the
seasonal phase of CO2 and water over the tropical tropopause, we know that there
is no communication backward from the polar regions to midlatitudes in these
key months of ozone loss. Therefore, it isnÕt simply ozone-depleted arctic airmoving back into midlatitudes.Does long-term ozone erosion result from chemical loss of ozone atmidlatitudes in the lower stratosphere? Susan Solomon made the very reasonable
suggestion that the penetration of cirrus clouds and cold aerosols into the lower
stratosphere initiates the conversion of inorganic chlorine to free-radical form,FIGURE 2
Hypothetical trend for basal cell carcinoma if the trends in midlatitude ozoneerosion continue unchanged.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.JAMES G. ANDERSON71and she carried out a number of modeling studies that support this.1 However,
evidence garnered from hundreds of crossings of the tropopause by the ER-2
aircraftÑwhich provides very high-resolution simultaneous measurements oftropopause position, water vapor and temperature, percentage of observations
with ice saturation, and ClO concentrationsÑdemonstrates that cirrus clouds andcold aerosols capable of providing the heterogeneous site for inorganic chlorine
to free-radical conversion do not exist. The absence of observed ClO is the most
compelling point. It would take about a 50-200 parts per trillion (ppt) of ClO to
drive the ozone loss thatÕs observed, but the experimental measurements showedless than 2-4 ppt of ClO, all the way up to 4 km above the tropopause.Consequently, we do not believe that in situ loss of ozone is responsible forthe long term trend in midlatitude ozone erosion, even though that would be the
most reasonable explanation. This brings us back to the fundamental unsolved
question of the coupling between the tropics and high latitude. As the temperature
of the ocean surface warms in response to increasing CO2 forcing, how does it
affect the boundary condition on the entrance of water vapor into the stratosphere?
The tropical tropopause constitutes a valve that desiccates the stratosphere and
strictly controls water vapor entering the stratosphere from the troposphere.Large-scale ascent operating above the tropical tropopause delivers this mix-ing ratio of water vapor into the high latitudes. For temperatures running from
192 to 200 K and a given water vapor curve of 6 parts per million (ppm), the
trigger point for formation of high ClO is about 195 K. We have verified this
experimentally using ER-2 observations with trajectory calculations demonstrat-
ing the temperature history of air parcels moving within the vortex.Consequently, the amount of water vapor, as it increases in the stratospherein response to increasing temperatures at the tropical tropopause, would instigate
a shift in the threshold temperature required to instigate ClO formation to tem-
peratures above 195 K, thereby aiding the dramatic loss of ozone in the arctic
winter vortex. At the same time, the increase in water vapor in the vortex induces
radiative cooling that drops the temperature of the wintertime lower stratosphere
at high latitudes, thus exacerbating the destruction of ozone by chlorine radicals.
The water vapor is the crucial quantity, and the structure of the tropics turns out to
be the centerpiece for understanding all of these issues linking climate and trends
in UV dosage.What is needed is to couple the boundary layer in the tropics all the way upthrough the tropical transition layer into the stratosphere (Figure 3). The geo-
graphic coverage is crucial. The eastern tropical Pacific over Central America is
dramatically different from the western tropical Pacific. It is the structure of con-1Solomon, S.; Borrmann, S.; Garcia, R.R.; Portmann, R.; Thomason, L.; Poole, L.R.; Winker, D.;McCormick, M.P. J. Geophys. Res. 1997, 102(D17),
 21411-21429.
The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72APPENDIX Dvection in the tropics, the control of water vapor in the middle-upper troposphere,and the formation of high-altitude cirrus in the region between 13- and 18-km
altitude that must be understood before predictions of the impact of climate change
can be made.There are important suggestions in the paleorecord. Consider the Eocene 50million years ago. In central Wyoming, there were turtles, alligators, and palm
trees, a combination of plant and animal life that extended into central northern
Canada. It was an era defined by deep ocean temperatures, running 10 K aboveFIGURE 3
.Deep convection in the tropics.
The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.JAMES G. ANDERSON73present and warm polar sea surface temperatures. The Northern Hemisphere con-tinental interiors were warm throughout the year. There was no glaciation. How
this occurred is an important question that carries crucial messages for todayÑincluding how we attack the problem scientifically.The mechanisms responsible for Eocene climate have been suggested to beenhanced meridional heat fluxes. The ocean is always involved here, with reorga-
nization of the atmospheric circulation, enhanced greenhouse warming due to
high carbon dioxide, and reductions in global topography. Yet none of the models
have been able to capture the gentle difference in temperature between the tropics
and high latitudes. This was explained by Sloan and Pollard in 1998, when they
introduced polar stratospheric clouds into the model.2 These are the site for het-
erogeneous reaction, but they also are profoundly important for trapping infrared
radiation. They introduced methane in our favorite reaction to produce the oxida-
tion leading to the formation of water. They proposed that the methane came
from swamps and wetlands.The Eocene went on uninterrupted for 10 million years, but the chemicallifetime of methane is about 7 years. Consequently, we donÕt believe that this isthe explanation. We believe that polar stratospheric clouds are trapping high-
latitude radiation in the infrared, but we believe the mechanism comes from the
following: If CO2 enters the system or heat moves northward, the gradient be-
tween the tropics and the poles begins to soften, leading to reduced excitation of
gravity waves and planetary waves driving from the troposphere up into the strato-
sphere. As the flux of upwelling gravity waves and planetary-scale waves is re-
duced, so is the wave drag effect, which is the dominant pump that lifts material
up in the tropics and pushes it down at high latitudes. If the effectiveness of that
pump is reduced, the system relaxes back over the tropics so that the boundary
condition on water vapor increases, allowing significantly more water to get into
the system. We believe that this is the crucial climate state, and it is at the heart of
our understanding of the current climate and also of UV dosage.This brings us back to analyzing the meridional cross section in three dimen-sions from the equator to the pole. A long-duration balloon that could remain in
the lower stratosphere would allow us to sample vertically by lowering a pack-
age. This is similar to stratospheric experiments from the 1980s, but the subtlety
of the connection of the dynamics with the radiative and chemical properties
demands an entirely different look.We know that we can scan 10 km back and forth, but now we have sometremendous help from fuel cells. The technology of fuel cells allows us to use
solar energy for balloon flights lasting several months. Solar energy drives a very
efficient propeller to position the balloon at whatever latitude we want to scan.
This energy technology has produced major breakthroughs. Even though other
approaches are important, we think that the subtlety of this connected system will2Sloan, L.C.; Pollard, D. Geophys. Res. Lett. 1998, 25(18), 3517-3520.
The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74APPENDIX DFIGURE 4Atmospheric radiative forcing trends.emerge only out of observations of tracers, particles, and the velocity componentsassociated with this when done in a very sensitive way from an immobile plat-
form.We must still address the question of testing climate forecasts. AtmosphericCO2 levels are rapidly increasing, as documented in the Intergovernmental Panelon Climate Change (IPCC) report.3 A number of different scenarios have been
 3Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Climate Change 2001: The Scientific Basis,Houghton, J.T.; Ding, Y.; Griggs, D.J.; Noguer, M.; van der Linden, P.J.; Xiaosu, D., Eds., Cam-bridge University Press: Cambridge, New York, 2001 (http://www.grida.no/climate/ipcc_tar/).The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THOMAS W. ASMUS75developed, and it is clear that weÕre hugging the upper boundary on the release ofCO2 that drives the forcing. We are projecting nearly 4 W/m3 by the middle of the
twenty-first century (Figure 4). This is emerging out of the natural variability,
and it will be extremely important.The final point is the question of societal objectives. If you look at the ques-tion of climate forecast from societal objectives, what we need is an operational
forecast that is tested and trusted. Yet this nation has no operational climate fore-
cast. We have no test of the veracity of that forecast; and until we do, we cannot
deliver what is needed to the public.The backbone of the climate forecast, of course, is the operational model thatlinks the short-term El NiŒo scale to the longer term. The observing system is thekey challenge for testing the veracity of calculations. Carbon sources and sinks
have been discussed. I believe that upper ocean observations, climate data records
at the surface, and benchmark observation that establish the long-term evolution
of the climate in an absolute sense constitute the centerpiece of what must be
done.DIESEL ENGINES FOR CLEAN CARS?Thomas W. AsmusDaimlerChrysler CorporationWhile the Diesel engine has been growing in popularity in the light-dutyvehicle segments in many parts of the world, it has essentially stalled in the United
States in these segments. In large part this results from the absence of financial
incentives given the low levels of fuel taxation in the United States, plus an image
problem based largely on experiences of two decades ago. Since that time, Diesel
engine technology has improved in many ways, and this manifests itself as in-
creased performance and fuel economy accompanied by reduced emissions, odor,
and noise. In large part this has been made possible, not by any scientific break-
throughs, but rather by machine design and manufacturing technology advance-
ments particularly in fuel-injection system components. In the light-duty vehicle
segments today the typical fuel economy expectation of a Diesel engine is 40%
greater than that of the gasoline engine at equal vehicle performance on a fuel
volume-normalized basis. Because Diesel fuel has roughly 15% more energy per
gallon than gasoline, the benefit is roughly 25% on an energy-normalized basis.The U.S. regulatory mandates on criteria emissions have been within reachfor gasoline and Diesel-powered vehicles to the present, but in 2007 the mandates
will be beyond reach for the Diesel with any kind of sensible emissions abate-
ment scheme. This, combined with a very weak business case based on low fuel
taxation, effectively discourages U.S. industry investment in DieselÑthe onlypractical high-fuel-economy alternative to the more conventional and well-knownThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76APPENDIX Dgasoline engine technology. While the cost of a modern, high speed Diesel en-gine is substantially more than its gasoline counterpart, it is the most cost attrac-
tive alternative to conventional gasoline.Evolution of the Diesel EngineDiesel engine combustion is a highly mixing-limited, stratified-charge pro-cess, and herein lies its formidable efficiency advantage over homogeneous-
charge gasoline as well as its challenges with respect to NOx and particulate mat-
ter (PM). Whereas the homogeneous-charge relies on inlet throttling for load
control, the Diesel relies only on injected fuel quantity for this. Early attempts at
managing this mixing-limited process often involved using an outside source of
compressed air to assist the fuel atomization process. Later, much attention fo-
cused on manipulating in-cylinder air flows to hasten the mixing process. Mean-
while, machine design and manufacturing specialists found practical means to
increase fuel-injection pressures and to better manage machining process for bet-
ter control of fuel-injection precision. Ultimately there was less reliance on in-
cylinder air flow manipulation to support the mixing process; hence higher en-
gine speeds were enabled by faster combustion, while NOx and PM emissions
were reduced. With this, the pre-combustion chamber Diesel became obsolete,
and direct injection (open combustion chamber design) became the standard for
Diesel engines of most all sizes and duty cycles. With this came reductions in
combustion chamber surface area and also in-cylinder turbulence, both of which
contribute to reduced heat losses. Typically a 15% increase in thermal efficiency
accompanied this shift. High-pressure common-rail fuel systems are state of the
art, they provide substantially improved combustion manipulation ability com-
pared to all progenitors, and turbocharging has become standard on all small
high-speed, automotive Diesel engines. (Turbocharging Diesel engines is highly
beneficial to vehicle fuel efficiency since smaller engines with lower friction can
be used. Any fuel efficiency benefit derived from turbocharging gasoline engines
is somewhat more conditional.) Relative to conventional gasoline engines, these
produce significantly higher torque density and near-competitive power density.
At least a portion of EuropeansÕ enthusiasm for Diesel power is their highly de-
sirable drivability and performance characteristics.Engine-Out EmissionsThe fuel efficiency advantage of the Diesel over conventional gasoline isbased primarily on the means of load control via injected fuel quantity while the
air flow is essentially unrestricted (i.e., there is no inlet throttling); therefore the
gas exchange (or pumping) loss is minimal. At light loads, therefore, the overall
air-fuel ratio is sufficiently high that homogeneous-charge flame propagation is
not possible. Hence, stratified charge, diffusion-limited combustion is the princi-The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THOMAS W. ASMUS77pal heat release mechanism. Therefore, combustion and post-flame chemistry
occur over a wide range of air-fuel ratios. The fraction of heat release that occurs
in the range of stoichiometric yields very high temperatures and produces high
levels of NOx. The portion of heat release that occurs in fuel-rich zones (equiva-lence ratio = 2 or greater; temperatures = 1400 K or higher) tends to produce PM
or soot. Manipulation of local air-fuel ratios is the goal of fuel-injection and in-
cylinder air-motion strategies.As described above, recent improvements in fuel-injection equipment haveproduced remarkable reductions in both of the principal emittants. This has been
achieved mainly via higher injection pressures and precision control of the in-
stantaneous rates of injection (with techniques described as rate shaping, split
injections, pilot injection, post injection, etc.). These advanced fuel-injection tech-
niques enable a measure of control over the local mixing processes and thus the
local air-fuel ratios. Trends toward increased levels of premixed burning tend to
be beneficial in terms of reducing both of the principal emittants. These injection-
mixing strategies, while very desirable, are limited by the need for timing preci-
sion of the thermal autoignition process (i.e., timing of thermal autoignition is
compromised when temporal proximity between injection and ignition is in-
creased). While the emissions reductions resulting from these advancements are
impressive, attainment of the so-called Tier 2, bin 5 legislated limits to be en-
forced in 2007 is not possible by these means alone.At the far end of this spectrum is homogeneous-charge compression ignition(HCCI), which has been the subject of considerable research effort over the past
several decades. This scheme strives to produce a truly (or nearly) homogeneous
charge, which under light-load conditions, corresponds to air-fuel ratios too lean
to support either flame propagation or diffusion-limited combustion. Hence,
multisite thermal autoignition will occur, provided that a particular temperature
threshold is attained. This process is capable of producing very low emissions,
but timing control of the thermal autoignition process is severely compromised,
since the injection event is no longer capable of precisely triggering heat release.
Hence, this scheme is readily demonstrable on a laboratory scale but is generally
incapable of sustained operation upon load changes due to perturbations in ther-
mal equilibria.Diesel Engine AftertreatmenSignificant publicly and privately funded R&D activities have been in placein this area for the past decade, and while incremental improvements have been
realized, they all fall short of what is necessary to achieve legislated requirements
for 2007 with respect to both NOx and PM. Complicating matters are low exhaust
temperatures at light loads characteristic of automotive-type duty cycles and the
presence of significant quantities of oxygen in the exhaust stream. In addition,
chemical reduction of NOx in a strongly oxidizing exhaust environment presents
The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78APPENDIX Dadditional and formidable challenges. Obviously, chemical reduction of NOx re-
quires that reductant chemicals be added to the exhaust in a manner compatible
with the particular aftertreatment scheme. The so-called urea-SCR (selective cata-

lytic reduction) scheme is perhaps the most effective means of reducing tailpipe
NOx emissions. Aqueous urea is metered as precisely as possible and stoichio-
metrically with respect to NOx into the exhaust just upstream of the SCR catalyst,
the first stage of which hydrolyzes urea to ammonia. The final stage of the SCR
system is an oxidation catalyst that oxidizes any excess of ammonia that may not
have been consumed in the SCR catalyst itself. Despite functional attributes of
the SCR approach, it comes with two formidable drawbacks: (1) a urea infra-
structure would be needed, and (2) the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) has virtually ruled out this option.The so-called NOx absorber (or trap) is generally seen as the most attractive
option for the United States  Although generally less effective than the urea SCR

approach, this uses Diesel fuel as a source of chemical reductant. The catalyst is
typically barium and platinum on an alumina substrate, where nitric oxide is cata-
lytically oxidized to nitrogen dioxide and then reacts with the barium to form
barium nitrate. When the barium becomes completely nitrated, the trap is regen-
erated by the addition of Diesel fuel somewhere upstream of the catalyst. The
twofold role of the secondary fuel addition is (1) to consume all excess oxygen
and (2) to produce cracked products (H2, CO, and hydrocarbons in decreasingorder of effectiveness) to effect chemical reduction of the trapped NOx. NOxabsorbers are extremely sulfur sensitive and are rendered inactive when fuel-
bound sulfur, which leaves the engine as SO2, becomes catalytically oxidized toSO3 whereupon it reacts 
ÒirreversiblyÓ with barium to form the comparatively
more stable barium sulfate. Desulfation of NOx absorbers requires temperatures
sufficiently high as to degrade the catalyst. Fuel sulfur levels will directly impact
desulfation frequency and hence catalyst life expectancy. This along with the
denitration frequency will determine the fuel economy penalty associated with
this form of NOx aftertreatment.
PM traps are typically ceramic wall-flow filters that trap PM rather effec-tively. PM trap regeneration, on the other hand, has proven to be rather more
challenging. Typically an additional source of heat must be added to effect the
initiation of oxidative regeneration. Once regeneration is initiated, the exother-
micity of the process can (and often does) overheat the filter, causing irreversible
damage. Various means may be employed to reduce the required regeneration
temperature.These basic aftertreatment elements have been demonstrated in a wide vari-ety of different configurations. All are very sensitive to duty-cycle diversity, fuel
quality, packageability, and control approaches. High-mileage durability has not
been thoroughly established for any of these systems. Some demonstrations haveThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THOMAS W. ASMUS79been reported for limited duty-cycle testing typically with Òtailored,Ó open-loop
regeneration control.Overall ConclusionsTo date there has been no demonstration of system compatibility with thelegislated emissions limits to be enforced under Tier 2, bin 5 (70 mg NOx per mile
and 10 mg PM per mile) in 2007. (It is typically necessary to target 50% of these
emissions limits to ensure high-mileage conformance.) In addition to the afore-
mentioned technical obstacles, at current levels of fuel taxation in the United
States and customer indifference to matters of fuel economy, private-sector in-
vestment in Diesel system technologies is discouraged. In the automotive indus-
try, lead times are such that without proven emissions capabilities as of this date,
it is highly unlikely that this technology will be available in the United States by
2007 based on the worldÕs most stringent emissions regulations. It is also note-worthy that Diesel technology is the most promising and cost-effective among
the major fuel-economy enabling technologies.Opportunities Through the Chemical SciencesIn the interest of mitigating some of the risks that could deprive the U.S.market of this high fuel-efficiency technology in light-duty segments, several
areas in which the chemical sciences could play a role are listed below.While the chemical kinetics of the thermal autoignition process are relativelywell understood, means of controlling the ignition timing in the engine cycle
when operating in the HCCI mode are still elusive. Chemists and chemical engi-
neers will need to help overcome this obstacle if HCCI is to be executable in
automotive practice.The most practical means of aftertreatment control of NOx in the U.S. envi-
ronment is the so-called NOx trap, and these are highly susceptible to sulfur poi-
soning. Even with the reduced, legislated levels of sulfur in Diesel fuel, the long-
term effects of sulfur on NOx trap performance is a major concern. Any means to
reduce this sulfur sensitivity would contribute to the long-term success of Diesel
technology.The health effects of Diesel PM are contentious, and there are strongly heldopinions on both sides of the issue. What is clear is that with the aforementioned
advances in Diesel fuel-injection technology, PM mass has indeed decreased, but
the PM number has become relatively greater. More decisive scientific conclu-
sions on PM toxicity in general could contribute to moving this debate toward the
establishment of realistic positions on the issue.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80APPENDIX DTHE CO2 TECHNOLOGY PLATFORM
Ruben G. CarbonellNorth Carolina State UniversityThe billions of pounds of organic and halogenated solvents used each year inchemical and materials manufacturing contribute significantly to the total dis-
charge of volatile organic carbon (VOC) to the atmosphere and to the contamina-
tion of water and soil. In addition, drying operations utilize huge amounts of
energy that is generated mostly by the burning of fossil fuels. As a result, there is
great interest in finding novel alternative solvents that would result in cleaner,
more efficient processes to enable a sustainable chemical and industrial manufac-
turing base.1High-pressure carbon dioxide is one of the leading alternative solvents formany applications because of its unique physical and chemical properties.2,3 It
has a very accessible critical temperature and pressure (31C and 73.8 bar) thatenable its use in the liquid, supercritical, or gaseous state near room temperature.
It is also highly compressible, so that its density and other physical properties can
be varied over a wide range in order to control its solubility properties. Because it
is generated as a by-product in the production of hydrogen, ammonia, and ethanol
and because it is present in large quantities in many underground reservoirs
throughout the world, it is relatively inexpensive compared to organic or haloge-
nated solvents. So much carbon dioxide is currently generated by power plants
and ends up in the environment, that even if all chemical and materials processes
used CO2 instead of organic or aqueous solvents there would still be no need to
generate CO2 from burning fossil fuels. However, the subsequent reduction in
VOC and organic solvent emissions into the soil and aquifers would be quite
significant.In the supercritical state, CO2 has a liquid-like density but a gas-like
diffusivity, so mass-transfer and diffusion processes are greatly enhanced in this
region. In its supercritical state it is also highly compressible, so that the density
rises from approximately 0.5 g/mL at the critical temperature to about 0.9 g/mL
at 10 C. In that same range, the viscosity and surface tension remain at least anorder of magnitude lower than those of water and most organic solvents. At these
low temperatures the increased density enhances the solubility properties for or-
ganic compounds while the vapor pressure drops significantly from the critical1Taylor, D. K.; Carbonell, R. G.; DeSimone, J.M. Annual Reviews of Energy and the Environment2000, 25, 115-146.
2McHugh, M. A.; Krukonis, V. J. Supercritical Fluid Extraction, Principles and Practice;Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, UK; 1993; 2nd Edition.3Hyatt, J. A., J. Org. Chem. 1984, 49, 5097-5101.
The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RUBEN G. CARBONELL81pressure, thus decreasing the potential cost of processes utilizing liquid instead ofsupercritical CO2.When considered as a solvent for chemical reactions, carbon dioxide offers amajor advantage because it is essentially inert over wide ranges of temperatures
and pressures. This prevents CO2 from participating in any chemical reactions
that can contaminate the product or terminate important elementary steps in a
reaction that may control molecular structure or molecular weights. In addition, if
used as a solvent or as a plasticizer, its high diffusivity and high volatility allow it
to evaporate quickly and completely, eliminating all chances of contaminating
the desired product. The high volatility also decreases the costs associated with
solvent removal from a solid substrate when compared to water and organic sol-
vents.Many of these properties of CO2 have been known for years,
2 but aside from
some small specialty applications such as the extraction of caffeine from coffee
beans and the fractionation of some polymeric compounds, CO2-based processeshave not made major inroads in industry. Over the last decade, interest in the use
of CO2 as a solvent has seen a great resurgence as a result of the discovery of
some unique solubility properties associated with CO2 that have enabled the syn-
thesis of fluoropolymers in carbon dioxide as well as the rational design of sur-
face-active materials that are soluble in CO2.Polymerization reactions are carried out industrially by a number of variousmethods, many of which involve organic solvents and water in the form of emul-
sions. These solvents often participate in the reaction, leading to unwanted side
reactions. The polymer must then be dried, resulting in the expenditure of large
amounts of energy, often leaving the product with significant amounts of
unreacted monomer, and residual solvent. There are tremendous advantages in
using CO2 as a solvent in these types of reactions because the product ends up
completely dry at the end of the process and any residual monomer could be
extracted prior to product recovery. DeSimone and coworkers4,5,6showed thatliquid and supercritical CO2 could be used as a solvent for the solution polymer-ization of fluorooctyl acrylate and the precipitation polymerization of
fluoroolefins such as tetrafluoroethylene with extremely high conversions, high
molecular weights, narrow molecular weight distributions, and high purities.
These discoveries led to the commercial development by DuPont of a novel, con-
tinuous polymerization process for Teflon based on this technology.7 A pilot
plant is currently operating in Bladen County, North Carolina, the first of what is
likely to be a long-term investment by the company in CO2-based polymerizationprocesses.4DeSimone, J. M.; Guan, Z.; Elsbernd, C. S. Science 1992, 257, 945-947.
5Romack, T. J.; Combes, J. R.; DeSimone, J. M. Macromolecules 1995, 28, 1724-1726.
6Romack, T. J.; DeSimone, J. M.; Treat, T. A. Macromolecules 1995, 28, 8429-8431.
7McCoy, M. Chem. & Eng. News 1999, 77(4), 11-13.
The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82APPENDIX DBecause of the high solubility of fluorocarbons (and siloxanes) in CO2, it isnot surprising that the first commercial direct synthesis of polymers in CO2 was
achieved with fluorinated materials. Siloxanes are also fairly soluble in carbon
dioxide, but most other polymeric materials are not. CO2 is an excellent solvent
for high-vapor-pressure materials, but it is not a good solvent for high-molecular-
weight, polar, or inorganic materials. To enhance the capability of CO2 to dis-
solve these types of materials, it is necessary to use cosolvents or to design sur-
factants that are soluble in CO2. The recognition that high-molecular weightfluoropolymers and siloxanes are soluble in CO2 enabled the design of such sur-
factants via the covalent coupling of highly CO2-philic moieties such aspoly(fluorooctyl acrylates) with oleophilic or hydrophilic moieties. DeSimone
and others1,8,9,10 have demonstrated that these CO
2-soluble surfactants are able toform micellar aggregates in CO2, and that these aggregates are able to enhancesignificantly the solubility of high molecular weight, oleophilic, and hydrophilic
species. These CO2-soluble surfactants are also able to stabilize latex particles inCO2, and they can be used to form water-in-CO2 and CO2-in-water emulsions. Itis interesting that the micellization process in compressed CO2 is reversible.
11,12At low CO2 pressures, the surfactants dissolve in micellar form. However, as thepressure is increased, the micelle size (aggregation number) decreases until the
surfactant solubility is so high that the micelles break up. Reduction of the pres-
sure leads to reaggregation and recovery of the micellar structure. The solubility
and functionality of these surfactants depend strongly on the ratio of CO2-philicto CO2-phobic groups, their chemical structure, and the morphology of the mol-ecule (block or random copolymers). As a result, there are many ways of control-
ling system properties by careful control of the chemistry as well as the process
conditions. One of the more natural applications for the use of these surfactants is
in cleaning applications with CO2 as the solvent. At least one commercial liquid
CO2-based dry-cleaning process1 is currently in the marketplace, providing an
outstanding alternative to perchloroethylene, in both cleaning quality and com-
patibility with garments, as well as in environmental and human health consider-
ations.The ability to synthesize CO2-soluble bifunctional materials based onfluoropolymers or siloxanes has enabled many other potential applications for
these novel material.1 One of the more exciting opportunities is in the area of
8Maury, E. E.; Batten, H. J.; Killian, S. K.; Menceloglu, Y. Z.; Comes, J. R.; DeSimone, J. M. Am.Chem. Soc. Div. Polym. Chem. 1993, 34(2), 664-665.
9DeSimone, J. M.; Maury, E. E.; Menceloglu, Y. Z.; McClain and, J. B.; Romack, T. J. Science1994, 265, 356-359.
10McClain, J. B.; Betts, D. E.; Canelas, D. A.; Samulski, E. T.; DeSimone, J. M. Science 1996, 274,2049-2052.11Fulton, J. L; Pfund, D. M.; Capel, M.; McClain, J. B.; Romack, T. J.; Maury, E. E.; Combes, J.R.; Samulski, E. T.; DeSimone, J. M; Capel, M. Langmuir 1996, 11, 4241-4249.
12Buhler, E.; DeSimone, J. M.; Rubinstein, M. Macromolecules 1998, 31, 7347-7355.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RUBEN G. CARBONELL83coatings, with particular emphasis on microelectronics fabrication. This is an areain which the unique properties of CO2 can lead to both process and environmental
advantages.For decades, photolithography has utilized a variety of organic and aqueoussolvents to deposit, develop, and strip photoresists on silicon wafers. Currently,
commercial photolithographic processes utilize chemically amplified photoresists
and photoacid generators (PAGs) that are deposited from organic solvents using a
spin coating technique. The patterns are then developed using an aqueous alka-
line solution of tetramethylammonium hydroxide. Once the resist patterns have
been etched into the underlying substrate, the photoresist is removed using a sol-
vent- or water-based stripping step. Although these wet processes have served the
industry well for years, as feature sizes continue to be reduced there are compel-
ling reasons to reevaluate the use of conventional solvents and aqueous solutions
and to implement a new ÒdryÓ technology.
To enable the manufacture of feature sizes with dimensions of 130 nm andless, the microelectronics industry uses photolithographic exposure tools operat-
ing at very short wavelengths of light (365 nm, 248 nm, 193 nm, and soon 157
nm). Lithography at 157 nm is particularly challenging since only a few classes
of polymers have the requisite transparency at this wavelength. Thus most con-
ventional polymeric materials are ill suited as 157-nm resists because the radia-
tion cannot penetrate through films of the required thickness. Although most poly-
meric materials have a high optical absorbance at 157nm, highly fluorinated

polymers are relatively transparent, thus establishing that future generations of
157-nm resists will need to be highly fluorinated to be useful. Fortunately, these
same glassy fluoropolymers are very soluble in liquid and supercritical CO2.We are attempting to design novel polymers and processes so that we candeposit the photoresist from liquid CO2, develop the image after exposure withsupercritical CO2, and strip the post-etched material with supercritical CO2 at
higher pressures. Preliminary results have been obtained with a random copoly-
mer of 1,1-dihydroperfluorooctyl methacrylate (FOMA) and 2-tetrahydropyranyl
methacrylate (THPMA). With less than 30 mol % of the THPMA monomer, this
photoresist in its fully protected form was found to be soluble in compressedliquid CO2 at moderate conditions. In order to spin-coat films using liquid CO
2,the photoresist had to be soluble in liquid CO2 at liquid-vapor equilibrium condi-
tions where there is a meniscus that can allow the CO2 liquid phase to spread and
wet the wafer and to evaporate in a controlled manner leaving a uniform film of
the photoresist on the wafer substrate. To achieve the desired solubility, all spin
coating was performed under subambient temperatures (6-10 C) that increasethe density and solvating strength of CO2 nearly 40% relative to room tempera-
ture. This was adequate to dissolve the photoresist at the desired liquid-vapor
equilibrium conditions. Two fluorinated analogs of conventional PAGs were also
designed to provide suitable solubility in liquid CO2.Polymer solutions for spin casting were prepared by dissolving 20 wt % ofThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84APPENDIX DPFOMA-r-THPMA in liquid CO2. This liquid CO2-photoresist-PAG solution wasmaintained in a high-pressure view cell equipped with sapphire windows so that
complete dissolution could be confirmed visually. The spin coating was carried
out in a specially designed and built high-pressure spin coating tool.13,14 The
pressure in the spinning chamber was maintained at precise values ranging from
5 to 15 psi below the equilibrium vapor pressure of the CO2-photoresist solution.Control of this chamber pressure was a key parameter in the determination of film
quality and thickness, as the pressure differential was what governed the evapora-
tion rate of the liquid CO2. Precision control of the evaporation rate, spinningspeed, and system temperature were required to ensure consistent, uniform coat-
ings. Extensive work was conducted to determine the ideal range of rotational
speeds, pressures, and concentrations to be used to produce uniform, lithographic
quality films, resulting in films with 3% variation in film thickness over the entire
wafer and a root mean square (rms) roughness of 0.4-0.5 nm. The photoresist and
PAG formulations were exposed and imaged at 248 and 193 nm, resulting in
highly encouraging feature sizes of 0.8 m. Even though this technology is notyet ready for full commercial implementation, it does point the way toward the
development of a new lithographic process that is totally ÒdryÓ and compatible
with existing cluster tools in the industry to couple to vacuum operations. All of
this is accomplished with a single environmentally friendly solvent.In other related areas of microelectronics fabrication we have also succeededin developing a high-pressure free meniscus coating apparatus capable of depos-
iting monolayer to 300 † thin films of perfluoropolyethers with great uniformityand roughness characteristics.14 We believe that the low viscosity of CO
2, coupledwith its excellent wetting properties, will enable whole new classes of thin-film
coating operations that will at the same time be environmentally responsible.
These are likely to be important, not just for microelectronics applications but
also for biomedical and nanotechnology formulations. Even though there are still
many technical and economic barriers to the total acceptance of these technolo-
gies, we believe that environmental pressures as well as technical requirements
for pure component systems with high uniformity will over time help ÒdryÓ CO
2-based processes play an increasingly important role in industrial environments.13DeSimone, J. M.; Carbonell, R. G. U.S. Patent 6,001,418; 2001.14Hoggan, E. N.; Novick, B. J.; Carbonell, R. G.; DeSimone, J. M. Semicon. Fabtech 2002, 16,169.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.UMA CHOWDHRY85BOX 1
Smart, Sustainable GrowthDuPontÕs commitment:Creating shareholder and societal value while decreasing ourenvironmental footprint along our value chains.ÒEnvironmental footprintÓ = injuries, illnesses, incidents, waste &
emissions, and depletable forms of raw materials and energy
SMART, SUSTAINABLE GROWTHUma ChowdhryThe DuPont CompanyThis paper describes DuPontÕs approach to addressing the dual challenge ofachieving business growth through new products that create a high standard of
living while also protecting the environment for future generations. We have made
environmentally sustainable growth (Box 1) through technical innovation our
primary challenge, and this ideology serves as a great motivator for our people
and our businesses.DuPontÕs bold and uncompromising commitment to sustainable growth withthe intent of integrating economic, environmental, and social factors forms thefoundation for our future. This simple statement represents an enormous chal-
lenge. It requires that we focus our efforts and also track our environmental im-
pact. At DuPont we are measuring the way we Òcreate shareholder value whiledecreasing our environmental footprint along our value chains.Ó The term 
Òfoot-printÓ includes raw materials, energy, emissions and waste, as well as injuries,
illnesses, and environmental incidents. We are integrating this concept into all
business decisions, into all local actions at the community level, and into helping
lawmakers make fact-based decisions in enacting new pieces of legislation. This
is a tall order, but if we are to protect the environment for future generations, we
must take on this challenge.Our core values (Box 2), which have stood the test of time, provide us withthe organizational culture to take on this enormous challenge of sustainable
growth. With strong leadership, we believe we can stay the course. Since the days
of our companyÕs founders, we have had a mindset of Òzero injuriesÓ to our
people. We are extending that same mindset to environmental excellence andThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86APPENDIX Dhave set demanding stretch goals for ourselves to remain at the forefront, leadingthe challenge for the chemical industry, and influencing our customers and com-
petitors to adopt the same goals of zero injuries to people or to the environment.As DuPont enters its third century and we reflect on the chemical industryover the last 200 years (Box 3), it is clear that we have contributed very signifi-
cantly to improved standards of living and to material prosperity for people around
the world through better housing, apparel, transportation, and food. The industry
has created both economic and societal value over the last two centuries. The
commitment to continue this pursuit now has to be accompanied by a commit-
ment to protect our environment.The chemical industryÕs challenge lies in cleaning up contaminated water,reducing toxic air emissions, and reducing energy consumption and waste that
leads to soil contamination (Box 4). Today the most pressing issues for water
contamination are heavy metals, nondegradable biologically active substances,
and persistent bioaccumulative toxins. Emissions from the chemical industry have

contributed to ozone-depleting materials and greenhouse gases, causing global
climate change. Our land is contaminated in certain areas with toxic compounds,BOX 2
DuPontÕs Core Values¥Safety, health: goal is Ò0Ó¥Environmental excellence¥Business ethics: highest standards¥People: treat with dignity and respectCore values define who we are and are 
Ònonnegotiable.ÓBOX 3
Over the last 200 years:Chemical Industry has contributed to material prosperity in housing,apparel, transportation, and food, by utilizing our knowledge of chemistryto provideBetter Things for Better LivingBut it came at a price.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.UMA CHOWDHRY87heavy metals, and biological waste. All of these harmful consequences of thematerial prosperity we have enjoyed are compromising the health of present and
future generations.Looking broadly at the spectrum of industries that generate 95% of water,air, or soil emissions, we see that they range from chemicals, metals and mining,
food, and paper to petroleum, utilities, and equipment manufacturers. The chemi-
cal industry ranks first, second, and fifth in the generation of water contaminants
(Figure 1), air toxics (Figure 2), and soil contaminants (Figure 3). It is therefore
incumbent upon the chemical industry to take a strong stand on reducing the
environmental footprint that it has generated and could potentially create in the
future.We must progress from an attitude of just complying with federal regulationsto one where we earn the publicÕs trust and move on to sustainable development.This corresponds to a journey: from compliance, to earning the publicÕs trust, tosustainable development.A quick review of the results over the past decade at DuPont demonstratesour commitment to sustainability (Box 5). While production volume grew 35%,
we kept energy consumption flat through innovation in our manufacturing pro-
cesses. Impressive reductions were made in air carcinogens (86%) and toxics
(73%), in greenhouse gas emissions (63%), and in hazardous waste generated
(40%) as well as reduction in deep well disposal (82%). Conservatively these
environmental improvements have also led to over $1 billion in savings for
DuPont. What is good for the environment can also be good for business.DuPont is transforming itself as it enters its third century. Using a three-pronged strategy of integrated science, knowledge intensity and ÒSix SigmaÓ pro-
ductivity (see below), we are focused on sustainable growth (Box 6).BOX 4
Chemical Industry¥Water ContaminationHeavy metalsBiologically active, nondegradable substancesPersistent bioaccumulative toxins¥Air EmissionsGreenhouse gasesOzone-depleting materials¥Soil ContaminationToxic metal compoundsHeavy metalsBiological wasteThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88APPENDIX D645036231919
540204060ChemicalsMetalsFoodMiningPaperPetroleumElectric
Generating
Facilities
Electrical 
Equip.
Millions ofpoundsTreatment,
Storage, Disposal

& Solvent
Recovery Facilities
FIGURE 1
Chemical water emissions by industry. These industries contribute 95% ofthe total emissions (1999 data). Source: DuPont Consulting Solutions analysis of EPAToxics Release Inventory, 1999.2881861079292
6057483433050100150200250300Millions ofpoundsChemicalsElectric
Generating
Facilities
Paper
Primary 
MetalsTransportation
EquipPlasticsFood
Fabricated
MetalsPetroleum
LumberStone/Clay/
GlassFIGURE 2
Chemical air emissions by industry. These industries contribute 95% of thetotal emissions (1999 data). Source: DuPont Consulting Solutions analysis of EPA Toxics
Release Inventory, 1999.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.UMA CHOWDHRY89FIGURE 3
Chemical soil contamination by industry. These industries contribute 99.6%of the total emissions (1999 data). Source: DuPont Consulting Solutions analysis of EPAToxics Release Inventory, 1999.258230220491510641050100150200250MetalsElectric
Generatin
gFacilities
Primary 
MetalsTreatment,
Storage,
Disposal &Solvent Recovery

Facilities
ChemicalsPaper
Coal Mining
FoodStone/
Clay/
GlassElectrical
Equip.
4,000  
3,935Millions of pounds
BOX 5
DuPontÕs Environmental Footprint ReductionPerformance over last 10 yearsSafety & HealthWorld Leader

Air Carcinogens 86%
Air Toxics 73%
Hazardous Waste 37%
CO2 equiv Greenhouse Gases
 63%
Total Emissions76%Total Waste Generated 38%
Production Increase 35%
Hazardous Waste 40%
Deep Well Disposal 82%
Volume increased 35%, while energy use was flat!!The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90APPENDIX DDuPontÕs heritage is its ability to create value with science and technology.In the twentieth century, we combined chemistry and engineering to create new
materials such as nylon, Teflon, Lycra, and Kevlar that are household words to-
day and have brought the world fashion, comfort, and protection. We are trans-
forming ourselves by building on our heritage of innovation to begin integrating
biology and chemistry into creating value. We are investing in building our capa-
bility in biotechnology because we see enormous potential in using this platform
of new technologies to ensure sustainable development.Another pathway to sustainability is to generate more business value butwith fewer pounds of material. We have a metric called shareholder value added
per pound of product produced (SVA/lb). SVA is the value created above the cost
of capital. By selling high-value services coupled with our products, we can en-
hance progress toward high SVA/lb. When coupled with other financial metrics,
SVA/lb provides an indicator of future sustainability for different growth strate-
gies.The focus on asset productivity at DuPont is relentless. Improving yields,uptime, and throughput helps us delay capital expenses and reduce raw material
usage and waste. We have adopted the Six Sigma methodology that uses statisti-
cally significant, data-based understanding to reduce defects in our manufactur-
ing processes. This methodology, coupled with process innovation, has led to
lower raw material usage, lower energy consumption, lower emissions, and lower
waste with annual pretax savings of over $1 billion over the past three years.
Thus, through technological innovation, we have made significant progress to-
ward creating economic and societal value while reducing our environmental foot-
print (Box 7).Several examples will illustrate the use of technical innovation to provideÒgreenerÓ products and processes. These are elimination of CCl
4 waste during
phosgene production; production of Tyvek envelopes from waste; Smart automo-BOX 6
DuPontÕs Strategy for Smart, Sustainable Growth¥Integration of science and technology platforms for new products and
processesless environmental impact¥Knowledge intensive services combined with productsincreased shareholder value added per pound (SVA/lb)¥Focus on asset productivityless wasteThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.UMA CHOWDHRY91tive finishes; biobased routes to chemicals, polymers, and fibers; and a biomassrefinery.The first example deals with reduction of carbon tetrachloride formation inthe production of a hazardous chemical, phosgene (Figure 4). Phosgene serves as
an intermediate for some of our specialty fibers and agricultural intermediates.
The State of New Jersey required us to reduce carcinogenic CCl4, which forms asa by-product when chlorine and carbon monoxide are heated at high pressure.
Our goal was to reduce CCl4 formation from 500 to 100 ppm. Our approach wasBOX 7
Towards Greener Products & Processes¥Eliminate waste at source vs end of pipe treatment¥Recycle waste to useful products¥Reduce emissions in our plants and for our customers¥Develop alternate forms of energy¥Use renewable resources for chemical production¥Increase use of biobased solutions¥Increase bioefficiencyFIGURE 4
Reduction of CCl4 through improved catalyst.
Actual after 1 year
Laboratory 
ResultsRequired by
State Regulations% CCl4 Reduction0102030405060708090100
CCl4 Reduction With
DuPont Commercial
Catalyst (>250,000x)The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92APPENDIX Dto find superior catalysts that, in fact, reduced CCl4 formation from 500 to less
than 10 ppm, exceeding regulatory requirements. We are licensing this technol-
ogy to other phosgene manufacturers to ensure that this development is available
not only for DuPont but for other manufacturers as well.Another example shows the ingenuity of our technical community in beingable to use recycled water and milk jugs made of high-density polyethylene into
Tyvek envelopes that are lighter than conventional Tyvek used for housewrap
during construction (Figure 5). The added benefit to the airlines of lower-weight
cargo is the lower use of fuel and lower emission of greenhouse gases. Polyethyl-
ene-based Tyvek is a non-woven material used to wrap houses under construction
to improve insulation. This use of Tyvek reduces energy consumption by tenfold
each year for the homeowner.In our automotive coatings business, we lowered waste by developing a coat-ing with very high-solids content. The advanced analytical tools available today
allowed us to measure and control the distribution of low molecular weight mate-
rial in the coating. This, combined with hybrid cross-linking, provided a thinner
coating with superior durability and scratch resistance coupled with smoothness
and higher gloss. Not only did we reduce waste at our manufacturing site by
decreasing the use of solvents, but we were able to help our customer Daimler-
Chrysler reduce its volatile organic compounds by 1.5 pounds per vehicle, haz-
ardous air pollutants by 0.45 lbs per vehicle, odor emissions by 86%, and total
raw material usage by 20%. Sustainable development should allow all parties
along a producerÕs value chain to benefit from product and process improve-ments.Switching to examples of bio-based solutions (Figure 5), we demonstratedthe use of an enzymeÑa renewable resourceÑin the production of 5-CCNNCCNH2NO    5-CVAM
ADN
Chemical¥25% conversion¥20% yield¥organic solvent; heatBiobased¥97% conversion¥93% yield¥aqueous solvent; mild¥reduced catalyst cost by$0.20/lb of 5-CVAM
¥reduced catalyst waste by200XFIGURE 5
Chemical vs. bio-based route to an agricultural intermediate.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.UMA CHOWDHRY93cyanovaleramide, an agricultural intermediate important for citrus growers andsome vegetable farmers. The results using a bio-based catalyst vs. a conventional
oxide catalyst show dramatic improvements. The chemical process operated at
25% conversion and 20% yield and used an organic solvent in a typical chemical
reaction. The use of a specific enzyme allows 97% conversion and 98% yield and
employs an aqueous solvent under mild conditions. The bio-based operation also
allows reduction of catalyst cost by $0.25 per pound and results in twentyfold
waste reduction. This impressive example confirms that it is possible to use re-
newable resources to create economic value while creating societal value and
reducing our dependence on petroleum-based feedstocks.We embarked on a large program five years ago to demonstrate that we canuse our technical innovation power, coupled with a partnerÕs capability in engi-neering enzymes, to make bulk chemicals and fibers cost effectively. Our goal
was to produce a specialty fiber we call ÒSoronaÓ (Figure 6), which incorporatesthe attractive properties of nylon, Dacron and Lycra, resulting in superior soft-
ness, vibrant color, UV and chlorine resistance, and stain resistance coupled with
stretch and recovery. Market test development shows that consumers find this
combination of functionalities very attractive.Chemical routes to polypropylene terephthalate-based fibers, which we havebranded Sorona, use hazardous chemicals such as ethylene oxide and carbon
monoxide and are subject to the environmental problems of a typical chemical
process (Figure 7). We undertook the enormous challenge of producing 1,3-
propanediol (3G) from glucose in one step as shown in Figure 8.First attempts resulted in very low yield. Working with Genencor, our teamof scientists and engineers has genetically modified an enzyme to gain a 120-fold
improvement in yield over five years (Figure 9). This Òtour de forceÓ of modify-ing an E. coli host to achieve high conversion and selectivity has demonstrated to
us and to the world what biocatalysis can do for the chemical industry. We have
scaled up the process and are currently operating a pilot plant.The impressive results we have demonstrated with bio-3G prompted the De-partment of Energy (DOE) to award a multimillion dollar grant over four years to
DuPont, Diversa, and the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) to use
the biomass from our 3G process as fuel. Our target is to demonstrate the use of
renewable resources (corn sugar) and simultaneous production of fuel from the
biomassÑa ÒbiorefineryÓ as an economically viable concept (Box 8).
OCCCOOCOCOCCCOOCOOCCCOOCOCOCCCOOCOHOCCCOHHOCCCOHCOOHCHOOCOOHCHOO+1,3-Propanediol(3G)Polypropylene terephthalate
 (3GT)Terephthalatic Acid
3GT (Sorona)
FIGURE 6
Sorona (polypropylene terephthalate), an advanced polymer-fiber.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94APPENDIX DYeastBacterium
GlucoseGlycerol
3GIn Nature:      Two microorganisms convert sugar to 3G stepwise.
For an Industrial Process: A single microorganism is desired
 OHOH
FIGURE 7
Traditional chemical routes to 3G.HOOH
O+  CO  +
  H2CHO+  H
2O  +
  H2HOOH
Shell:Degussa:FIGURE 8
Nature combined with metabolic engineering to produce 3G.FIGURE 9
Bio-3G titer history.0204060
801001201401601801994199519961997199819992000
3G Titer (g/L)The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.UMA CHOWDHRY95DuPontÕs commitment to sustainable development begins with a strong lead-ership commitment to stay the course through economic cycles, to set stretch
goals for each decade and to drive innovation. Specific 2010 goals for energy are
to¥derive 25% (up from 10% today) of corporate revenue from renewableresources;¥source 10% of our energy needs from renewable resources;¥reduce greenhouse gases by 65% vs. 1990; and¥keep total energy use flat vs. 1990.Our commitment to use our powerful technology base coupled with comple-mentary skills from universities, government labs, and/or other companies to en-
sure sustainable development is steadfast. Further examples of technical programs
to illustrate this commitment include fuel cells, sensors, and catalysts for control-
ling auto emissions, waterborne coatings, supercritical solvents, and recyclable
polymers.Major environmental trends that we see for land, air, water, and transporta-tion of environmentally hazardous materials are shown in Box 9. These trends
require that we get ahead of these issues and lead the chemical industry in the
reduction of toxic metal (e.g., Sb, Sn, As) compounds, greenhouse gases, mer-
cury emissions, and sulfur from gasoline and diesel, and find ways to control and
sequester CO2. Reduction of arsenic, as well as nitrates and ammonia, in drinkingwater is necessary. It is also imperative in these days of terrorism that we reduce
transportation and storage of hazardous materials and continue our drive to de-
velop inherently safer processes.DuPont has prospered in the last two centuries. As we enter our third century(Figure 10), we are committed to use the power of biology coupled with ourBOX 8
Integrated Corn-Based Biorefinery (ICBR)Corn + stover  fermentable sugars 
 PDO (3G) + Ethanol
Measures of success:¥Petroleum usage down 90%
¥(equiv $1MM barrels of oil/yr per ICBR)¥Climate change gases down 90%¥Reduced investment by $120MM per plant¥Returns on investment > 10% after tax income
The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96APPENDIX DBOX 9
Major Environmental TrendsLand¥Growing regulations for toxic metal compounds (Sb, Sn, As, etc.)¥Increasing volume of biological wasteAir¥NOx, SOx reduction (75% below 1997 level by 2007)
¥Hg emissions reduction (90% from 1997 level by 2007)
¥Sulfur in gasoline reduction (30 ppm by 2005)
¥Sulfur in diesel reduction (15 ppm by 2007)
¥CO2 control and sequestration¥Phase-out of brominated organicsWater¥Phase-out of methyl tertiary-butyl ether (MTBE)¥Arsenic reduction in drinking water¥NH3, NO3 limits in waste water
Security¥Movement away from storage of hazardous substances
¥Embed security code into responsible care¥Introduce inherently safer processesFIGURE 10
The transition to smart, sustainable growth.1802 1900  2000                        2100
Birth
Growth
Maturity
Birth
Growth
Maturity
Birth
Growth
Maturity
ExplosivesChemistry
Energy
Chemistry,
Biology. . .

Knowledge -
IntensiveSolutionsThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BARRY DELLINGER97traditional strengths in chemistry and engineering to what we hope will becomethe Òcentury of sustainability.Ó The ultimate goal of sustainability has to be con-
servation of global ecosystems for the future of our planet and of humanity. We
cannot settle for anything less.THE ORIGIN AND NATURE OF TOXICCOMBUSTION BY-PRODUCTSBarry DellingerLouisiana State UniversityIntroductionAlthough combustion and thermal processes are necessary to provide for theessential needs of our existence, they are intrinsically ÒdirtyÓ and emit a variety
of air pollutants. Some of these pollutants are well known, well understood, and
subject to significant control.However, combustion is a complex process that results in formation of manypollutants that are not well characterized as to their nature or origin. As a respon-
sible society, it is incumbent upon us to examine these issues, determine their
importance, and endeavor to eventually resolve and address each of them.Combustion-related air pollution can be classified in many ways. Table 1presents one such classification that may assist in identifying and prioritizing
research needs.We actually have a pretty good idea of the identity of most of the emissionsfrom combustion on a mass basis; on the order of 99.9% of emissions from a
reasonably controlled combustion source are carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide,
and simple hydrocarbons such as methane and ethane. However, the remaining
fraction is a complex myriad of pollutants that is not fully characterized and can
contain toxic species.TABLE 1
Categorization of Combustion-Generated Air Pollutants.CategoryExamples
Smog precursorsCO
Acute toxicsNO
x, volatile organic compounds (VOCs)Toxic air pollutantsButadiene, Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs)
Endocrine disrupting chemicalsDioxins, oxy-PAHs

HalocarbonsChlorinated hydrocarbons (CHCs), brominated
hydrocarbons (BHCs)Fine particlesMetals and organic constituents

Persistent radicalsSemiquinones
The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98APPENDIX DAn analytical chemist would be interested primarily in characterizing theseemissions by developing new analytical techniques and continuous monitoring
apparatus. A combustion scientist might be most interested in identifying the
origin and mechanism of their formation. A combustion engineer might focus on
developing methods for their mitigation through design of control technology or
combustion modification to prevent their formation.Table 2 presents a combustion system from the viewpoint of a combustionscientist. It identifies reaction zones, the conditions that exist within these zones,
and classifications of reactions that can occur under these conditions.The vast majority of these pollutant-forming pathways involve free radicals.It is generally assumed that these radicals are formed in the high-temperature
flame zone of combustion systems. However, reactions occurring in the post-
flame, thermal zone (Zone 3) and the gas-quench and surface-catalysis zones
(Zones 4 and 5), may also form radicals responsible for pollutant formation. In
some cases, the radicals may be stable and act as pollutants themselves.Small reactive radicals (e.g., HO¥, H¥, O¥) have lifetimes of less than a micro-TABLE 2Chemical Reactions Zones in Combustion Systems.ReactionDecompositionFormation
ZoneConditionsMechanismsMechanisms
1 Pre-flameT = 200-1000
CMolecular eliminations,Molecular eliminations,
tr << 1 sbond fission, bimolecularcomplex radical-molecule
[O2]~50% EAradical attackpathways, recombination-
association reactions2 FlameT = 1000-1800
CBimolecular radical attack,Complex radical-
tr ~ 0.01sbond fission, molecularmolecule pathways,
[O2] ~ 50% EAeliminationsmolecular eliminations,
recombination-associationreactions3 High-temperatureT = 600-1100
CMolecular eliminations,Recombination-
thermalt
r = 1-10sbond fission, bimolecularassociation reactions,
[O2] = 50-100% EAradical attackcomplex radical-molecule
pathways, molecularelimination4 Gas quenchT = 80-600
CMolecular eliminations,Recombination-
tr ~ 10sbond fissionassociation reactions
[O2] = 3-9% EA5 Surface catalysisT = 1000-1800
CSurface-catalyzedSurface-catalyzed
tr = 10s to 10 mindecompositionsynthesis
[O2] = 3-9% EAThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BARRY DELLINGER99second. Organic radicals are less reactive and may have lifetimes of several mi-croseconds. Resonance-stabilized organic radicals, such as cyclopentadienyl and
propargyl, can be even more stable and less reactive, with lifetimes in the milli-
second range. Catalytic cycles similar to those well studied by the tropospheric
chemistry community can result in measurable steady-state concentrations of radi-
cals that exist for several seconds after the combustion event that initiated their
formation. Finally, recent evidence suggests that semiquinone-type radicals con-
tained in some types of particles may persist indefinitely.Combustion Chemistry Research OpportunitiesWhile some sources and mechanisms of combustion-generated air pollutionhave been the subject of considerable study, other sources are poorly character-
ized and not very well understood. Examples are:1.flares and plumes,
2.soot and PAH formation by resonance-stabilized radicals,

3.endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDCs) and oxy-PAH,

4.gas phase reactions of halogenated hydrocarbons,

5.surface-mediated pollutant formation, and

6.particulate-stabilized free radicals.
Flares and PlumesIndustrial flares and plumes represent a potentially significant source of airpollution that are poorly characterized and controlled. Conditions are ideal for
post-flame thermal reactions and photolytic reactions at elevated temperatures
(photothermal reactions). The elevated temperatures in flares and plumes (~50 to
600 C outside of the visible flame) can result in accelerated rates of formation ofoxy-PAH and nitro-PAH. At higher temperatures within the flame zone of com-
bustors, oxy-PAH and nitro-PAH are likely to be destroyed, but under the rela-
tively mild conditions of flares and plumes, the rates of formation can be acceler-
ated without their subsequent destruction. The elevated temperatures and exposure
to solar radiation can result in fast photothermal reactions that lead to the forma-
tion of both combustion-type pollutants and photochemical pollutants. Research
has shown that at elevated temperatures, the rate of absorption of solar radiation
and photochemical quantum yield can increase up to tenfold.Soot and PAH Formation by Resonance Stabilized RadicalsFor many years, the reactions of small organic radicals, containing even num-bers of carbons, such as vinyl, ethynyl, and butadienyl, have dominated the theory
of molecular growth to form soot and PAH. However, it has been recognized
recently that odd-carbon radicals such as propargyl and cyclopentadienyl are sta-The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100APPENDIX Dbilized and play a significant, possibly dominant role. The properties and elemen-tary reactions of these resonance-stabilized species are poorly characterized from
the chemical viewpoint. They can undergo a variety of isomerization, recombina-
tion, and addition reactions for which rates have not been determined, and their
impacts on PAH formation pathways have not been assessed.EDCs and Oxy-PAHIt is now known that endocrine disrupting chemicals are emitted from com-bustion sources. Interest has focused on the emissions of polychlorinated dibenzo-

p-dioxins and polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDD/F), which are also knowncarcinogens. However, oxy-PAH, epoxides, and other oxygenated species are
known EDCs. These can also be emitted from combustion sources, although they
are not well characterized. They are semipolar compounds that are difficult to
analyze. Thus, improved methods of analysis are needed in conjunction with bio-
logical testing to determine the nature and quantity of EDC emissions from com-
bustion sources.Gas-Phase Reactions of Halogenated HydrocarbonsChlorinated and brominated materials are burned or thermally treated in avariety of combustion sources including hazardous and municipal waste incinera-
tors, industrial processes, backyard trash burning, and accidental fires. Chlori-
nated materials are used in a wide range of applications and brominated com-
pounds are fire retardants used in many devices including electronic circuits.
Although there has been some research on the reactions of CHCs and BHCs in
the past 20 years, too little is known about their reactions considering the magni-
tude of the environmental impact. Elementary reaction studies of gas-phase reac-
tions of C1 and C2, CHCs, and BHCs are needed to understand their most funda-mental reaction properties. Reactions of the chlorinated and brominated benzenes
and phenols are important intermediate steps in the formation of PCDD/F. Recent
kinetic models indicate that the gas-phase reactions may be quite important and
elementary gas-phase reaction studies have been overlooked by researchers.Surface-Mediated Pollutant FormationResearch has shown that the presence of catalytic surfaces and particles in-creases the yields and rates of formation of PCDD/F in combustion systems over
the reaction temperature range of 200-600 C. Transition metals such as coppercan increase the rate of chlorination, molecular growth, and aromatic condensa-
tion reactions to form PCDD/F. Also, reactive species can attack a carbon matrix
to chlorinate and fragment the carbon lattice-forming PCDD/F as well as other
chlorinated hydrocarbons. Although research to date has focused on surface-me-The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BARRY DELLINGER101diated PCDD/F and chlorinated hydrocarbon formation, this same research sug-gests that many types of pollutants can be formed by similar processes. Post-
combustion cool-zone formation of pollutants may explain an important combus-
tion dilemma, which is how seemingly thermally fragile compounds can be
emitted from combustion systems.Particle-Stabilized Free RadicalsRecent research has shown that combustion sources can generate radicalsthat are stabilized by associated with particulate matter. This same particulate
matter becomes a component of airborne PM2.5. (fine particulate matter (smaller
than 2.5 microns in diameter). PM2.5 is known to initiate lung cancer and car-
diopulmonary disease; however, the mechanism has not been identified. DNA
and cellular assay results indicate that combustion and PM2.5 can cause radical
induced damage to DNA. Based on electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) stud-
ies, the responsible species appear to be semiquinone-type radicals. These studies
reveal that radicals, heretofore thought to be too unstable to survive in the atmo-
sphere, can be stabilized by association with particles and initiate biological
damage.Conclusions and RecommendationsResearch on the environmental aspects of combustion is inherentlymultidisciplinary. Fundamental research is needed within specific areas; instru-
ment development is needed to facilitate this research; and interdisciplinary col-
laborations are needed to evaluate the health impacts of combustion-generated
pollution.Research Recommendations¥Research on photothermal and thermal reactions in flares and plumes in-cluding photothermal chemistry and spectroscopy as well as destruction and for-
mation of toxic air pollutants¥Elementary reaction kinetic studies of resonance stabilized radicals andhow they impact formation of PAH and PAH radicals¥Mechanistic studies of the partial oxidation of PAHs by thermal, pho-tolytic, and photothermal pathways¥Elementary reaction kinetic studies of CHCs and BHCs with specific em-phasis on the reactions of chlorinated phenol and other dioxin precursors; chemi-
cally activated displacement reactions; Cl¥, Br¥, H¥, O¥, and HO¥ reactions; and ab
initio molecular orbital calculations¥Research on surface-catalyzed pollutant formation including transitionThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102APPENDIX Dmetal catalyzed dioxin formation, surface-catalyzed formation of CHC and toxicair pollutants, and catalytic destruction¥Efforts to characterize fine particles including speciation of toxic metalsand organometallic surface binding¥Research on persistent radicals in the environment including characteriza-tion of their structure, mechanisms of formation, mechanisms of stabilization,
and pathways of biological redox cyclingInstrument Development Needs¥Methods for study of fast surface reactions¥Surface analysis techniques for organometallic binding and radical char-acterization¥Dependable methods for studying elementary gas-phase reactions of or-ganic radicals at elevated temperature¥Methods for studying the spectroscopic properties of high-temperaturesystems¥Techniques for metal speciationRecommendations for Support of Research¥Development of microarrays for rapid screening of biological end pointsof complex mixtures¥Risk assessment methods for multiple pollutants from multiple sources¥Biochemical reactions of environmentally persistent free radicalsCOMPUTATION AND ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCEDavid A. DixonPacific Northwest National LaboratoryEnvironmental chemical science deals with issues of scale as much as anyarea of chemistry and the issues of scaling in space and time dominate environ-
mental science. The goal of environmental science is to understand the current
state of the environment based on our knowledge of the past and to use this infor-
mation to be able to predict the future state. For example, given current practices
for manufacturing, what will be their long-term environmental impact? Given
potential environmental remediation strategies, what will these lead to? One does
not want to use a remediation strategy that will have unforeseen consequences
and introduce new environmental issues. No one wants to repeat the mistakes of
the past, for example, the wide release of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) into the
atmosphere that led to stratospheric ozone depletion. Although, we are interestedThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DAVID A. DIXON103in the results at large spatial and temporal scales, detailed insight into behavior atthe molecular scale is key to understanding (1) how humans have impacted the
environment, (2) how to remediate anthropogenic impacts on the environment,
and (3) how to minimize future anthropogenic impacts on the environment.Computing has revolutionized the way that we live and the way that wepractice science. The entire research enterprise has been undergoing a revolution
over the past two decades as it exploits the advances that are occurring in com-
puter hardware and software and in new mathematical and theoretical approaches.
This revolution is based on the utilization of high-performance computers (now
massively parallel) to solve the complex equations that describe natural phenom-
ena (e.g., the Schrıdinger equation for electronic motion in molecules; NewtonÕsequations of motion for the classical motion of hundreds of thousands of particles
such as those in a protein). Modeling and simulation is now considered to be the
third branch of science, bridging experiment and analytical theory. The role of
simulation in the modern scientific and technical endeavor cannot be underesti-
mated, and the use of effective modeling and simulation plays a critical role in
modern scientific advances. There are a number of important roles that modeling
and simulation play in the scientific enterprise. First, modeling, theory and simu-
lation can enhance our understanding of known systems. Second, they can pro-
vide qualitative and quantitative insights into experimental work and guide the
choice of which experimental system to study or enable the design of new sys-
tems. This is most useful if the simulation has been benchmarked on well-estab-
lished systems to validate the approach. Third and finally, simulations can pro-
vide quantitative results to replace experiments that are too difficult, dangerous,
or expensive and can extend limited experimental data into new domains of pa-
rameter space. For example, accurate thermochemical and kinetic calculations
for the design of nuclear waste processing facilities and green chemical processes
or for predicting tropospheric oxidation processes relevant to aerosol formation
are needed due to missing experimental data. In addition, simulation allows one
to explore temporal and/or spatial domains that are not accessible by present
experimental methods. For example, it is now possible to explore different chemi-
cal reaction pathways not directly accessible by experiment to learn why they are
not favorable or to find missing steps in a mechanism.High accuracy from a simulation is important. A factor of 2 to 4 in catalystefficiency may determine whether a chemical process is economically feasible or
not, and a factor of 4 in a rate constant at room temperature (25 C) correspondsto a change in the activation energy on the order of just less than 1 kcal/mol. For
a 50:50 starting mixture of two components, a change in the free energy, G, ofless than 1.5 kcal/mol leads to a change in the equilibrium constant by a factor of
10, leading to a 90:10 mixture at 25 C. The requirement for such accuracy meansthat we must be able to predict thermodynamic quantities such as bond dissocia-
tion energies (De or 
D00) and heats of formation (Hf) to better than 1 kcal/moland activation energies to within a few tenths of a kilocalorie per moleÑa daunt-The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104APPENDIX Ding computational task. Rapid advances in hardware, algorithm development,theory, and software are enabling computational scientists to attack larger and
more complex problems with higher-accuracy and higher-fidelity models. Based
on advances in computational science over the past two decades, we often know
how to dramatically improve the quality of the simulation given sufficient com-
puting resources. If we are to gain the maximum impact from simulations, one
must aim for the highest possible accuracy in the simulations given the available
resources, and one must continue to develop methods that can take advantage of
the significantly increased computational resources to be available in the future.
This latter point is critical due to the rapid evolution of computer hardware, driven
mostly by the consumer industry.It has recently been shown that computational chemistry methods can pro-vide the accuracy required to reliably solve complex environmental problems but
accuracy significantly increases the computational demands. Examples of how
computational chemistry is being used to impact environmental science include
the following:¥Accurate properties prediction for radionuclides, including actinides andlanthanides, to understand their migration in the vadose zone (e.g., the Hanford
site), and their chemical behavior in waste tanks (e.g., Hanford and Savannah
River)Ñsuch chemical reactivity information is needed for detailed subsurfaceand groundwater reactive transport models.¥Reliable prediction of thermodynamic and kinetic properties for chemicalprocesses (e.g., reactions of chlorinated hydrocarbons on surfaces and in aqueous
systems, atmospheric oxidation of organic precursors to ozone and aerosols) as
well as for designing green chemical manufacturing processes.¥Molecular-level studies of chemistry in solution and at interfaces, includ-ing mineral interfaces (e.g., the behavior of metal ions in aqueous solution and on
metal oxide or clay surfaces for vadose zone, tank, and groundwater remediation
and catalysis)Ña detailed understanding of redox (electron transfer chemistry) isbroadly needed; studies of the interactions of biological molecules with surfaces
for bioremediation are also needed and being pursued.¥Reliable prediction of spectroscopic properties to aid in the interpretationof experiments for determining speciation in the environment (e.g., surface, sub-
surface, groundwater) and in tanks, as well as for chemical process control.¥Reliable prediction of chemical processes for carbon management includ-ing aerosol formation (organic oxidations, inorganic NH3-H2SO4-H2O chemistry,and nucleation processes) and sequestration and capture of CO2 (e.g., in geologic
formations and in the ocean).¥Fundamental molecular processes relevant to cell signaling pathways forbiological remediation and risk assessment including protein-protein interactions
and enzymatic reactions.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DAVID A. DIXON105¥Structural biology and functional genomics for assessing the health im-pact of environmental contaminants and for bioremediation.¥Chemical processing, includingÑtank waste processing and separation systems for tank wastes as wellas sensor design,Ñgreen chemical processing strategies for waste remediation, and chemi-cal and petroleum production to minimize waste streams and energy con-
sumption,Ñhomogeneous and heterogeneous catalyst design (e.g., controlled oxi-dation of organics to produce intermediates for the chemical process industry
or NOx or SO
x emission reduction from combustion systems), and
Ñmodels of the behavior of waste storage systems (e.g., glasses for radio-nuclide storage in Waste Isolation Pilot Plant or Yucca Mountain) over long
time periods (hundreds of thousands of years).
¥Developing a thorough understanding of combustion chemistry to reduceunwanted emissions (e.g., NOx abatement strategies for lean-burn engines) and to
improve system performanceÑa large number of chemical species and reactionsare involved in the combustion of hydrocarbon fuels, and little is known about the
highly reactive intermediates and many of the reactions.Computational Design of Catalysts:The Control of Chemical TransformationThe U.S. petroleum, chemical, biochemical, and pharmaceutical industriesare the worldÕs largest producer of chemicals, ranging from ÒwonderÓ drugs to
paints to cosmetics to plastics to new more efficient energy sources. The U.S.
chemical industry represents 10% of all U.S. manufacturing, employing more
than one million Americans. It also is one of the few industries that has possessed
a favorable balance of trade. The petroleum and chemical industries contribute
~$500 billion to the gross national product of the United States These industries
rely for their financial well-being on their ability to produce new products by
using energy-efficient, low-cost, environmentally clean processes, with a mini-
mal number of undesirable side products. Key ingredients in 90% of chemical
manufacturing processes are catalysts. A catalystÕs role is to make a chemicalreaction that produces a desired product proceed much more efficiently than it
otherwise would by changing the kinetics of the process. Catalysis and catalytic
processes account for nearly 20% of the U.S. gross domestic product and nearly
20% of all industrial products. Chemical transformations in industry take a cheap
feedstock (usually some type of hydrocarbon) and convert it into a higher-value
product by rearranging the carbon atoms and adding functional groups to the
compound. About 5 quads per year are used in the production of the top 50 chemi-

cals in the United States and catalytic routes account for the production of 30 of
these chemicals, consuming 3 quads. Improved catalysts can increase efficiencyThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106APPENDIX Dleading to reduced energy requirements, while increasing product selectivity andconcomitantly decreasing wastes and emissions. A process yield improvement of
only 10% would save 0.23 quad per year! In addition, production of the top 50
chemicals leads to almost 21 billion pounds of CO2 emitted to the atmosphere per
year.1 Improved catalysts can help reduce this carbon burden on the atmosphere.
As new products become ever more sophisticated, the need to quickly develop
new catalysts grows rapidly in importance. A fundamental understanding of

chemical transformations is needed to enable scientists to address the grand chal-lenge of the precise control of molecular processes by using catalysts.Whereas Mother Nature is very effective at designing catalysts such asenzymes, we are decidedly less so. The most common approach to catalyst design
used to be Edisonian. Try something; if it works, try to improve on the design by
systematically changing the chemical nature of the catalyst; if it doesnÕt work, trysomething else. This approach is highly intensive, in terms of both time and ex-
pense, and most of the time, it did not work well. In addition, catalysts developed
using this approach often produced undesirable by-products, and the catalyst it-
self may pose an environmental hazard. For many catalytic processes it is still
unclear just how the catalyst works. A more desirable approach to catalyst design
is to analyze at the molecular level exactly how catalysts function and to use this
information to lead to the discovery of new systems and to optimize the design of
others. Without this information, it is impossible to ÒtuneÓ the catalyst to have the
desired effect. For example, even the most sophisticated experimental techniques
are unable to provide the details of the chemical reactions occurring at the surface
of a heterogeneous catalyst or information about how to tune a homogeneous
catalyst to gain a factor of 2 to 4 in performance.The coupling of theory and experiment provides the most profound in-sights into catalyst behavior enabling the design of new catalysts. A combined
theory-experiment approach was used to design a new alloy catalyst for ammonia
synthesis leading to the first new ammonia catalyst since Haber and BoschÕswork in the early 1900s that is better than iron. The development of a Lewis
acidity scale based on high-level computations led directly to the design of a
mixed metal catalyst for the liquid phase production of the hydrofluorocarbon
refrigerant HFC-134a, the only such available liquid phase process.The computational design of practical catalysts for industrial and commer-cial applications requires the ability to predict, at the molecular level, the detailed
behavior of large, complex molecules as well as solid-state materials. Although
intermediate-level computations can often provide insight into how a catalyst
works, the true computational design of practical catalysts for industrial and com-
mercial applications will require the ability to predict accurate thermodynamic1Tonkovich, A. L.Y.; Gerber, M. A. The Top 50 Commodity Chemicals: Impact of Catalytic Pro-cess Limitations on Energy, Environment and Economics, PNL-10684, Pacific Northwest National
Laboratory, Richland WA, 1995, 99352.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DAVID A. DIXON107and kinetic results. There are enormous technical challenges in the computationaldesign of catalysts. These include the number of different scales that must be
considered, the size of the active domain, the need to treat heterogeneous struc-
tures, the need to consider the effective environment in which the catalyst acts
(gas phase, solid phase, solution phase, at interfaces), and the need to treat com-
plex metal interactions as most catalysts involve transition or lanthanide metals.
Another set of challenges is that catalysts must be designed for use in real envi-
ronments such as chemical reactors. The goals for computational catalysis on
next-generation computer architectures are:50 teraflops (109 floating-point operations per second): accurate calcula-
tions for realistic, isolated homogeneous catalyst model systems (<1.0 kcal/mol
thermodynamics, <50% error in reaction rates).250 teraflops: accurate calculations for realistic homogeneous catalyst modelsystems in solution and heterogeneous catalysts in vacuum (<1.0 kcal/mol ther-
modynamics, <50% error in reaction rates).1000 teraflops: accurate calculations for realistic homogeneous catalystmodel systems in solution and heterogeneous catalysts in solution (<1.0 kcal/mol
thermodynamics, <50% error in reaction rates).Success in these computational approaches will enable the long-sought goal incatalyst research of the design of efficient catalysts from first principles. Such
new catalytic systems will revolutionize how we manufacture the chemicals that
are such a part of everyday life, from efficient automotive fuels to polymers to
cancer-fighting drugs, as well as the design of catalysts to minimize tropospheric
environmental pollution from combustion energy systems. The ability to
computationally design efficient new catalyst systems would lead to a revolution
in the design of green chemical manufacturing processes that minimize (1) the
usage of raw materials, (2) energy utilization, and (3) the environmental impact
of the process and waste stream. Improved catalytic converters for combustion
systems would enable the use of different fuel types as well as the development of
lean-burn engines that minimize the impact of engine emissions such as NOx on
the formation of tropospheric pollutants such as ozone and harmful aerosols. Fur-
thermore, the development of lean-burn engines with low emissions would have
a large impact on reducing CO2 emissions to the atmosphere because these en-
gines burn the fuel much more efficiently.Computational Environmental Molecular Science for DOE Site CleanupComputational molecular science is a key technology for addressing the com-plex environmental cleanup problems facing the Department of EnergyÕs nuclearproduction sites as well as other polluted sites in the nation. Production of nuclear
weapons at U.S. DOE facilities across the nation over four decades has resulted inThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108APPENDIX Dthe interim storage of millions of gallons of highly radioactive mixed wastes inhundreds of underground tanks, extensive contamination of the soil and ground-
water at thousands of sites, and hundreds of buildings that must be decontami-
nated and decommissioned. The single most challenging environmental issue
confronting the DOE, and perhaps the nation, is the safe and cost-effective man-
agement and remediation of these wastes. Environmental impacts at these sites
range from minimal (e.g., near-surface contamination with uncontaminated

groundwater aquifers) to extensive (e.g., surface, vadose zone, and groundwater
contamination that extends off-site). The DOE invests approximately $6 billion
per year in environmental cleanup activities at its former and present production
sites. Even with this large expenditure expected over a 50-year time frame, it is
difficult to see how remediation of the sites will be accomplished by using cur-
rently available technology. The sole use of conventional approaches to
remediation and control (e.g., excavation, treatment, recovery, and disposal of
residual waste for contaminated soils; pump and treat for contaminated aquifers)
is cost prohibitive. Remediation strategies for DOE sites will require the combi-
nation of conventional remediation approaches with the increasing effectiveness
and decreased cost of emerging technologies (e.g., in situ techniques such as
natural bioremediation), to meet future remediation goals within budget con-
straints. Incorporation of in situ remediation technologies into overall remediation

strategies has the potential for significant cost savings by leveraging physical,
chemical, and biological subsurface processes to enhance the natural recovery of
vadose zone and groundwater systems. However, a key ingredient in the success
as well as the cost-effectiveness of remediation efforts is fundamental knowledge
about the chemical properties and interactions of the wastes with their environ-
ment. This information is needed in order to develop and use in situ processes as
unlike ex situ processes, there is usually no easy way to effectively halt an in situ
process once it has begun. Computational molecular science in combination with
experimental investigations provides this fundamental understanding of the com-
plex interactions of (man-made) materials with the environment.To support the development of innovative technologies for remediatingvarious DOE sites, we need to develop reliable models to investigate the impact
of the technology and the appropriate level of risk of using the technology or of
doing nothing. These models of contaminant fate and transport in the subsurface
have to be built on a detailed understanding of the binding and reaction of con-
taminants on soil particles as well as transport and reaction in groundwater. In
addition, reliable models of the direct impact of mobile contaminants on humans
and the risk of proposed remediation technologies will be critical for developing
the safest and most cost-effective approaches to site cleanup and for public ac-
ceptance of the cleanup process and results. It is clear that such research spans the
interfacial regime from bare solid surfaces to complex, solution-phase surface
chemistry, and covers a range of time and length scales. Thus, one important
focus of such a computational science effort is an understanding of the linkagesThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DAVID A. DIXON109between different temporal and spatial scales. No matter how many details of thephysics are included in the transport models, if the critical underlying physical,
chemical, and biological data describing the various reactions are missing or un-
reliable, the accurate predictive capability of such models will be significantly
lessened. Computational molecular science can provide the thermodynamic, ki-
netic, and structural properties data needed for the models and can provide data
that is difficult, or at times even impossible, to obtain in the laboratory or in the
field due to the cost or danger of the experiment. The calculation of interactions
of chemicals, including those containing radioactive elements, with environmen-
tal matrices such as soils is incredibly complex and will require tens to hundreds
of sustained teraflops to begin to reliably predict the molecular interactions of
chemicals with environmental systems and to provide the underlying data needed
for reactive transport models. High-quality data are needed, and great care must
be taken to minimize the errors in the calculated underlying data used in a sophis-
ticated environmental or chemical process model so that errors in the data do not
accumulate, propagate, and ultimately invalidate the macroscopic-scale model.
There is a time-criticality in the need for the data that this computational molecu-
lar science effort will provide. Contaminants have been released into the environ-
ment over the past 50 years, and their mobility has led, and is continuing to lead,
to broad-scale soil and groundwater contamination of the DOE sites.Some of the most hazardous materials in the underground tanks, in the soilsand groundwater, and in the buildings contain radioactive isotopes of the ac-
tinides and lanthanides. These materials pose significant radiation and other health
hazards. A basic understanding of actinide and lanthanide chemistry is required
to develop the new technologies needed for remediating the sites. Because of the
difficulty and expense involved in conducting experiments with radioactive ma-
terials, it is important to employ computational methodologies that include the
effects of EinsteinÕs theory of relativity to support accurate calculations on mo-lecular systems containing the actinides and lanthanides in order to guide the
choice of experiments and to reliably extend the available experimental data into
all of the regimes of interest. Such a capability would minimize the need for
experimental work on radioactive materials. This capability would support many
other research programs of importance to DOE, including the development of
highly efficient and selective catalysts for new industrial processes. In addition,
such a computational capability is needed to help offset the nationÕs loss of ex-pertise in the area of actinide chemistry that is so critical to the multiple missions
of the DOE. Computational molecular science also can be used to aid in the
design of new processes, for example, the design of new compounds for efficient
separation of radionuclides, such as technetium, or the rational design of enzymes
to enhance the biodegradation of organic wastes or to immobilize radionuclides.
Computational molecular science not only provides needed data but also can be
used to provide new insights and answer Òwhat if?Ó questions raised by scientists
and engineers. Improving the response time to answer such questions will dra-The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.110APPENDIX Dmatically shorten the design and development time for new remediation strate-gies. In summary, theory can, at enormous but feasible computational expense,
reliably and safely predict the chemical and physical properties of radioactive
substances, often more cost-effectively than performing an experiment. The sci-
ence goals in this area for next-generation computer architectures are:50 TFlops: accurate calculations for realistic models of lanthanides and ac-tinides on complex mineral surfaces (<1.0 kcal/mol thermodynamics) to develop
parameters for reactive transport models of the vadose zone250 TFlops: accurate calculations for realistic models of lanthanides andactinides on complex mineral surfaces interacting with aqueous solutions (<1.0
kcal/mol thermodynamics) to develop parameters for reactive transport models
of the vadose zone1000 TFlops: accurate calculations for realistic models of lanthanides andactinides on complex mineral surfaces interacting with aqueous solutions (<50%
error in reaction rates) to develop parameters for reactive transport models of the
vadose zoneNot surprisingly, the ability to predict the transport of wastes and associatedcontaminants within the EarthÕs shallow crust has become one of the most impor-tant challenges facing the DOE and is one of the most daunting scientific and
computational challenges. Reliable prediction of the disposition of contaminants
is critical for decisions on virtually every waste disposal option, from remediation
technologies such as in situ bioremediation to evaluations of the safety of nuclear
waste repositories. Nuclear waste repository designs, for both high-level and low-
level wastes, require knowledge of transport of fluids in the vadose and saturated
zones. Such predictive capabilities also will impact the responsible utilization of
our nationÕs energy resources, particularly with respect to oil and gas. Any suchpredictions must be based on a comprehensive understanding of processes in the
EarthÕs shallow crust. The accurate computation of the transport and dispositionover long spatial and temporal scales of fluid-borne contaminants in complex
natural systems is well beyond current capabilities. We currently lack the scien-
tific understanding and the computational resources necessary to address these
issues with the desired accuracy. However, with future generations of computa-
tional resources, it will be possible to address scientific and technical issues that
are fundamental for quantitative analysis of fluid transport in terrestrial systems
and essential for improving predictive capabilities.Computation is essential for predicting the intricate web of species, reac-tions, and interconnections of transport in the natural system. The few natural
examples of the integrated record of these processes constitute experiments that
cannot be offered as an alternative to computational approaches. In addition, com-
putational simulations are the only means that we have for predicting how con-
taminants will move over a long time period to predict the future state and theThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DAVID A. DIXON111potential long-term impact of proposed remediation strategies. Computationalmodeling is the essential tool for translating scientific breakthroughs into practi-
cal applications in the area of subsurface transport. There are two key challengesfor predictive modeling of subsurface transport. First, the present generation of
hardware and software is insufficient to address the comprehensive treatment of
flow and transport of multiple fluid and solid phases in heterogeneous, three-
dimensional, nonequilibrium, interactive systems such as those found in the natu-
ral state. Second, as discussed above, accurate theoretical descriptions of the
mechanisms of interaction are not yet fully developed. Overarching issues con-
cern the ability to scale processes over many orders of magnitude in length and
time, the ability to handle coupled complex relationships of processes at multiple
scales, and the ability to predict and evaluate the results of processes over long
time scales using data available only for narrow windows of observation. Over
the next 10 years, simulation will play a major role in the development of new
theory for field-scale simulations. A hierarchy of models designed for different
scales is necessary to identify key features and processes at fundamental scales
that have to be propagated to the field scale. Key scales where integration is
needed include1,the microbial membrane and surface where molecular-level structure and
binding reactions are important to the biogeochemistry;2.the mineral surface in solution to provide the setting for the interaction of
minerals, aqueous components, surface-complexed metals, and attached micro-
bial populations;3.a network of pores to put multiple mineral surfaces in contact with trans-
porting fluids that move nonuniformly, allowing for varying rates of exposure to
nutrients and reacting components;4.at the Darcy scale (macroscopic scale
Ñfor fluid volumes on the order ofmilliliters), similar degrees of process interaction are necessary, but the process
models are based on bulk parameterizations to account for behaviors that cannot
be resolved by the continuum approach; and5.at the field scale (megascopic scale) process integration is similar in ap-
proach to the Darcy scale but generally considers more range in the parameter
space (e.g., heterogeneity) but less detail in spatial and temporal resolution.Subsurface simulations have actually begun to impact geochemistry, geo-physics, and environmental chemistry by encouraging holistic and mechanisti-
cally detailed investigations where multiple processes and multiple reactive com-
ponents are considered and monitored in complex subsurface materials. Over the
next 10 years, these simulations are expected to be indispensable to the advance-
ment of subsurface science through the systematic upscaling of processes at fun-
damental scales to representative parameterizations useful to field-scale models.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112APPENDIX DAtmospheric ChemistryProblems in atmospheric chemistry are extremely challenging compu-tationally. They are highly nonlinear, require the ability to simulate processes
occurring on a vast range of spatial and temporal scales, and require coupled
simulation of complex systems (the ocean and atmosphere) involving dynamics,
thermodynamics (including condensable gases), chemistry, and thermal radia-
tion. They are compute-intensive, data-intensive, memory-intensive, and analy-
sis-intensive. One area in which computational chemistry has played an impor-
tant role in atmospheric chemistry is in the development of alternatives to the
chlorofluorocarbons involved in stratospheric ozone depletion. Computational
chemistry was essential for calculating missing thermodynamic data as well as
correcting older experimental data on the CFCs, hydrochlorofluorocarbon
(HCFCs), and hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs). Indeed, there are now far more calcu-
lated values being used than experimental ones. Calculations were critical to un-
derstanding the stability of an alternative in the environment and to the design of
production processes and the actual refrigeration system. The calculated thermo-
dynamic and kinetic properties have been used extensively in the design of chemi-
cal plants for producing CFC alternatives as well as by researchers who are devel-
oping new catalysts and alternatives. From calculations, it is now possible to
reliably predict the thermodynamics and kinetics of the atmospheric degradation
processes for the CFC replacements that are so critical to the design of environ-
mentally safe alternatives. The ability to reliably predict rate constants for the
initial reaction of an HFC or HCFC with a hydroxyl radical and the ability to then
develop reliable degradation mechanism parameters was important in understand-
ing and predicting the behavior of the alternatives in the troposphere and strato-
sphere in terms of ozone depletion potential, and together with calculated infra-
red intensities, a compoundÕs global warming potential could be calculated. Thecomputational chemistry results could then be used in much larger-scale atmo-
spheric models involving fluid flow. DuPont used the results from computational
chemistry to improve its process design for the manufacture of new fluorochemi-
cals. By using thermodynamic and kinetic parameters calculated from first prin-
ciples, the behavior of a pilot plant for the production of a CFC alternative was
modeled correctly before actual operation began. Computational work was criti-
cal to getting the CFCs replacements to market as soon as possible, helping to
save the stratospheric ozone layer. Computational chemistry is continuing to be
used in many areas of atmospheric chemistry as we improve our knowledge of
how the atmosphere behaves. Modeling aerosol formation, attachment of chemi-
cals to aerosols, and reactions on aerosols are very difficult computational prob-
lems that are just beginning to be addressed. Atmospheric models are extremely
complex especially when the correct physics (e.g., radiative transport and im-
proved cloud parameterizations) is included, and they represent another computa-
tional grand challenge crossing many scales in space and time.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WILLIAM H. FARLAND113SummaryAs discussed above, computational chemistry can play a key role in advanc-ing the scientific enterprise. It can provide the data input for many larger, more
complex models and provide us with unique insights into molecular behavior so
that we can design and construct new molecules for specific tasks. Computational
chemistry has become an established tool in the chemistÕs toolbox and is beingused in broad areas of chemistry to replace experimental measurements and to
provide us with improved understanding of molecular behavior. Computation
will be the major tool that enables us to cross the many temporal and spatial
scales that characterize environmental science.CHEMICALLY RELATED R&D AT THE EPAÕS OFFICE OFRESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENTWilliam H. FarlandU.S. Environmental Protection AgencyThis presentation will provide background information on programs at theOffice of Research and Development (ORD) at the U.S. Environmental Protec-
tion Agency. EPAÕs mission is broadly designed around protecting human healthand safeguarding the natural environmentÑaims that require the application ofchemistry, biology, epidemiology, physical sciences, and engineering in an inte-
grated fashion. The role of ORD is to provide scientific foundations to assist the
EPAÕs work by:¥conducting research and development to identify, understand, and solvecurrent and future environmental problems;¥providing responsive technical support to EPAÕs programs and regions;¥collaborating with our scientific partners in academia and other agencies,state and tribal governments, private sector organizations, and nations; and¥exercising leadership in addressing emerging environmental issues andadvancing the science and technology of risk assessment and risk management.ORD is a relatively large organization, with three national laboratories andthree national centers. In early November 2002, we announced a new center for
homeland security research in Cincinnati, and EPA has the lead on drinking water
infrastructure issues for the security of the nationÕs drinking water system. Wealso played a significant role in the decontamination of congressional buildings
that suffered anthrax exposure in 2001. Overall, ORD has about 1900 employees
in R&D, about 1200 of whom have graduate degrees in science.In addition to its role in both health and ecological research, EPA also hasresponsibility for research in pollution prevention and new technology activities.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114APPENDIX DAlthough there are other national institutes and centers that work in this area,only EPA has a fully integrated, multidisciplinary, problem-directed research pro-
gram. We rely on the peer review process and the scientific community to focus
our program as we push the envelope for being state of the art. At the same time
we have a responsibility to evaluate the broader scientific literature and collect
additional information to ensure that science is credibly used in EPAÕs decisions.This is accomplished through a combination of our in-house research program
and an external grants program. Sound science is essential for EPA decisions:¥Science is a critical component of credible decisions and actions that pro-tect human health and the environment.¥Making EPA decisions with sound science requires relevant, high-qual-ity, cutting-edge research in human health, ecology, pollution control and preven-
tion, and socioeconomics; proper characterization of scientific findings; and ap-
propriate use of science in the decision process.¥ORD is a leader in environmental research, focusing its efforts and re-sources on those areas in which EPA can add the most value to reducing uncer-
tainty in risk assessments and enhancing environmental risk management.I appreciated the discussion during the workshop session on the MTBE is-sue. A decade ago at EPA, we were laying out research needs for oxygenates, and
we were concerned . We strongly suspected that MTBE would be a problem in
groundwater. The discussion at this workshop shows that the concern is still with
us. This clearly illustrates the importance of life-cycle analysis when we evaluate
substances that are introduced widely into the environment.Many of the decisions made by EPA are risk based and have significantuncertainties associated with them. The only way we can make better decisions is
to fill the knowledge gaps that lead to the uncertainties. For the scientific basis
that we provide for regulatory decision making, the research falls into two gen-
eral categories, problem-driven research and core research, where the former in-
cludes topics such as¥fine particulates in air,¥drinking water contaminants,¥diesel engine emissions, and¥mercury in air and water.The core research includes topics such as¥ecological monitoring and assessment of ecological resources,¥health risks to sensitive populations,¥pollution prevention and green chemistry, and¥environmental economics.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WILLIAM H. FARLAND115These topics illustrate the need to bring a multidisciplinary approach to prob-lem-driven research. The core research program is closer to what might be called
basic research, and it provides a forward-looking approach to dealing with eco-
logical issues, health risks, pollution prevention, and support for environmental
economics that eventually will allow us to anticipate new problems at an early
stage. The interaction between problem-driven and core research is reciprocal
and iterative.Chemistry will play a large role in the research areas of our own strategicplan. For example, work on particulate matter will allow us to understand the
nature of the particles and their behavior in the atmosphere, develop the modeling
that will predict their fate and transport along with the resulting human exposure,
and understand the transition from exposure to dose that will enable health as-
sessment work.Drinking water provides another example in which the by-products of disin-fection illustrate ways that environmental chemistry is part of our everyday ac-
tivities. We have also been looking at the nature of the toxin associated with
Pfiesteria in order to understand the chemistry by which Pfiesteria produces le-
sions in fish and potentially has the ability to poison humans. This is a very
difficult chemistry problem. Similarly, endocrine disrupters have been discussed
in this workshop, and we need to understand their mechanism of action and the
structure-activity relationships that would allow us to make a judgment about
interaction with specific types of cellular receptors. Clearly, research in pollution
prevention and new technologies are heavily based in the chemical sciences.A more focused list of ORD research interests includes a large number oftopics that came up in todayÕs workshop discussions:¥Particulate matter¥Drinking water¥Global change¥Endocrine disruptors¥Ecological risk¥Human health¥Pollution prevention and new technologiesAs one example of endocrine disrupter work, EPA has been involved in di-oxin reassessment for the last 11 years. This is an incredibly complex issue, with
a huge amount of available informationÑfrom the chemistry of toxicity equiva-lents and understanding how dioxin-like congeners can play into the total load in
the environment to an understanding of how dioxin works to affect cells essen-
tially as an environmental hormone.Persistent biocumulative toxic chemicals were discussed in the workshop asone of the top opportunities for advances in chemistryÑunderstanding that thesehydrophobic chemicals have the ability to persist and move around in the envi-The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116APPENDIX Dronment and are particularly difficult for us to control and remediate. This isanother of the areas in which we work on a day-to-day basis, and again chemistry
plays a large role.In atmospheric chemistry, a particular focus of our R&D activities is thedevelopment of air quality models and scaling to models that can predict local,
regional, and global impacts on air qualityÑfrom sources that we have the abilityto control. A new generation of air-quality models looks at community modeling
of air quality (CMAQ), and this has provided a real advance for some of the
regulatory activities that go on in EPAÕsprogram. Mercury has recently been
added to the model, and certainly the biggest improvement will be addition of the
NOx module, which is currently under development. This will be particularly
important if we move forward with a multipollutant approach to air pollution
using the Clear Skies initiative.1 Understanding the interactions among mercury,
NOx, SOx, and other chemicals will be particularly important for us. ORD hassupported work in Riverside, California to build chambers in which chemical
reactivity studies will provide input into these models and advance our under-
standing of this issue.Our programs include several areas that have a focus on analytical chemis-try. For example, the Clean Air Act requires us to publish Federal Reference
Methods for how one measures particulate matter. We have the responsibility for
looking at methods that are functionally equivalent to the Federal Reference Meth-

ods so we have to be in a position to look at new analytical approaches. As an-
other example, genomics has become an important way to look at molds as in-
door air pollutants or microbial contamination on beaches. We need to develop
markers that can be used for rapid detection and characterization of beach con-
taminationÑrather than growing cultures that might tell you tomorrow whereyou shouldnÕt have gone swimming yesterday. These applications combinegenomics and chemistry, and they have important implications for childrenÕshealth, and for determining the ability to inhabit residences after flooding or wa-
ter damage from fires. This approach will allow us to identify the organisms,
understand the remediation techniques that must be used, and evaluate the extent
of cleanup. It is an important contribution from our laboratories.Another analytical topic of concern to us is continuous monitoring. WeÕreinterested in finding ways of continuous monitoring for dioxins, mercury, and
combustion by-products. Some of this work is also taking place in our laboratory
in Las Vegas using pattern recognition from a continuous gas chromatographyÐmass spectrometry (GC-MS) analysis of water sources to discover changes, char-
acterize the materials responsible for the change, and ultimately, respond quickly
by diverting them from drinking water.We have several hundred chemists on our research and development staff in-1http://www.epa.gov/clearskies/The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WILLIAM H. FARLAND117house primarily in our National Exposure Research Laboratory and our NationalRisk Management Laboratory. These individuals are, for the most part, research
chemists who work on the kinds of problems I have described.In 1995 we developed an approach to reaching out to the scientific commu-nity and investing funds in particularly important problems where we can engage
some of the top scientists in the country. About a quarter of the academic faculty
involved in this meeting are currently funded by our Science To Achieve Results
(STAR) program, which provides about $100 million a year in support of basic
research directed toward specific problems. STAR-funded research supports a

broad range of issues that will have important payoffs for our future approaches
to dealing with environmental problems. Some of the STAR solicitations that
have a chemistry emphasis include:¥Measurement, Modeling and Analysis Methods for Airborne Carbon-aceous Fine PM (2003)¥Development of High-Throughput Screening Approaches for PrioritizingChemical for the EDC Screening Program (2003)¥Technology for a Sustainable Environment (National Science Founda-tion) (2001, 2003)¥Assessing the Consequences of Global Change for Air Quality: Sensitiv-ity of U.S. Air Quality to Climate Change and Future Global Impacts (2002)¥Nutrient Science for Improved Watershed Management Program (2002)¥Environmental Futures Research in Nanoscale Science, Engineering andTechnology (2001, 2002)¥Mercury: Transport, Transformation, and Fate in the Atmosphere (2001)In a collaborative program called Technologies for a Sustainable Environ-ment, the National Science Foundation (NSF) and EPA have awarded approxi-
mately $46 million for 164 projects addressing¥environmentally benign solvents,¥biotechnology for pollution prevention,¥green chemistry-reaction modifications,¥green engineering-process modifications, and¥industrial ecology-environmentally benign manufacturing.Pollution-prevention research is an overarching activity for which we want acombined in-house and extramural program that is focused on finding ways to
eliminate or minimize hazardous solvents, emissions, and waste. In other words,
we want to clean up processes to reduce impacts on the environment; to examine
renewable feedstocks as a process improvement; and to minimize water, energy,
and materials use in industrial processes. The work that EPA and NSF have
funded on pollution prevention has been dominated by the chemical engineeringThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118APPENDIX Dand chemistry community (Figure 1). We hope that there will be a continuedcommitment in the areas of pollution prevention, greener chemistry, and greenertechnologies. I think this is a success story that illustrates how problem-directed
research in these disciplines will be important to us for the future.I agree with many of the workshop participants that we have an opportunityin terms of nanotechnology. Certainly there are indications that we can improve
environmental sensing, treatment, and remediation if we can improve manufac-
turing processing efficiency, reduce waste production and toxicity, and reduce
materials consumption. What are the effects of nanomaterials on the environ-
ment?¥Currently, little is known about the potential effects of manufacturednanoparticles on human health and the environment.¥Nanomaterials may enter the food chain and human body when releasedinto the air or water or discarded on the land.¥Nanomaterials could affect human health and the environment throughÑExposure to skin,ÑAdsorption by the lungs, andÑBio-uptake and bioaccumulation.¥The toxicity of nanomaterials is largely unknown.All of this is chemistry and chemical engineering at its finest if we can find away to make it work at a nanoscale level. This is the real challenge for us. We51%22%3%6%6%8%4%Chemical EngChemistry
Civil & Env 
EngMechanical/ Industrial/ 
Biological EngOther ScienceOther EngFIGURE 1Chemical sciences dominate pollution-prevention grants portfolio.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.JANET G. HERING119participated in an interagency National Nanotechnology Initiative that will investabout $710 million in this particular area this year. The vast majority of this work
comes out of NSF, the Department of Defense (DOD), and DOE. But EPA in-
vests about $5 million a year right now in this area. We are making an important
contribution in understanding what needs to be done in integrating the issues with
environmental problems.In summary, ORD has a dynamic program of research and development thatreally is based on integration of disciplines. We are dealing with problems for
which solutions necessitate an integration of various science and engineering dis-
ciplines. We have a balance between problem-driven and core or basic research
that requires us to really build a strong relationship with our partners, both inside
the agency and out in the general scientific community, to meet the agencyÕsneeds, and we hope to be able to continue to enhance that partnership. We are in
a position to anticipate some of the emerging scientific issues and, hopefully, be
poised to meet the challenges of the twenty-first century.BIOGEOCHEMICAL CONTROLS ON THE OCCURRENCE ANDMOBILITY OF TRACE METALS IN GROUNDWATERJanet G. HeringCalifornia Institute of TechnologyIntroductionClean water has been called the Òoil of twenty-first century,Ó a phrase that
reflects both the growing demand for water resources and the recognition that the
quality of many water resources has been degraded by human activities. The
importance of groundwater as a water supply in developed countries, such as the
United States, is often overlooked, yet in 1995, 46% of the domestic water supply
was provided by groundwater and 54% by surface water (Table 1). Although
groundwater is particularly important for self-supply in rural areas, it is also an
important resource for public water systems. Demand for and dependence on
groundwater supplies are expected to increase with increasing population in the
United States, particularly in the West.There are some important differences between groundwater and surface wa-ter with respect to water quality. Surface water is considerably more vulnerable to
pathogens; groundwater provides some level of Ònatural protectionÓ against bac-teria and viruses that can cause outbreaks of human disease. The composition of
groundwater, however, is more influenced than that of surface water by contact
with soil and aquifer minerals, which generally leads to the accumulation in
groundwater of constituents derived from geologic materials.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120APPENDIX DThe natural occurrence of arsenic at elevated concentrations in groundwaterin West Bengal, India, Bangladesh, and other parts of South Asia provides an
unfortunate example of the potentially devastating effects of groundwater quality
on human health.1 In these areas, huge shifts in water resource utilization, from
surface water to groundwater, have occurred over the past 30 years. Now tens of
millions of tubewells providing drinking water for individual families and larger
wells are used for groundwater-based irrigation. Arsenic occurs in the ground-
water in these regions at concentrations up to the milligram-per-liter range, and
concentrations between 200 and 800 g/L are common. The human health effectsof consuming this arsenic-contaminated water range from skin lesions to fatal
cancers. At the same time, it must be recognized that groundwater offers protec-
tion from pathogensÑdiarrheal diseases are a major cause of death in infants inthe developing world. Furthermore, groundwater-based irrigation has allowed
substantial expansion of agricultural activities and has drastically improved the
nutritional status of people in these areas. Nonetheless, the lack of attention to
groundwater quality has had profound human health consequences, and these
experiences illustrate the importance of evaluating the quality as well as the quan-
tity of groundwater resources.Properties of Aquifers Influencing Groundwater QualityIf we are to consider how the chemical composition of water withdrawn froma specific well has evolved, a key issue is the origin of the water and the contactTABLE 1
Use of Surface Water vs. Groundwater for U.S. Domestic Supply in1995Million GallonsMillion Cubic Meters
per day (MGD)per Day (m
3/d)Surface waterSelf-supply380.14
Public supply14,10053.4
Total14,10053.4
GroundwaterSelf-supply3,35012.7

Public supply8,46032.0
Total11,80044.7
SOURCE: Data from http://water.usgs.gov/watuse/pdf1995/html.1Smith, A. H.; Lingas, E. O.; Rahman. M. Contamination of drinking-water by arsenic inBangladesh: A public health emergency. Bull. World Health Organ. 2000, 78(9):1093-1103.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.JANET G. HERING121it has had with soil and aquifer minerals between the sites of recharge and with-drawal.2 A distinction should therefore be made between wells drilled into un-
confined and confined aquifers. In unconfined aquifers, the water table is in con-
tact with the unsaturated zone and is subject to local recharge; groundwater ages
can be less than decades. In confined aquifers, however, a confining layer (usu-
ally clay) prevents local recharge, which must therefore occur in upland areas that
can be distant from the withdrawal site. Residence times can vary greatly and
groundwaters can be tens of thousands of years old.Within an aquifer, water flows in response to the hydraulic gradient (i.e.,from locations of higher to lower hydraulic head). However, flow velocities are
also determined by properties of the aquifer materials, specifically hydraulic con-
ductivity and porosity, as shown in the following equation:Average linear velocity = 
ddKhLwhere K = hydraulic conductivity,  
ddhL= hydraulic gradient,  and 
 = porosity.
For various aquifer minerals, porosity varies over a fairly narrow range (ca.0.3 to 0.5) but hydraulic conductivity varies over many orders of magnitude.2Even for a specific type of aquifer material, ranges of 1-4 orders of magnitude are
common (e.g., 10Ð8.5 to 10
Ð4 m/s for fractured rock, 10
Ð5 to 10
Ð3 m/s for well-
sorted sand). The lowest hydraulic conductivities are found for crystalline rock
(10Ð14 to 10
Ð10 m/s) and the highest for well-sorted gravel (10
-2 to 1 m/s) and
clean sand or cavernous limestone (10Ð6 to 10
Ð2 m/s).
The prediction of groundwater flow is complicated by the heterogeneities ofthe subsurface environment, which occur on multiple scales. To understand the
evolution of groundwater composition, it is also important to distinguish between
flow through porous media and flow through channels (caused by dissolution of
the rock matrix) or fractures (resulting from tectonic activity). Such differences
in texture can result in differences in the contact between the fluid and mineral
surfaces.Biogeochemical Processes Affecting Groundwater CompositionIn the physical context of water movement in subsurface and water-rockcontact, we may then consider the biogeochemical processes that can affect the
distribution of a constituent X between the immobile and mobile phases in the
subsurface (Table 2). Obviously, mobile constituents are of the most direct con-
cern because of the potential for human exposure. Constituents in the mobile2Langmuir, D. Aqueous Environmental Geochemistry; Prentice Hall: Upper Saddle River, NJ 
1997.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122APPENDIX Dphase (i.e., as dissolved or colloidal species) can migrate from their source regionto a drinking water well. However, it must be remembered that immobile con-
stituents may have the potential to be mobilized if conditions in the subsurface
environment change.As indicated in Table 2, the type of process by which constituent X may be
mobilized (or sequestered) depends on speciation of X in the solid phase. Thus, if
X is an integral constituent of an aquifer mineral, dissolution of the mineral will
be required to release X into solution, whereas mineral dissolution would not be
required to mobilize X if it is sorbed onto a mineral surface. Environmental con-ditions (including both chemical composition of pore fluids and microbial activ-
ity) will influence the extent of mobilization or sequestration of X. For metals, inparticular, both the solubility and the affinity for surfaces can be strongly influ-
enced by redox conditions and the presence of (biogenic) complexing agents.In order to gain insight into the evolution of groundwater composition, thesebiogeochemical processes must be examined, and subsurface materials character-
ized, over multiple scales ranging from nanometers to kilometers (Figure 1). Each
level of investigation in Figure 1 corresponds to different types of process inves-
tigation or material characterization. For example, at the nanoscale, x-ray absorp-
tion spectroscopy (XAS) has been a powerful tool to characterize the local (i.e.,
coordination) environments of a range of elements in association with solid sur-
faces.3 At the laboratory scale, macroscopic experiments have determined disso-
TABLE 2Partitioning of Constituent X Between Immobile and Mobile PhasesImmobile PhaseProcess
aMobile PhaseX as component ofDissolution 
Dissolved Xaquifer mineral matrix Precipitation
X sorbed on surfaces ofDesorption 
Dissolved Xaquifer materials Adsorption
X dissolved in immobile
 Diffusion
Dissolved Xwater trapped in microporesX sorbed-precipitated inDetachment-peptization 
X sorbed-precipitated in mobile
attached colloids Attachment-filtrationcolloids
aBoth precipitation-dissolution and sorption-desorption can be strongly influenced by microbial pro-cesses. Microbial redox transformations of constituent X may (especially for metals) significantly
alter solubility, and microbial production of ligands can promote the release of X from immobile
phases by dissolution and desorption and stabilize X in solution.
3 Brown, G. E.; Parks, G. A.
 Int. Geol. Rev.
 1992, 43(11), 963-1073.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.JANET G. HERING123lution rates for a wide variety of minerals as well as their properties as sorbentsfor both inorganic and organic chemical species.4 The effects of factors such as
solution composition, the type and surface area of the solid, and biological activ-
ity on both dissolution and sorption processes have been studied at this scale.
Field- or mesoscale experiments include investigations conducted at the U.S.
Geological Survey (USGS) Cape Cod Toxic Substances Hydrology Research Site,
which is intensively instrumented with multilevel samplers and where subsurface
conditions can be manipulated by injection of hundreds of liters of water with
modified composition.5 Similar manipulations have been performed as a 
Òpush-pullÓ experiment at an individual well.
6 In field observations, evolution of
FieldObservations
Field or ÒMesocosmÓ
Experiments
Laboratory
Experiments
NanoscaleCharacterization
FIGURE 1
Interrogation of multiscale subsurfacebiogeochemical processes.4Stumm, W. Chemistry of the Solid-Water Interface; Wiley-Interscience: New York, 1992.5USGS. Cape Cod Toxic Substances Hydrology Research Site. U.S. Geological Survey, 2002;http://ma.water.usgs.gov/CapeCodToxics/.6 Harvey, C. F.; Swartz, C. H.; Badruzzaman, A. B. M.; Keon-Blute, N.; Yu, W.; Ali, M. A.; Jay,
J.; Beckie, R.; Niedan, V.; Brabander, D.; Oates, P. M.; Ashfaque, K. N.; Islam, S.; Hemond, H. F.;Ahmed. M. F. Science 2002, 298(5598), 1602-1606.
The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124APPENDIX Dgroundwater quality can be related to aquifer characteristics and attributed toprocesses occurring within the aquifer.7Linking these different scales presents a substantial challenge. A critical is-sue is to determine how information acquired at the nano- or molecular scale can
be applied to elucidate macroscale processes in the environment. Modeling and
simulation provide an avenue for the linkage of biogeochemical processes across
multiple scales. Ab initio calculations and molecular dynamics simulations are
powerful tools for linking nano- and molecular-scale observations to macroscopic

behavior on the laboratory scale.8 A variety of transport codes have been devel-
oped to model flow in the subsurface. Although the level of biogeochemical so-
phistication incorporated in these codes varies widely, a few do incorporate bio-
geochemical kinetics as well as equilibrium reactions. The USGS code
PHREEQC9 combines reaction kinetics with one-dimensional transport, and the
code HydroBioGeoChem 123D includes both three-dimensional flow and trans-
port in the vadose (i.e., unsaturated) zone.10 A key issue is to understand what
information about the subsurface environment and the operative biogeochemical
processes is needed to constrain calculations made using these codes so that they
have real predictive value.Case Study: Arsenic Mobilization in SedimentsAs already mentioned, the mobilization of arsenic provides an example ofthe enormous impact that biogeochemical processes can have on groundwater
quality and human health. In the Ganges-Brahmaputra delta (i.e., Bangladesh and
West Bengal, India), arsenic mobilization has been attributed to the reductive
dissolution of iron oxides and the release of arsenic associated with these carrier
phases.11 Recent manipulation experiments have shown enhanced release of ar-
senic with the injection of molasses (as an organic substrate for microbial iron
reduction) and arsenic sequestration with the injection of nitrate (as an electron
acceptor for microbial iron oxidation).6 Possible sources of organic matter whose
oxidation supports iron reduction and the elevated arsenic concentrations ob-7Plummer, L. N.; Busby, J. F.; Lee, R. W.; Hanshaw, B. B. Water Resour. Res. 1990, 26(9), 1981-
2014.8Molecular Modeling Theory : Applications in the Geosciences; Cygan, R. T.; Kubicki, J. D., Eds.;Reviews in Mineralogy and Geochemistry, vol. 42; Mineralogical Society of America: Washington,DC, 2001.9USGS. PHREEQC (version 2): a computer program for speciation, batch-reaction, one-dimen-sional transport, and inverse geochemical calculations. U.S. Geological Survey, 2002; http://wwwbrr.cr.usgs.gov/projects/GWC_coupled/phreeqc/index.html.10Gwo, J. P.; Frenzel, H.; DÕAzevedo, E.; Hoffman, F. M. Hydrobiogeochem. 1999, 123D, v. 1.1,
Oak Ridge National Laboratory.11Nickson, R.; McArthur, J.; Burgess, W.; Ahmed, K. M.; Ravenscroft, P.; Rahman, M. Nature1998, 395, 338.
The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.JANET G. HERING125served in these aquifers include buried peat deposits12,13
 and newly infiltrated
organic carbon derived from agricultural activities.6The coupled biogeochemical cycling of iron and arsenic has also recentlybeen studied in a system dominated by the addition of iron as an engineering
practice.14 Since 1996, ferric chloride has been added as a coagulant to the Los
Angeles Aqueduct in order to control the levels of naturally occurring arsenic that
reach the water distribution system for the City of Los Angeles. The iron- and
arsenic-rich floc formed by this process is deposited in North Haiwee Reservoir.
Sediments and porewaters from this reservoir were examined to determine the
extent to which arsenic and iron are remobilized in the sediments and to probe the
speciation of arsenic in the solid phase and its possible effects on arsenic
remobilization.Arsenic and iron concentrations in the sediment porewaters were found to beclosely correlated. Although these concentrations are considerably elevated at
depth in the sediment columnÑreaching 17 M (1.3 mg/L) for arsenic and 1.6mM (90 mg/L) for ironÑonly a small fraction of the iron and arsenic deposited tothe sediments needs to be remobilized to support these concentrations. XAS analy-

sis of the sediments indicated that arsenic in the solid phase is reduced from
As(V) to As(III) above the depth at which arsenic is released into the porewater.
Iron in solid phase remains as Fe(III). XAS analysis showed no evidence of con-
version to magnetite (though conversion of ferrihydrite to goethite could not be
excluded). Sequential extractions indicated that most of the arsenic can be re-
leased from sediment by treatment with magnesium chloride or phosphate solu-
tions; this treatment does not release iron, behavior that is consistent with sorp-
tion as a mode of association for the majority of the arsenic with the sediment.
The remainder of the arsenic is released, along with almost all the iron, by treat-
ment with hydrochloric acid.15These observations indicate that reduction of As(V) to As(III) does not, initself, result in the mobilization of arsenic. This conclusion is supported by labo-
ratory adsorption studies showing similar affinities of As(III) and As(V) for hy-
drous ferric oxide, goethite, and magnetite.16 However, outstanding questions
remain regarding the factors that control the rate and extent of the reductive dis-
solution of iron in these sediments and whether the arsenic (and iron) that is
released into the porewater is (re)sorbed onto the residual iron oxyhydroxides in12Nickson, R. T.; McArthur, J. M.; Ravenscroft, P.; Burgess, W. G.; Ahmed, K. M. Appl. Geochem.2000, 15, 403-413.13McArthur, J. M.; Ravenscroft, P.; Safiulla, S.; Thirlwall, M. F. Water Resour. Res. 2001, 37(1),109-117.14Kneebone, P. E.; OÕDay, P. A.; Jones, N.; Hering J. G. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2002, 36, 381-386.
15Dempsey, D. Arsenic Cycling in Natural Sediments: Effects of Aging, SURF report: CaliforniaInstitute of Technology; Pasadena, CA, 2002.16Dixit, S.; Hering, J. G. Environ. Sci. Technol., 2003, submitted.
The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.126APPENDIX Dthe sediment. These are the types of questions that must be answered in order topredict the concentration of arsenic in the porewater and its response to possible
changes in environmental conditions.Opportunities, Challenges, and NeedsGroundwater is an important resource and one that will be critical in meetingfuture needs for water for human consumption, irrigation, and industrial uses.
Groundwater quality is an important (though sometimes underappreciated) issue
because naturally occurring groundwater constituents can adversely affect human
health. Although arsenic has been highlighted here, other trace constituents of
geologic materials, such as uranium and radon, also occur naturally in groundwa-
ter and have known adverse health effects. Chromium(VI) has recently been iden-
tified as a natural constituent of groundwater in California though its health ef-
fects are less well understood. Aesthetic problems are posed by some common
groundwater constituents such as iron, manganese, and sulfide.In addition, groundwater quality can be degraded by introduction of con-taminants from a wide range of human activities. These include increased salin-
ity, nitrate, pesticides, and pathogens from agriculture; pathogens from septic
systems; fuel hydrocarbons and oxygenates (e.g., MTBE) from underground stor-
age tanks; chlorinated solvents, metals, and perchlorate from industrial manufac-
turing; metals from mining, ore processing, and refining; and radionuclides from
nuclear weapons and energy production. Because of the long residence time of
groundwater and the inaccessibility and/or physical extent of sources of contami-
nation in the subsurface, groundwater remediation is often a slow and difficult
process.In order to use and manage groundwater resources productively and safely, itis necessary to understand the occurrence and mobility of naturally occurring
groundwater constituents and the fate and transport of contaminants in the sub-
surface environment. Insight into the biogeochemical processes by which chemi-
cal species are mobilized from or sequestered into immobile phases in the subsur-
face is crucial to this understanding.The chemical sciences offer insight into the molecular mechanisms of bio-geochemical processes, links between nano-, laboratory, and field scales through
modeling and simulation, sensors for the detection and quantification of chemical
constituents of groundwater, and chemical reagents and chemistry-based tech-
nologies for in situ remediation of contaminated aquifers.Yet, various needs must be addressed if the challenge of providing safe andadequate water supplies is to be met. The interrogation of biogeochemical pro-
cesses and subsurface materials at a fundamental level requires continued support
that recognizes both the value of studying well-controlled model systems and the
need to work directly in complex, environmental systems. Multidisciplinary col-
laborations that examine complex systems must be supported and complementedThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHARLES E. KOLB127by focused, disciplinary research. Priority should be given to the developmentand application of sensors for use in the subsurface environment and of tools for
the characterization of subsurface materials at the nano- and atomic scale. These
latter efforts should support activities at shared or user facilities such as the Stanford
Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory (http://www-ssrl.slac.stanford.edu/) and theEnvironmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory (http://www.emsl.pnl.gov:2080/).Finally, a crucial resource is provided by facilities, such as the USGS Cape Cod
Toxic Substances Hydrology Research Site,5 that allow field-scale experiments
to be conducted. Support should be provided for activities at this and additional
facilities, such as the Vadose Zone Research Park and the proposed Subsurface
Geosciences Laboratory at the Idaho National Engineering and Environmental
Laboratory (http://www.inel.gov/env-energyscience/geo/).The occurrence and mobility of harmful chemical substances, whether ofnatural origin or anthropogenic contaminants, in the subsurface environment pose
both an intellectual and fundamental scientific challenge and practical concerns
for the use and management of groundwater resources. The chemical sciences
offer powerful approaches toward understanding and mitigating the problems of
groundwater contamination. Society has benefited and will continue to benefit
from this important application of chemistry to environmental problems.AcknowledgmentsThe collaboration of P. OÕDay, S. Dixit, P. Kneebone, and D. Dempsey andthe cooperation of the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power in projects
described in this paper are gratefully acknowledged.MEASUREMENT CHALLENGES AND STRATEGIES INATMOSPHERIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMISTRYCharles E. KolbAerodyne Research, Inc.Atmospheric and environmental chemistry are rapidly evolving disciplinesthat play a critical role in a wide variety of current environmental issues spanning
local, regional, continental, and global scales. Effective management of these
issues generally requires knowledge of chemical and physical properties over a
wide range of spatial and temporal scales, with processes involving fluid media
(atmospheric, oceanic, surface, and groundwater) usually demanding frequent
updating (seconds to months, depending on chemical lifetimes and/or transport
rates). Chemical characterization methods that rely on traditional sample collec-
tion and subsequent analysis are generally slow, labor intensive, time consuming,
and costly. Alternatively, environmental systems may be monitored pseudo-The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128APPENDIX Dcontinuously at fixed-site instrumented stations, reporting ambient chemicalspecies concentrations with time resolutions ranging from minutes to months.
However, cost restraints usually severely limit the number of fixed-site monitor-
ing stations deployed so that impacted environments are sparsely sampled spa-
tially. The constraints imposed by traditional environmental measurement
methods generally lead to environmental systems being badly undersampled in
the spatial and/or temporal domains.The undersampling of environmental systems often has several unfortunateconsequences. First, it can lead to misdiagnosis of both the nature and extent of
environmental problems, leading to either an over- or underestimation of the seri-
ousness or extent of the problem. Second, environmental process models devel-
oped to assess the effectiveness of regulatory or other environmental manage-
ment challenges are often ÒvalidatedÓ with insufficient experimental data to truly
constrain the model, resulting in potentially unproductive or even counterproduc-
tive management strategies. Third, misunderstanding the nature and/or extent of
an environmental problem can obscure its interconnections with other environ-
mental problems, creating the possibility that management strategies may help
eliminate or mitigate the target issue but exacerbate connected problems.Environmental measurements are challenging for a number of reasons thatare summarized in the following section. After presenting measurement chal-
lenges, some promising strategies for addressing environmental management
challenges are advanced. Atmospheric chemistry measurement challenges and
strategies are emphasized, but many of the lessons learned there can be applied to
environmental problems with water, soil, and ecological components.Environmental Measurement ChallengesThe world is a pretty large place. The EarthÕs surface area is ~500 millionsquare kilometers, approximately two-thirds ocean and one-third land. For atmo-
spheric issues we are typically concerned with the two lowest atmospheric re-
gions, the troposphere and the stratosphere, which compose the first 50 km of the
atmosphere, with a volume of ~25 billion cubic kilometers. So atmospheric
chemical issues that are global in scope pose a real measurement challenge. Fur-
thermore, as noted above, the atmosphere is dynamic, so chemical and physical
characterization measurements must be repeated, sometime quite frequently, to
well describe and predict the evolution of processes of interest. Also, because the
atmosphere is highly dynamic, quantification of fluxesÑsurface-atmosphereemissions and depositions, stratospheric-tropospheric exchange, boundary layer
detrainment, transport across the Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ)Ñareoften as or more important than ambient concentration measurements.Atmospheric measurements are also challenging because they must deal withlow to extremely low concentrations of trace chemical species. The major com-
ponents (>99.999%) of the lowest portions of the atmosphere (the troposphere upThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHARLES E. KOLB129to ~10 km in altitude and the stratosphere between ~10 and ~50 km) are molecu-lar nitrogen, molecular oxygen, argon, water vapor, and carbon dioxide. Chem-
ists will recognize that all of these species are very stable, strongly bonded mol-
ecules or atoms that are essentially inert gases at normal atmospheric temperatures
(190-310 K). Indeed, without solar photons to break up selected molecules, atmo-
spheric chemistry would be very dull indeed. Atmospheric chemistry is domi-
nated by trace species, ranging in mixing ratios (mole fractions) from a few parts
per million, for methane in the troposphere and ozone in the stratosphere, to hun-
dredths of parts per trillion, or less, for highly reactive species such as the hy-
droxyl radical. It is also surprising that atmospheric condensed-phase material
plays very important roles in atmospheric chemistry, since there is relatively so
little of it. Atmospheric condensed-phase volume to gas-phase volume ratios
range from about 3  10
Ð7 for tropospheric clouds to ~3  10
Ð14 for background
stratospheric sulfate aerosol.Progress in understanding key atmospheric environmental issues well enoughto identify and test effective management strategies is very dependent on our
ability to measure the required range of chemical and physical parameters over
adequate spatial scales and appropriate time scales. It has been recognized for
more than a decade that the inability of available instrumentation to meet these
needs is a serious issue in both atmospheric chemistry research1 and assessments
of the effectiveness of air quality regulations.2Environmental Measurement StrategiesIt is important to recognize that environmental scientists make measurements
for a variety of reasons, each of which imposes its own requirements and con-
straints on the instrumentation and measurement systems to be used. General
environmental measurement modes include exploratory mapping and surveying,
process investigations, baseline establishment and trend monitoring, and emis-
sion-deposition and other flux measurements. Table 1 lists some of the goals that
drive each mode of measurement and some of the measurement system capabili-
ties that they require.While the various environmental measurement modes have a range of re-quirements, the undersampling problem discussed above is endemic. We are fre-
quently unable to make enough measurements under an adequate range of envi-
ronmental conditions over a sufficient range of spatial dimensions and time scales

to understand and describe the issue being investigated. Three general strategies
have been identified that can address the environmental undersampling issue.1 Albrittton, D. L.; Fehsenfeld, F. C. Tuck, A. F. 
Science 1990, 258, 75-81.
2Rethinking the Ozone Problem in Urban and Regional Air Pollution, National Research Council,National Academy Press, Washington, DC, 1991.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.130APPENDIX DThey are: (1) fast sensors on mobile platforms; (2) remote sensors; and (3) dis-tributed sensor networks. These strategies are listed in Box 1, which includes
some descriptors of their current or potential implementations. Of course, these
strategies are not mutually exclusive, remote sensing instruments can be mounted
on mobile platforms, with airborne and space-based passive (radiometers, spec-
trometers) and active (lidar, radar) remote sensing instruments playing a large
role in our understanding of global-scale environmental issues such as strato-
spheric ozone destruction and climate change. Further discussion of these three
approaches, their application to a variety of environmental problems, and the
instrument challenges they pose can be found in the report of a recent workshop
on environmental instrumentation sponsored by the National Science Founda-
tion.3 The environmental science community has made enormous advances in
TABLE 1
Environmental Measurement ModesModeGoal(s)Typical Requirements
ExploratoryEstablish ranges ofEasy sampling-analysis,
mapping-surveyingenvironmental variablesmobility
Investigate spatial-temporalvariabilityCheck for surprisesProcess investigationQuantitative understandingMultispecies-multiparameter
Predictive modelmeasurements, high temporal
and spatial resolution, fluxmeasurementsBaseline-trend monitoringQuantify current state andHigh precision, regular
rate of changerepetition, long-term stability,
Determine if regulations-adequate spatial and temporal

management strategiesresolution and coverage
are workingEmission-depositionEstablish pollutant sourcesMobility, moderate to very high
measurementsand quantify fluxestemporal and spatial resolution,
Check estimation algorithmsability to correlate with tracer

Improve environment modelsspecies
Determine if regulations-management strategies are
working3Instrumentation for Environmental Science 2000ÑReport of a Workshop and Symposium, Na-
tional Science Foundation, Arlington, VA, 2000.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHARLES E. KOLB131the past two decades in designing, fielding, and utilizing rapid sensors on mobileplatforms and remote sensing instruments. One point made in the NSF report is
that anticipated advances in sensors based on micro- and nanotechnology
Ñcoupled with advanced information technology solutions to the problems of data
collection, processing, dissemination, and display
Ñmay make the distributed sen-sor network measurement strategy much more powerful and affordable.Over the past 15 years, the atmospheric science community has developed aseries of mobile platforms with highly accurate and specific fast response instru-
mentation that have revolutionized atmospheric chemistry field measurements.
These include high-altitude aircraft, such as NASAÕs ER-2 and WB-57, andlower-altitude aircraft like the NASA DC-8, the National Oceanic and Atmo-
spheric Administration (NOAA) and Center for Interdisciplinary Remotely-Pi-
loted Aircraft Studies (CIRPAS) (Naval Postgraduate School) Twin Otters, the
National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) C-130, and the DOE G1. In
addition, mobile surface laboratories are now being used for a wide variety of
urban and regional air quality and emission source characterization studies.4 Typi-
cal configurations for the ER-2 and the mobile laboratory are shown in Figures 1
and 2.Interestingly, the mobile (comparatively) fast-sensor strategy has recentlybeen implemented for subsurface studies in the form of a truck-mounted
geotechnical probe equipped with miniaturized laser-induced fluorescence or la-
ser-induced breakdown spectroscopy sensors to detect vertical and horizontal dis-BOX 1
Strategies for Solving the Undersampling ProblemMobile Platform with Fast Sensors (Process Studies)
Platforms: manned-unmanned aircraft, balloons, trains, vansIn situ or remote sensors with 0.01 to 10 second responseRemote Sensing (Trends and Distributions)Satellite or airborne passive or active optical instrumentsDistributed Sensor Networks (Trends and Distributions)Large numbers of relatively inexpensive sensors linked bytelecommunication (wireless, fiber optic) networks4See for example, Lamb, B., McManus, J. B.; Shorter, J. H.; Kolb, C. E.; Mosher, B.; Harriss, R.C.; Allwine, E.; Blaha, D.; Howard, T.; Guenther, A.; Lott, R. A.; Siverson, R.; Westberg, H.;
Zimmerman, P. Environ. Sci. Technol. 1995, 29, 1468-1479; Jim
”nez, J. L.; McManus, J. B.; Shorter,J. H.; Nelson, D. D.; Zahniser, M. S.; Koplow, M.; McRae, G.J.; Kolb, C. E. Global Change Sci.2000, 2, 397-412.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132APPENDIX DFIGURE 1View of NASA WER-2 High Altitude Aircraft With Stratospheric ChemistryInstrument Package.FIGURE 2
Schematic of aerodyne research mobile laboratory deployed for air qualitystudies in Mexico City.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHARLES E. KOLB133tributions of aromatic organic and heavy metal contaminants, respectively.5 Box
2 lists the general goal and some of the desirable characteristics for exploratory
and process study field measurement campaigns that are required to take full
advantage of fast-sensorÐmobile platform strategy. Box 3 illustrates some of theevolution in environmental analytical instrumentation (especially in atmospheric
measurement technology) that has motivated the development of instrument suites
such as those illustrated in Figures 1 and 2.In order to produce the instruments and platforms that meet the specifica-tions required by the measurement strategies listed in Box 1, advances in en-
abling technologies must be exploited. Table 2 lists some of the enabling tech-
nologies that are currently undergoing rapid development and presents examples
of the improvements in environmental instrumentation and measurement plat-
forms they have or may soon allow.BOX 2
Innovative Atmospheric Chemistry FieldMeasurement DesignGoalExploit capabilities of advanced instruments and platforms to form effec-

tive and responsive field measurement systems tailored to the issuesbeing addressed.Field Measurement System Characteristics
¥Simultaneous real-time measurement of many trace species¥Each measurement technique calibrated and quality assured¥Mobile, fast-response instruments replace multiple, slow, fixed-sitemonitors¥Advanced platforms cover spatial scales necessary to addressproblem¥Careful blending of static and mobile point and remote sensingmeasurements to assure intercompatibility and synergy¥Immediate model analysis of field data to assess measurementsuccess and scope¥Ongoing measurement efforts5See for example, Sinfeld, J. V.; Germaine, J, T.; Hemond, H.F. J. Geotech Geoenviron. 1999, 125,1072-1077; Theriault, G. A.; Bodensteiner, S.; Liberman, H. Field Anal. Chem. Technol. 1998, 2,117-125; Instrumentation for Environmental Science 2000ÑReport of a Workshop and Symposium,National Science Foundation, Arlington, VA, 2000.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.134APPENDIX DFigure 3 shows an airborne version of one recently developed fast responseinstrument made possible by recent advances in materials, vacuum technology,
ion optics, fluid dynamics, information technology, and control technology.6 This
aerosol mass spectrometer allows the real-time measurement and display of the
nonrefractory, size-resolved (~30 nm to ~1500 nm) ambient aerosol particle mass
loadings. Figure 4 shows the ambient fine aerosol nonrefractory composition,BOX 3
Atmospheric Species Measurements EvolutionMeasurement Science:Wet Chemistry 
 Electro- or Ion Optics
Sampling Frequency:Batch 
 Continuous
Analysis Rate:Off-Line 
 Real Time
Sample Preparation:Concentration-Conversion 
 Whole Air
Specificity:Species Classes 
 Species 
 Isotopomers
TABLE 2
Impacts of Enabling TechnologiesTechnologyExamples of Evolving Impacts
Structural materialsLighter, more robust sensors and sensor platforms
Energy systemsSmaller, longer lasting off-grid power sources, enhanced
platform propulsion systemsElectro-opticsCompact, efficient solid state lasers and detectors, compact
long-path sampling cells, detector arraysSemiconductor technologyCompact, robust electronics, throw-away sensors and data
systemsIon opticsIon traps, smaller TOF and quadrupole mass filter
spectrometersVacuum technologyFieldable sensors based on electron, ion, molecular, particle
beam methodsInformation technologyReal-time data processing and display, multisensor
integration, data fusion and assimilationControl technologyAutonomous instrument-platform operation, real-time
experimental designFluid dynamicsMore efficient airborne platforms, better sampling systems
BiotechnologySmaller, faster diagnostics for microbial and biologically
active moleculesNanotechnologySmaller, lighter, cheaper everything
6Jayne, J. T.; Leard, D. C.; Zhang, X.; Davidovits, P.; Smith, K. A.; Kolb, C.E.; Worsnop, D. RAerosol Sci. Technol. 2000, 33, 49-70.
The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHARLES E. KOLB135Physical   Power: 
600 watts   Mass: 190 kg   Size: ~36Ó x 36Ó x 24Ó
(plus half rack of electronics)
Performance   Measurement size range: 30 nm     to 1 m   Sensitivity: 
0.01  g/m3 (60s sec.)   Sampling Rate: 100 cm3 min-1   Maximum Data Rate: 100 HzG1 Package
Integral size and composition information for
non-refractory bulk constituents
on seconds time scaleFIGURE 3
An Aerosol mass spectrometer allowing real-time size-resolved chemical spe-ciation measurements of fine aerosols, free standing and packaged for airborne measure-ments.706050403020100gm-312:00 PM7/22/200212:30 PM1:00 PM1:30 PM2:00 PM2:30 PM3:00 PM3:30 PMDate and Time
80006000400020000Alt (ft) Nitrate Sulphate Ammonium Organics Water
AltitudeFIGURE 4
Aerosol mass spectrometer airborne measurements of fine particle composi-tional mass loading and size distributions showing two sulfate aerosol layers in air masses
from the Ohio River valley.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136APPENDIX Dmass loading, and size distribution measured as a function of aircraft altitude ofthe coast of Massachusetts in July 2002. The two large sulfate peaks are sampling
air with back trajectories that left the surface over the Ohio River valley two days
earlier.SummaryIt is clear that innovative instruments and measurement strategies are re-quired to cure the undersampled environment problem. They can be developed
and deployed if ongoing advances in a wide range of enabling technologies are
adapted and exploited. For many environmental challenges, measurement require-
ments favor real-time, mobile, autonomous instruments. The resulting quantum
leaps in measurement capabilities will have the potential to revolutionize atmo-
spheric and environmental chemistry.ENVIRONMENTAL BIOINORGANIC CHEMISTRYFran“ois M.M. MorelPrinceton UniversityThe coevolution of life and geochemistry on the Earth has resulted in anextraordinarily tight coupling between the cycles of bioactive elements at the
surface of our planet and the growth of microorganisms. This is evidently true of
major plant nutrients such carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus. It is also true of
many essential trace metals, such iron, manganese, copper, cobalt, nickel, and
zinc, that serve as active centers in enzymes that catalyze the transformations of
carbon and nitrogen in terrestrial and aquatic systems. The biological availability
and use of these metals are modulated by intracellular and extracellular binding
compounds produced by microorganisms. The chemistry of bioactive metals in
the environment, including their coordination to binding agents and to appropri-
ate centers in proteins, thus controls the efficiency of critical environmental pro-
cesses that govern the global cycles of carbon and nitrogen. A detailed under-
standing of the bioinorganic chemistry of these metals in various environs and of
their effects on geochemically important processes presents major challenges and
opportunities to environmental chemists as illustrated in the three oceanographic
examples below.The increase in O2 and concomitant decrease in CO
2 caused by the evolution
of oxygenic autotrophs on the Earth, has resulted in an undersaturation of the
main (and ancient) carboxylating enzyme, ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase,

responsible for the first step in carbon fixationÑthe dark reaction of photosyn-thesis. To palliate this difficulty, a number of species of marine phytoplankton
have evolved carbon concentrating mechanisms that all involve some forms ofThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FRAN‡OIS M.M. MOREL137the zinc enzyme carbonic anhydrase.1 This enzyme catalyzes the hydration of
CO2 and the dehydration of HCO
3Ð. In the surface oceans, which are singularlydepleted in zinc, a number of phytoplankton species have evolved the ability to
replace zinc with cobalt and cadmium in carbonic anhydrase.
2,3 In diatoms, which
are arguably the most important primary producer in the modern oceans, it ap-
pears that the activity of the external carbonic anhydrase is enabled by the forma-
tion of a silica frustule that serves, in part, as a proton buffer at the surface of the
cell.4 Unraveling the conditions that allow for an efficient Zn-Co-Cd replace-
ment in carbonic anhydrase (and similar enzymes) in marine autotrophs and of
the use of silica as a local proton buffer will provide a molecular understanding of
the links between the global cycles of these trace metals and of CO2 and SiO
2.The increase in O2 concentration in the oceans since the evolution of oxy-
genic photosynthesis has also led to a massive decrease in the concentrations of
metals such as iron and manganese, which form insoluble oxy-hydroxides. These
metals, particularly iron, are important in the transfer of electrons in photosynthe-
sis and respiration and as metals centers in a wide variety of redox enzymes. Not
surprisingly, there is mounting evidence that modern marine microorganisms
wage a fierce Òiron warÓ against each other and that many have acquired the
ability to replace iron with other metals in key compounds. For example, the
production of marine siderophores allows some marine bacteria to sequester iron
and limit its availability to organisms that do not possess the appropriate transport
proteins (Figure 1).5 As a countermeasure, some eukaryotic phytoplankton ex-
tract the iron from Fe(III)-siderophore complexes by reduction of Fe(III) to Fe(II)
extracellularly.6 We need to elucidate the chemical forms of iron in seawater and
the mechanisms of iron acquisition by various microorganisns in order to assess
the role of iron in limiting primary production in the oceans7 and in controlling
the assemblage of planktonic species.Nitrogen is generally considered the most important limiting plant nutrient inthe oceans. The processes that determine the total concentration of fixed nitrogen
in surface seawaterÑparticularly N2 fixation and denitrification
Ñthus exert afundamental control on marine primary production and on the resulting seques-1Badger, M. R.; Hanson, D.; Price, G. D. Functional Plant Biology 2002, 29, 161-173.
2Morel, F. M. M.; Reinfelder, J. R.; Roberts, S. B.; Chamberlain, C. P.; Lee, J. G.; and Yee, D.Nature 1994,
 369, 740-742.3Lane, T. W.; Morel, F. M. M. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
 2000, 97, 4627-4631.
4Milligan, A. J.; Morel, F. M. M. Science 2002,
 297, 1848-1850.
5Butler, A. Science 1998, 
281, 207-210.
6Maldonado, M. T.; Price, N. M. Journal of Phycology 2001, 37, 298-309.
7Coale, K. H.; Fitzwater, S. E.; Gordon, R. M.; Johnson, K. S.; Barber, R. T. Nature 1996, 379,621-624.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138APPENDIX DFIGURE 1 Two examples of ampiphilic siderophores produced by marine heterotrophicbacteria. Redrawn from Martinez et al. (2000).tration of CO2 in the deep oceans. All the steps in the nitrogen cycle are catalyzed
by metalloenzymes (Figure 2). For example, all forms of nitrogenase (the enzyme
responsible for N2 fixation) contain a large number of iron atoms. Iron, molybde-
num, and copper are also involved in the various enzymes that carry out denitrifi-
cation. There is presently wide speculation that iron availability limits the overallThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FRAN‡OIS M.M. MOREL139FIGURE 2 A diagram of the nitrogen cycle with catalyzing enzymes and metal require-ments of each step. NOTE: AMO = ammonium mono-oxygenase; HAO = hydroxylamineoxidoreductase; NAR = membrane-bound respiratory nitrate reductase; NAP = periplasmicrespiratory nitrate reductase; NR = assimilatory nitrate reductase; NIR = respiratory nitrite
reductase; NiR = assimilatory nitrite reductase; NIT = nitrogenase; NOR = nitric oxidereductase; N2OR = nitrous oxide reductase.rate of nitrogen fixation in the oceans.8,9 There is also some evidence that, in
some suboxic waters, the concentration of available copper may be too low for
the activity of the copper enzyme nitrous oxide reductase and result in N2O accu-mulation and release to the atmosphere.10 Understanding the nitrogen cycle of
the oceans and the release of some important greenhouse gases such as N2O to theatmosphere thus requires that we elucidate the acquisition of metals such as iron
and copper and their biochemical utilization by various types of marine microbes.As exemplified above, the major goals of environmental bioinorganic chem-istry are to elucidate the structures, mechanisms, and interactions of important
ÒnaturalÓ metalloenzymes and metal-binding compounds in the environment and
to assess their effects on major biogeochemical cycles such as those of carbon
and nitrogen. By providing an understanding of key chemical processes in the
biogeochemical cycles of elements, such a molecular approach to the study of
global processes should help unravel the interdependence of life and geochemis-
try on planet Earth and their coevolution through geological times.8Falkowski, P. G. Nature 1997, 
387, 272-275.
9Berman-Frank, I.; Cullen, J. T.; Shaked, Y.; Sherrell, R. M.; Falkowski, P. G. Limnology andOceanography 2001, 46, 1249-1260.
10Granger, J.; Ward, B. Limnology and Oceanography 2002, 48, 313-318.
The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.140APPENDIX DENVIRONMENTALLY SOUND AGRICULTURAL CHEMISTRY:FROM PROCESS TECHNOLOGY TO BIOTECHNOLOGYMichael K. SternMonsanto CompanyAgricultural practices are undergoing a transformation driven partially byadvances at the interface of chemistry and biotechnology. This paper outlines
some of the new technologies that are playing an integral role in catalyzing that
change. Topics of discussion include new chemical process technology and
chemical catalysis that allows for more efficient production of herbicides as well
as transgenic crops and their benefits to agriculture and the environment.Glyphosate is the active ingredient in Roundup herbicide. The processMonsanto uses to manufacture glyphosate relies heavily on chemical catalysis
(Figure 1). Improvements in our catalyst have driven profound environmental
and economic benefits in the manufacturing of glyphosate. One of the main
themes around environmental chemistry moving into the future will be a renewed
focus on the development of novel homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts.
One of the beautiful things about catalysts is their ability to positively impact the
economics of a process often without the requirement for major capital invest-
ments.FIGURE 1
The current glyphosate process.Catalyst
GI  + O2StepsPCl3DSIDA
GIGlyphosate
N HO-NaONa-OOOHONOOHPO3H2N HH2O3POOHDEA   or HCN + CH2O + NH3P4 + ChlorineDSIDA + Formaldehyde
CatalystThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MICHAEL K. STERN141A key intermediate in the manufacturing of glyphosate is disodiumiminodiacetic acid (DSIDA). Originally an HCN-based route was the only pro-
cess used to manufacture this product. Some of the advantages of this technology
are (1) itÕs proven, (2) it uses readily available raw materials, and (3) the processtypically gives good yields. However there are a lot of challenges associated with
this chemistry. For instance, a considerable amount of waste is produced and
HCN is a difficult raw material to handle due to its toxicity. Accordingly,
Monsanto wanted to explore other technologies when we were faced with the
need to expand our DSIDA capacity in the early 1990s.We ultimately settled on a novel catalytic route for the production of DSIDA.
The initial catalyst was a Raney copper composition that allowed us to convert
diethanolamine, to DSIDA in a really interesting dehydrogenation reaction. This
is an endothermic reaction that gives off hydrogen as a by-product. We were able
to get the facility to work with this catalyst, but there were a lot of operational
issues associated with this technology. Raney copper is a very malleable soft
metal which resulted in catalyst stability issues. Ultimately we needed to go ahead
and find something that was better.Copper is essentially the only metal that catalyzes this reaction. The techni-cal challenge was to find a way to stabilize copper under the reaction conditions.
We spent a lot of time looking at whether you could put copper directly on car-
bon. It turns out that you really canÕt do that very well. Copper likes to movearound, particularly under the reaction conditions. So a new catalyst technology
was developed using platinum as an anchor that was then coated with copper.
This resulted in a very stable catalyst (Figure 2). The new catalyst technology had
significant environmental benefits. These included the use of less toxic raw mate-
rials and the elimination of nearly all of the waste produced by the older technol-
ogy.FIGURE 2
Second-generation catalyst.PtPtPtPtPtPtCuCu
CuCopper Plating Technology
Carbon Support
The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.142APPENDIX DLet me switch gears to another catalytic reaction. This is the reaction wherewe take glyphosate intermediate and convert it to glyphosate using a carbon cata-
lyst. This appears to be a very simple reaction, but there are several technical
issues related to the production of by-products. The problem is that the by-prod-
ucts go ahead and react with your desired product to make other undesired by-
products. What we needed was a catalyst that could do two reactions at the same
time. The first reaction converts glyphosate intermediate to glyphosate and the
other is to react away the undesirable by-products. We were successful in devel-
oping this type of catalyst which resulted in significant environmental and com-
mercial benefits (Table 1).The major benefits associated with this technology result from the more effi-cient use of water in the process. With the implementation of this new catalyst
technology we have been able to reduce the amount of water flowing through our
process by nearly 300 million gallons a year. This resulted in a concomitant re-
duction in flows to our biotreatment systems that reduce the amount of biosolids
we send to landfill. Overall this was a very successful project for Monsanto.IÕd like to change focus from catalysis to another theme in green chemistry:that of atom efficiency. If you noticed in the glyphosate process, weÕre not com-pletely atom efficient. This is due to the fact that putting on the phosphonomethyl
group is challenging. The issue is that if you donÕt protect the primary amine, youend up doing two phosphonomethyl reactions that yield the undesirable product
glyphosine. The current solution to this problem is to protect the primary amine
with a carboxymethyl group, which ultimately gets removed in the last step of the
process. The challenge was to find a more atom-efficient protecting group.A team investigated this and developed a whole new technology based onnovel platinum catalysts. This technology allows for the selective demethylation
of N-methylglyphosate to produce glyphosate acid directly. This would save oneTABLE 1Environmental Benefits of New Catalyst and Process TechnologyAnnual Reductions Projected by 2002ResourcesSteam (BTUs/yr)880,000,000,000
Demineralized water (gal/yr)380,000,000
WasteFlow to biosystems (gal/yr)800,000,000
SARA 313 deep well injection (lb/yr)52,000

Biosludge (lb/yr)8,000,000
Land-filled solid waste (lb/yr)1,380,000
SARA 313 air emissions (lb/yr)17,600

Carbon dioxide production (lb/yr)100,000,000
NOTE: SARA = Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MICHAEL K. STERN143carbon atom when compared to the traditional route. However it was also discov-ered that you could use other protecting groups besides methyl. In fact it was
possible to use an isopropyl group, which under the reaction conditions could be
removed to generate acetone and glyphosate. The acetone can be recycled back
into the process, resulting in an extremely atom-efficient system (Figure 3).As mentioned above, glyphosate is the active ingredient in Roundup herbi-cide. Roundup plays an important part in the new wave of agricultural products
derived from biotechnology. This new technology has many economic and envi-
ronmental benefits. Expansion of the global acreage planted with Roundup Ready
crops has resulted in a reduction of the use of pesticides by nearly 50 million
pounds per year. This can affect groundwater positively by reducing agricultural
chemical contamination in watersheds where a large percentage of Roundup
Ready crops are planted. When crops such as cotton and corn are protected against
insect pest through biotechnology, we also see a benefit to nontarget organisms.
So in summary, biotechnology has delivered significant environmental benefits.
Many of these benefits are consistent with the EPAÕs guidelines and focus.In conclusion, the chemical industry is going to be even more dramaticallytransformed in the future, and key advances will be made at the interface of chem-
istry and biology. Discovery and development of new environmentally beneficial
catalyst and process technologies will be critical for the chemical industry to
thrive in the United States. The new technologies will need to be relevant and
have a positive impact on the earnings and competitiveness of the chemical in-
dustry. Advances in catalysis will be a key driver in the development of cleaner
and more efficient chemical processes. Finally, breakthrough discoveries are
likely to be the products of interdisciplinary work teams.H2O3PNCO
2HO2H2O3PHNCO
2HPtO+H2O3PNCO
2HN-isopropyl glyphosate
NCO
2HMoedritzer-Irani
+  NH
3OH2cat.
NH2NCO
2HN-isopropyl glycine
FIGURE 3
N-isopropyl glyphosate: an atom-efficient intermediate.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.144APPENDIX DSTABLE ISOTOPES AND THE FUTURE OF ENVIRONMENTAL-CHEMICAL RESEARCHMark H. ThiemensUniversity of California, San DiegoIn 1947, Harold Urey and, simultaneously, Bigeleisen and Mayer developedthe formalism for determination of the position of equilibria in isotope exchange
reactions. These papers, for the first time, calculated at high precision the posi-
tion of isotope exchange equilibria as a function of temperature. In the same year,
Nier reported the development of the double collector isotope ratio mass spec-
trometer, which allowed for measurements of isotope ratios at a precision suffi-
cient to measure the modest isotope ratio changes associated with the temperature
dependencies of exchange reactions. In this sense, 1947 represents the birth of
stable isotope chemistry. Subsequently, an enormous range of applications has
emerged utilizing isotope ratio measurements as a probe of natural processes that
include studies of atmospheric chemical processes, paleoceanography and cli-
mate, stable isotope geochemistry, and planetary sciences.Although the utilization of stable isotopes as a means to resolve environmen-tal processes has had many applications for more than a half-century, there have
been some limitations on the extent to which specific processes, both chemical
and physical, might be resolved. These limits arise because with only a single
isotope ratio, there is a certain lack of specificity associated with the measure-
ments.In 1983, Thiemens and Heisenreich reported a new isotope effect. This par-ticular effect was unique in that the isotope ratios (e.g., of oxygen) alter on a basis
other than mass. For example, in the case of ozone formation, the isotopomers16O16O17O16O16O18Oform at essentially equally rates that exceed those associated with16O16O16O.These reactions proceed in part on the basis of isotopic symmetry, with the asym-metric species forming at a rate greater than the purely symmetric species. Marcus
and colleagues at Cal Tech have developed a chemical formalism that accounts
for a large proportion of the laboratory experiments. There remain some funda-
mental issues, however, with respect to a fully developed quantum-level theory.While additional theoretical formalisms for the isotopic fractionation eventare still needed, the mass-independent isotopic fractionation process has provided
a new and definitive mechanism by which an extraordinary range of environmentalThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MARK H. THIEMENS145processes may be resolved. The inclusion of the second isotope ratio measure-ment adds a sensitive probe of processes that may not be afforded by concentra-
tion or single isotope ratio measurements. As such, the use of mass-independent
isotope compositions of environmental molecular species has provided a new
probe to understand natural processes and to characterize anthropogenic impacts.
There will be a wide range of new and significant applications in the future that
will provide a powerful complement to other measurement techniques and model-

ing efforts. These include studies of the atmosphere, hydrosphere, and geosphere,
as well as paleoenviroments and global environmental change. Such studies will
be of critical importance in evaluating and predicting global environmental
sustainability.Present and Future ApplicationsThere exist numerous recent review articles on the subject of mass-indepen-dent isotope effects and details are available in these articles.1,2,3
 A key point of
the culmination of observations is that the most important chemical issues in the
environment today, and as expected in the future, may be studied utilizing mass-
independent isotopic compositions. In the context of this report, this represents a
future chemical frontier area of chemical-environmental research.There exist a number of gases that possess mass-independent isotopic com-positions, and with future measurements, the frontiers of environmental chemis-
try may be extended. The following are specific, though not inclusive, examples.Stratospheric and Mesospheric CO2It was first observed by Thiemens et al.4 that stratospheric CO
2 possesses a
large and variable mass-independent isotopic composition. This composition was
suggested as deriving from isotopic exchange with O(1D), the product of ozonephotolysis.5,6
 As later confirmed by rocket-borne collection of stratospheric and
mesospheric air, this unique isotopic signature provides an ideal tracer of odd
oxygen chemistry of the EarthÕs upper atmosphere, one of the most importantupper atmospheric processes. There are, however, several features that require
further measurement (laboratory and atmospheric) and theoretical considerations.1Thiemens, M. H. Science 1999, 283, 341.
2Weston, R. E. Chem. Rev. 1999, 99, 2115.
3Thiemens, M. H.; Savarino, J.; Farquhar, J.; Bao, H. Acct. Chem. Res. 2001, 34, 645.
4Thiemens, M. H.; Jackson T. L.; Mauersberger, K.; Schuler, B.; Morton, J. Geophys. Res. Lett.
1991, 18, 669.
5Yung, Y. L.; DeMore; W. B.; Pinto; J. P. Geophys. Res. Lett.
 1991, 18, 13.
6Yung, Y. L.; Lee, A. Y. T.; Iriow, W. B.; Demaro, W. B.; Chen, J. J. Geophys. Res. 1997, 102,10857.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.146APPENDIX DThis represents a future goal in need of pursuit because both climate and chemicalbudgeting considerations are impacted. As discussed in an earlier report,7 upper
atmospheric CO2 possesses a mass-independent isotopic composition, while tro-
pospheric CO2 is strictly mass dependent (as a result of equilibrium isotopic ex-
change with water). This renders CO2 an ideal tracer of stratosphere and tropo-
sphere mixing. Quantification of this process is also of significance for
understanding global chemical budgets and lifetimes of several greenhouse spe-
cies. Given that significant uncertainties remain, future measurements will be
crucial in quantification of stratospheric and tropospheric mixing and in develop-
ment of remediation policies associated with global climate change.Greenhouse Gas CharacterizationAs discussed in the review article,8 several greenhouse gases have been ob-
served to possess mass-independent isotopic compositions. These include O3, CO,and N2O. In each instance, this measurement has provided significant insightunattainable by other measurement techniques. The case of atmospheric N2O isparticularly interesting. Nitrous oxide is a greenhouse gas with a warming capac-
ity nearly 200 times that of CO2 on a per-molecule basis, and serves as a major
sink for stratospheric ozone via photochemical destruction. In spite of decades of
research, the N2O budget is still inadequately understood. Most recently, isotopicmeasurements of a new variety have proven to be particularly valuable. These
observations utilize high-precision measurements of the isotopomeric fragments
of NO in a mass spectrometer.9,10,11,12
 From such measurements, the internal
N2O isotopomeric distribution may be determined. It is now recognized that theisotopomeric distributions of15N14N16O15N14N18O14N15N16O14N15N18O7Thiemens, M. H.; Jackson, T.; Zipf, E.C.; Erdman, P.W.; Van Egmond, C. Science 1995, 
270,969.8Thiemens, M. H. Science 1999, 283, 341.
9Toyoda, S.; Yoshida, N. Anal. Chem., 1999, 71, 4711-4718.
10Brenninkmeijer, C. A. M.; Rockmann, T. Rapid Commun. Mass Spec. 1999, 13, 2028.
11Rockmann, T.; Kaiser, J.; Crowley, J. W.; Brenninkmeijer, C. A. M.; Crutzen, P. Geophys. Res.Lett. 2001,
 28, 503.
12Toyoda, S.; Yoshida, N. C.; Urabe, T.; Aoki, S.; Nakazawa, T.; Sugawara, S.; Honde, H. J.Geophys. Res. 2001,
 106, 7515.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MARK H. THIEMENS147are highly characteristic of specific processes, such as photolysis or defining indi-vidual point sources (biologic, abiologic).In the future, this particular variety of measurements will provide a new levelof detail in understanding the global atmospheric cycles of N2O as well as theother gases. There is a clear need for expansion of such measurements in a variety
of global environments and to obtain fundamental physical-chemical information
simultaneously. With such concomitant developments, new details of N2O atmo-spheric processes may be obtained.Atmospheric Aerosol Sulfate and NitrateAtmospheric sulfate aerosols are known to exert a significant influence onEarthÕs surficial processes. They mediate climate, both as cloud condensationnuclei and as light-scattering agents. Sulfate is also a pernicious respirable mol-
ecule with well-known consequences for human health. It is estimated that there
are more than 60,000 deaths a year from cardiovascular disease associated with
aerosol inhalation. Recent studies have demonstrated a link to cellular damage.
Additionally, following wet and dry deposition, sulfate destroys biota, alters
biodiversity, and causes pervasive structural damage. The segregation of sulfur
between gas- and aqueous-phase oxidative processes has implications for the de-
gree of indirect effect of sulfate aerosols on climate due to its dependence on
aerosol number densities. Sulfate derived from gas-phase oxidation results in new

particle formation. However, for aqueous-phase oxidation, the sulfate is gener-
ated on a previously existing particle and does not contribute to the total aerosol
number.It has recently been shown that atmospheric sulfate possesses a significantand variable oxygen mass-independent isotopic composition. From a series of
laboratory and atmospheric measurements it has been demonstrated that these
measurements provide a highly sensitive mechanism by which the relative pro-
portions of hetero- and homogeneous  oxidative pathways may be quantified.

This represents a significant observational advancement, and future measurements
on a global scale will dramatically enhance understanding of this important atmo-
spheric species. It has also been shown that sulfate oxygen isotopic measure-
ments of aerosols collected during the Indian Ocean Experiment (INDOEX) re-
vealed that the Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) is a source of new aerosol
particles, which has significant consequences. First, this is a previously unrecog-
nized process unaccounted for in any global climate model. Secondly, this is a
source of large (micron-sized) particles and the mechanism associated with their
formation is unknown. Gas-to-particle conversion processes produce submicron-
rather than micron-sized particles. The likely mechanism for this process may be
surface catalysis, possibly on carbonaceous particles. Should this be confirmed,
there would be significant consequences. Climate models assume that sulfate par-
ticles are white and reflective of visible light. If sulfur is catalytically oxidized onThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.148APPENDIX Dcarbon surfaces, the sign of sulfate radiative forcing may be the reverse of whathas been assumed, in which case there could be significant error in climate mod-
els. It is therefore of considerable importance that the nature and magnitude of
this process be resolved. Fully understanding the reaction pathways can be ac-
complished only by an intensive combination of isotopic measurements, climate
models, and laboratory studies of the relevant surface catalytic reactions. Such a
program typifies the future needs of environmental chemical research.As is the case of sulfate, nitrate aerosols also possess large, mass-independentisotopic compositions. Nitrate concentrations may double in the next half-century
with severe environmental consequences, including alteration of biodiversity,
enhanced algal blooms, and loss of agricultural productivity. As in the case of
sulfate, the large mass-independent isotopic signature has afforded new insights
into a major global cycleÑthe nitrogen cycle. There remains a large range ofstudies to be pursued, which will develop new understanding of the chemistry of
the EarthÕs environment. Once more, this may be accomplished by combinedlaboratory physical-chemical measurements, field observations, and modeling
efforts. The ultimate consequence is a significant advancement in understanding
global interactions of the chemical environment.SummaryThe utilization of mass-independent isotopic measurements of a wide varietyof atmospheric, hydrospheric, and geologic species has advanced understanding
of a wide range of environmental processes. The future development of the utili-
zation and understanding of this new technique clearly will have numerous appli-
cations that should, and will, be advanced. Issues in climate change, health, agri-
culture, biodiversity, and water quality all may be addressed. Simultaneous with
the acquisition of new environmental insight will be enhanced understanding of
fundamental chemical physics.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.149EBiographies of Workshop Speakers
James G. Anderson is Philip S. Weld Professor of Atmospheric Chemistryat Harvard University. He received his B.S. in physics from the University of
Washington and his Ph.D. in physics-astrogeophysics from the University of
Colorado. His research addresses three domains within physical chemistry: (1)
chemical reactivity viewed from the microscopic perspective of electron struc-
ture, molecular orbitals, and reactivities of radical-radical and radical-molecule
systems; (2) chemical catalysis sustained by free-radical chain reactions that dic-
tate the macroscopic rate of chemical transformation in the EarthÕs stratosphere
and troposphere;  and (3) mechanistic links between chemistry, radiation, and

dynamics in the atmosphere that control climate. Studies are carried out both in
the laboratory, where elementary processes can be isolated, and within natural
systems, in which reaction networks and transport patterns are dissected by estab-
lishing cause and effect using simultaneous, in situ detection of free radicals,
reactive intermediates, and long-lived tracers. Professor Anderson is a member of
the National Academy of Sciences.Thomas W. Asmus is a senior research executive at DaimlerChrysler Cor-poration. He is the corporate adviser on powertrain technologies and key corpo-
rate technical representative in industry-government joint technical activities. He
represents most of the research activities at the Chrysler Group. He has been
involved in many facets of engine R&D activities including energy management
systems, alternative engines, emissions control, and fuel economy improvement
for nearly 30 years. Dr. Asmus is a Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) fellow

and received the 1999 American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME)
Soichiro Honda Lecture Award, which was established by ASME to recognizeThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.150APPENDIX Eindividual achievement or outstanding contributions in the field of personal trans-portation. Dr. Asmus is a member of the National Academy of Engineering.Ruben G. Carbonell is Frank Hawkins Kenan Distinguished Professor ofChemical Engineering at North Carolina State University. He is currently direc-
tor of the William R. Kenan, Jr., Institute for Engineering, Technology, and Sci-
ence at North Carolina State University, codirector of the National Science Foun-
dation (NSF) Science and Technology Center for Environmentally Responsible
Solvents and Processes, and director of the Kenan Center for the Utilization of
Carbon Dioxide in Manufacturing.  His main areas of research include the appli-
cation of transport phenomena and colloid and surface science principles to the
development of coating, extraction and reaction processes based on carbon diox-
ide as a solvent, and affinity chromatographic separation processes for biological
molecules using ligands derived from combinatorial libraries. He earned his B.S.
in chemical engineering from Manhattan College and Ph.D. in chemical engi-
neering from Princeton University.  He won the North Carolina State University

Alumni Association Outstanding Research Award in 1989; the R.J. Reynolds
Award for Excellence in Teaching, Research, and Extension from the North Caro-

lina State College of Engineering in 1990; and the Alcoa Outstanding Research
Award from the College of Engineering in 2001.Uma Chowdhry is vice president for Central Research and Development
(CR&D) at the DuPont Company. She joined DuPont in 1977 as a research scien-
tist in CR&D and spent the first 11 years of her career there in various research
and management roles. She subsequently served as laboratory director and busi-
ness manager in the Electronics Department before moving to the Chemicals Sec-
tor as laboratory director of Jackson Lab. From 1993 to 1995, she served as R&D
director for Specialty Chemicals and was appointed business director for the
DuPont Terathane business in 1995. In 1997, Dr. Chowdhry moved back to Spe-
cialty Chemicals as business planning and R&D director. In 1999, she was ap-
pointed director of DuPont EngineeringÕs Technology Division. Born and raisedin Mumbai, India, she came to the United States in 1968 with a B.S. in physics
from the Indian Institute of Science, Mumbai University; she received an M.S.
from Caltech in engineering science and a Ph.D. in materials science from the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). Dr. Chowdhry is a fellow of the
American Ceramic Society and a member of the National Academy of Engineer-
ing.Barry Dellinger is the Patrick F. Taylor Chair of the Environmental Impactof Treatment of Hazardous Wastes and professor of chemistry at Louisiana State
University (LSU).  He is the director of the LSU Intercollege Environmental

Cooperative and the acting director of the Biodynamics Institute.  He is a member

of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Science Advisory Board
Environmental Engineering Committee.  From 1981 to 1998, he was group leader

of environmental sciences and engineering at the University of Dayton where he
also held a joint faculty appointment.  From 1978-1981 he was a senior project
The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX E151scientist at Northrop Services Inc.  He holds a Ph.D. in physical chemistry from
Florida State University and a B.S. in chemistry from the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill.  His research interests include origin and control of toxic

combustion by-products, thermal treatment of hazardous wastes, pathways of for-
mation of dioxins, gas-phase and surface-catalyzed elementary reaction kinetics,
and sources and health impacts of environmentally persistent free radicals.  He is

a recipient of the Charles A. Lindberg Certificate of Merit, the Engineering and
Science Foundation Award for Outstanding Professional Achievement, the
Wohleben-Hochwald Researcher of the Year Award, the Ohio General Assembly
Award for Research Excellence, and corecipient of numerous EPA Science to
Achieve Results (STAR) research awards.David A. Dixon is a Battelle fellow in the Fundamental Science Directorateat the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL), where he previously served
as associate director for theory, modeling, and simulation at the William R. Wiley
Environmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory. His main research interest is the
use of numerical simulation to solve complex chemical problems with a primary
focus on the quantitative prediction of molecular behavior.  He uses numerical

simulation methods to obtain quantitative results for molecular systems of inter-
est to experimental chemists and engineers with a specific focus on the design of
new materials and production processes. Before moving to PNNL, he was re-
search fellow and research leader in computational chemistry at DuPont Central
Research and Development (1983-1995) and a member of the Chemistry Depart-
ment at the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis (1977-1983). He earned his
B.S. in chemistry from the California Institute of Technology and his Ph.D. in
physical chemistry from Harvard University, where he served as a junior fellow
of the Society of Fellows, Harvard University. He is a fellow of the American
Association for the Advancement of Science, and a fellow of the American Physi-
cal Society. He is a recipient of the 1989 Leo Hendrik Baekeland Award pre-
sented by the American Chemical Society, the Federal Laboratory Consortium
Technology Transfer Award (2000), and the 2003 American Chemical Society
Award for Creative Work in Fluorine Chemistry.William H. Farland is the acting deputy assistant administrator for science
in the U.S. Environmental Protection AgencyÕs Office of Research and Develop-ment. A member of the governmentÕs Senior Executive Service, Dr. FarlandÕspermanent position is director of the EPAÕs National Center for EnvironmentalAssessment, which has major responsibility for the conduct of chemical specific
risk assessments in support of EPA regulatory programs, the development of
agency-wide guidance on risk assessment, and the conduct of research to im-
prove risk assessment. Dr. Farland began his EPA career in 1979 as a health
scientist in the EPAÕs Office of Toxic Substances, while he continued his re-search endeavors at the George Washington University. His career has been char-
acterized by a commitment to the development of national and international ap-
proaches to testing and assessment of the fate and effects of environmental agents.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.152APPENDIX EDr. Farland has received a number of awards and honors, including an EPA Sil-ver Medal and several Bronze Medals, for this work. Dr. Farland holds a Ph.D.
from the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) in cell biology and bio-
chemistry, an M.A. in zoology from the same institution, and a B.S. from Loyola
University, Los Angeles. He was awarded an Individual National Research Ser-
vice Award from the National Cancer Institute to pursue postdoctoral training in
DNA damage and repair at the University of California, Irvine, and at Brookhaven
National Laboratory.Janet G. Hering is a professor of environmental science and engineering atCaltech, where she has been a member of the faculty since 1996.  Prior to that,

she was an assistant and later associate professor of civil and environmental engi-
neering at UCLA.  She has an A.B. in chemistry from Cornell University, an

A.M. in chemistry from Harvard University, and a Ph.D. in oceanography from
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology-Woods Hole Oceanographic Institu-
tion Joint Program.  She has published more than 30 papers in refereed scientific

journals and is the coauthor of the book Principles and Applications of AquaticChemistry.  She is a past recipient of the National Science Foundation
Õs YoungInvestigator Award and Presidential Faculty Fellows Award and is a member of
the editorial advisory board for the journal Environmental Science & Technology.Professor HeringÕs research interests include the biogeochemical cycling of traceelements in natural waters and water treatment technologies for the removal of
inorganic contaminants from potable water.  Her research includes both labora-

tory and field experimental studies and has been funded by the National Science
Foundation, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the American Water
Works Association Research Foundation, California Sea Grant, the Petroleum
Research Foundation, the University of California Water Resources Center, the
Chevron Research and Technology Company, and the Metropolitan Water Dis-
trict of Southern California.Charles E. Kolb is president and chief executive officer of Aerodyne Re-
search, Inc.  Since joining Aerodyne as a senior research scientist in 1971, his

personal areas of research have included atmospheric and environmental chemis-
try, combustion chemistry, chemical lasers, materials chemistry, and the chemi-
cal physics of rocket and aircraft exhaust plumes.  He is the author or coauthor of

more than 150 archival publications in these fields. In the area of atmospheric and
environmental chemistry, Dr. Kolb initiated AerodyneÕs programs for the identi-fication and quantification of sources and sinks of trace atmospheric gases and
aerosols involved in regional and global pollution problems, as well as the devel-
opment of spectral sensing techniques to quantify soil pollutants. He has also
developed models of aircraft and rocket exhaust plume-wake chemical kinetics,
condensation physics, and dispersion processes critical to the systematic assess-
ment of the impact of aerospace systems on the chemical structure of the upper
troposphere and stratosphere. Dr. Kolb received the 1997 Award for Creative
Advances in Environmental Science and Technology from the American Chemi-The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX E153cal Society.  He has been elected a fellow of the American Physical Society, the
Optical Society of America, the American Geophysical Union, and the American
Association for the Advancement of Science and has served as the atmospheric
sciences editor of the journal Geophysics Research Letters (1995-1999).
Fran“ois M.M. Morel is Albert G. Blanke Professor of Geosciences atPrinceton University, where he is also director of the Princeton Environmental
Institute and director of the Center in Environmental BioInorganic Chemistry. He
received the Licence-‘s-Sciences in Math”matiques Appliqu”es at the Universit”de Grenoble, the Diplome dÕIng”nieur from Universit” de Grenoble, and a Ph.D.in engineering sciences from the California Institute of Technology, Pasadena.
The main focus of his research is the interactions between aquatic microorgan-
isms and their chemical milieu, with the goal of understanding the biogeochemi-
cal cycles of elements, particularly trace elements, and their ecological conse-
quences at the local or global scale. The relationship between aquatic
microorganisms and trace metals, some of which are necessary for growth and
some of which are toxic, is important for the ecology of plankton, the environ-
mental consequences of metal pollution, and the possible control of primary pro-
duction. At present, he is particularly interested in testing the so-called iron andzinc hypotheses, which, if true, could have important consequences for the effi-
ciency of CO2 sequestration by the oceans and, hence, for the global carbon cycle.
Michael K. Stern is senior science fellow and director of technology, agri-cultural chemistry, at Monsanto Company.  He joined Monsanto in of 1989 as a

senior research chemist in the Metal Mediated Chemistry Group of Monsanto
Corporate Research and was appointed science fellow in 1993 and senior science
fellow in 1999.  During his tenure at Monsanto, Dr. Stern has been actively in-

volved in a variety of research programs relating to the development of novel
chemical processes and pharmaceuticals.  He was the recipient of the Monsanto

Thomas and Hochwalt Science and Technology Award in 1993 for his role in the
discovery of the aromatic substitution chemistry used in the development of

MonsantoÕs new process to manufacture 4-aminodiphenylamine (4-ADPA) andreceived the Presidential Green Chemistry Challenge Award for this process tech-

nology in 1998. He graduated from Denison University with a B.S. in chemistry.
He received an M.S. in chemistry from the University of Michigan and a Ph.D. in
chemistry from Princeton University. He was a postdoctoral associate in the De-
partment of Chemistry at MIT before joining Monsanto. Dr. Stern is the author of
24 scientific publications and the inventor on 24 U.S. Patents.Mark H. Thiemens is dean of the Division of Physical Sciences and profes-
sor in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of Cali-
fornia, San Diego (UCSD). He received his B.S. from the University of Miami
and his Ph.D. from Florida State University. He joined the faculty at UCSD after
serving as a postdoctoral fellow at the Enrico Fermi Institute at the University of
Chicago. He has received an Alexander von Humboldt Fellowship, the E.O.
Lawrence Award from the U.S. Department of Energy in 1999, and the Chancel-The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.154APPENDIX Elors Associates Award for Excellence in Research from UCSD in 2001. He wasnamed Chancellors Associates chair in 1999 and is a fellow of the American
Academy of Arts and Sciences. His research is focused on measurement of stable
isotope variations at ultrahigh precision to develop experimental programs in
widely varying research fields that include atmospheric chemistry (aerosol and
greenhouse gas studies), the evolution of life and the atmosphere, the physical
chemistry of gas-phase photochemical reactions, early solar system history and
Mars atmospherics (meteorite measurements), and gas-solid conversion mecha-
nisms.The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX E155FWorkshop Participants
CHALLENGES FOR THE CHEMICAL SCIENCES IN THE 21STCENTURY: WORKSHOP ON THE ENVIRONMENTNovember 16-18, 2002Hamid Abbasi, Gas Technology InstituteHeather C. Allen, Ohio State University
James G. Anderson, Harvard University
Ken B. Anderson, Argonne National Laboratory
Thomas W. Asmus, DaimlerChrysler Corporation
Roger Atkinson, University of California, Riverside
Betsey L. Ballash, University of California, Davis
Mark A. Barteau, University of Delaware
Philip H. Brodsky, Pharmacia (Retired)
Gordon E. Brown, Jr., Stanford University
William H. Brune, The Pennsylvania State University
Steven H. Cadle, General Motors
Ruben G. Carbonell, North Carolina State University
A. Welford Castleman, Jr., The Pennsylvania State University
Marge Cavanaugh, National Science Foundation
Uma Chowdhry, The DuPont Company
Helena Chum, National Renewable Energy Laboratory
Yoram Cohen, University of California, Los Angeles
Dady Dadyburjor, West Virginia University
Liese Dallbauman, Gas Technology Institute
Barry Dellinger, Louisiana State UniversityThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.156APPENDIX FDavid A. Dixon, Pacific Northwest National LaboratorySandra K. Dudley, CH2M Hill
William H. Farland, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Howard J. Feldman, American Petroleum Institute
Allan M. Ford, Gulf Breeze, Florida
Joseph S. Francisco, Purdue University
Jean H. Futrell, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Raymond J. Garant, American Chemical Society
Richard A. Gross, Polytechnic University
Patrick G. Hatcher, The Ohio State University
George R. Helz, University of Maryland, College Park
John C. Hemminger, University of California, Irvine
Janet G. Hering, California Institute of Technology
Robert E. Huie, National Institute of Standards and Technology
William M. Jackson, University of California, Davis
Robert G. Keesee, University at Albany, SUNY
Charles Kolb, Aerodyne Research, Inc.
Stephen G. Maroldo, Rohm and Haas Company
Stephen W. McElvany, Office of Naval Research
Kristopher McNeill, University of Minnesota
Jay C. Means, Western Michigan University
Mario J. Molina, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Fran“ois M. M. Morel, Princeton UniversityKarl T. Mueller, The Pennsylvania State University
Mary Neu, Los Alamos National Laboratory
Parry M. Norling, RAND
Mitchio Okumura, California Institute of Technology
Charles Peden, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Jeffery P. Perl, Chicago Chem Consultants Corporation
Michael J. Prather, University of California, Irvine
Douglas Ray, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Sharon M. Robinson, Oak Ridge National Laboratory
J.W. Rogers, Jr., Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Michael Romanos, University of Cincinnati
F. Sherwood Rowland, University of California, Irvine
Eric S. Saltzman, University of California, Irvine
John H. Seinfeld, California Institute of Technology
Brent Shanks, Iowa State University
Jeffrey J. Siirola, Eastman Chemical Company
Subhas K. Sikdar, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Christine S. Sloane, General Motors Corporation
Lynda Soderholm, Argonne National Laboratory
Michael K. Stern, Monsanto CompanyThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX F157Mark H. Thiemens, University of California, San DiegoMatthew Tirrell, University of California, Santa Barbara
Sam Traina, University of California, Merced
Frank P. Tully, U.S. Department of Energy
Richard P. Turco, University of California, Los Angeles
Jay R. Turner, Washington University
Jeanette M. Van Emon, U.S. Environnmental Protection Agency
Israel E. Wachs, Lehigh University
John C. Westall, Oregon State University
Elizabeth K. Wilson, Chemical & Engineering NewsThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.158GReports from Breakout Session Groups
A key component of the Workshop on the Environment was the set of fourbreakout sessions that enabled individual input by workshop participants on the
four themes of the workshop: discovery, interfaces, challenges, and infrastruc-
ture. Each breakout session was guided by a facilitator and by the expertise of the
individuals as well as the content of the plenary sessions. Participants were as-
signed to one of four breakout groups on a random basis, although individuals
from the same institution were assigned to different groups. Each breakout group
(color-coded  red, yellow, green, and blue) was asked to address the same set of

questions and provide answers to the questions, including prioritization of the
voting to determine which topics the group concluded were most important. After
every breakout session, each group reported the results of its discussion in plenary
session.The committee has attempted in this report to integrate the information gath-ered in the breakout sessions and to use it as the basis for the findings contained
herein. When the breakout groups reported votes for prioritizing their conclu-
sions, the votes are shown parenthetically in this section.DISCOVERYWhat major discoveries or advances related to the environment have beenmade in the chemical sciences during the last several decades?The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX G159Red Group ReportEnabling CapabilitiesAnalytical (examples include single particles in the atmosphere, electron-capture detector, use of synchrotrons for aqueous systems, increased time resolu-
tion for atmospheric measurements)Modeling (use of correlated chemical measurements to deduce environmen-tal processes; modeling, from molecular to global; structure-activity relationships
for activity and fateTechnical SolutionsEmission control of lean combustion; catalytic converter; substitutesÑheavymetals, CFCs, water-based paintsTABLE G-1Organization of Breakout SessionsBreakout SessionGroupFacilitatorSession ChairRapporteur
DiscoveryRedD. RaberC. SloaneJohn Westall
GreenM. Barteau,M. Barteau,Mitchio Okumura
P. NorlingP. Norling
BlueP. Brodsky,P. Brodsky,Israel Wachs
W. CastlemanW. Castleman
BlackJ. JackiwJ. FutrellKristopher McNeill
InterfacesRedJ. JackiwJ. FutrellKenneth Anderson
GreenD. RaberC. SloaneKarl Mueller
BlueM. Barteau,M. Barteau,Heather Allen
P. NorlingP. Norling
BlackP. Brodsky,P. Brodsky,Brent Shanks
W. CastlemanW. Castleman
ChallengesRedP. Brodsky,P. Brodsky,Mary Neu
W. CastlemanW. Castleman
GreenJ. JackiwJ. FutrellWilliam Brune
BlueD. RaberC. SloaneJay Means

BlackM. Barteau,M. Barteau,Douglas Ray
P. NorlingP. Norling
InfrastructureRedM. Barteau,M. Barteau,Robert Huie
P. NorlingP. Norling
GreenP. Brodsky,P. Brodsky,Eric Saltzman
W. CastlemanW. Castleman
BlueJ. JackiwJ. FutrellGordon Brown
BlackD. RaberC. SloaneRay Garant
The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.160APPENDIX GDiscoveriesOzone hole; recognition of importance of speciation vs. total concentration;understanding of reactions on surfaces and microporous regionsGreen Group ReportTropospheric ChemistryChemistry of air pollution, (e.g., photochemical origin of smog; acid rain;discovery of the relevance of biogenic emissions; aerosol chemistry, formation,
and microphysics)Stratospheric ChemistryThe ozone holeÑunderstanding of ozone chemistry in the stratosphere; het-erogeneous chemistry in the atmosphereModels, Databases, TechniquesRecognition of systems approach; generation of databases of kinetics andenergetics; advances in computation; fundamental understanding of chemistry
(free radicals); instrumentation (remote sensing, space based, advances in sensor
technology)Synthesis: Chemistry to Produce Systems with Minimal Environmental ImpactCFC replacements; PCB replacements; degradable pesticides, polymers;cleaner fuels; designer compoundsProcess AdvancesImplementing green chemistry; benign solvents; catalytic converters; engineefficiency via fundamental understanding; energy; energy storage and efficiency,
photovoltaics; atom economySoil and Water ChemistryAdvances in interfacial chemistry, biogeochemical cycles; remediation tech-nology; trace metals; radiation chemistry, radionuclides; hydrophobic compounds
in the environmentThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX G161Negative AdvancesMTBEImpact of catalytic self-propagating entitiesBlue Group ReportPrioritized ListFundamental chemistryAnalytical instrumentation
Surface chemistry
Genetics
Understanding homogeneous atmospheric chemistryBlack Group ReportToolsIndustrial ecology;life-cycle analysis; detection, monitoring, measurement
science (4); development of noninvasive spectroscopic technology; synchrotron-
based methods, availability and development; application of GC-MS; computa-
tion and modeling (4); satellite technology (profiles, surface temperature, etc.)
(3)TechnologiesUse of biomass in chemical reactions (instead of petroleum); advances inmembrane science; metabolic engineering of microbes and plants for remediation;

drinking water disinfection and ozonation technologies; three-way catalysts (1);
emission control technology (3); use of supercritical CO2 to replace solvents (1)
Risk AssessmentDevelopment of structure-activity relationships; ability to predict risk andrisk-based corrective action (2); identification of endocrine disrupters and eluci-
dation of risk mechanismAir ProblemsRecognition of particulate matter (4); heterogeneous atmospheric chemistry(1); photochemical modeling ; understanding mechanisms of photochemical smog

formation (2); rise and fall of CFCs; global warming; ozone depletion (3)The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.162APPENDIX GWater ProblemsGroundwater remediation; bioaccumulation and persistent organic pollutants(2); detection of pesticides (1); human and eco-health effects of arsenic and mer-
curySoil ProblemsDiscovery of dioxinsDiscovery of PAHsINTERFACESWhat are the major environment-related discoveries and challenges at theinterfaces between chemistryÐchemical engineering and other disciplines, includ-ing biology, information science, materials science, and physics?Red Group ReportPhysicsScaling of physical and chemical properties with size (10); instrumentationand sensor development (10); application of quantum mechanics to understand
chemical processes (1); understanding transport coupling with chemistry (2)MaterialsDevelopment of solvents; materials development (3); new catalysts (1);nanomaterialsMathematics and InformationStatistical handling of data and statistical methods (3); cyber infrastructure(data preservation, processing, access) (9); theory and modeling of scaling (4)Meteorology and GeologyTrace component behavior (2); control of pollutant plumes in groundwater(1); biogeochemical cycles (10); aerosol chemistry and clouds (2); chemical
weather (1); chemistry-climate links (2); air pollution processes (1)The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX G163BiologyLife in extreme environments (2); scale-up of bench- to full-scale processes(2); application of microbiological biotransformations to industrial processes (2);
conversion from batch to continuous processes (1); bioavailability (4); structure-
activity relationships (8); new enzymes; bioinformatics (4); proteomics and
genomics (4)Problems and IssuesProfessional societies and journals; interdisciplinary and multidisciplinaryeducation (7); team approach; collaboration between development stages; com-
pleteness of life-cycle analysis (1); stovepiping of funding (2); breaking down
administrative barriers (1); changing the scientific-academic culture (motivation)
(7); reward structure; industry-academic collaboration; communication (lan-
guage) (1); regulation and science (1); instrumentation development; theory and
modeling; education of public and politicians (3); grand challenges must be de-
fined and funded (10)Green Group ReportThe blue group reported its analysis of interfaces as a matrix in which therows are a series of environmentally important chemistry and chemical engineer-
ing research areas, and the columns are the other disciplines that will participate
in the research activity (Table G-2).Blue Group ReportBiology (8)Science (microbial community genomics; microbial in situ bioremediation;proteomics and metabolomics; PCR and revolutions in microbiology (6); engi-
neering (bioprocessing, biotechnology, combining unit operations) (2)Physics and Other Engineering (5)Tools (new instrumentation; measurement systems and platforms; materialsand processes for alternative, nonfossil fuels)Atmospheric Science (5)Modeling (chemical weather forecasting; air quality and human health; dis-persion of chemicals; aerosol and cloud physics)The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.164APPENDIX GTABLE G-2
Matrix of InterfacesHydrologyBiology
ComputationalandAtmosphericand
MathematicsScienceGeologyScienceMedicine
AdvancedsimulationsXXMultiscalecomputingXXDispersion ofchemicalsXXChemicalweatherforecastingXXCloud physicsand aerosolsAir quality andhuman healthXMicrobialcommunity
genomicsXProteomicsXPCRmicrobiologyXClimatequestionsXXAnalysis ofhigh-throughputdatasetsXXInstrumentationmeasurementsystemsMicrobialremediationXBioprocessingXBiotechnologyXChemicalfootprint
of societyNonfossil energyThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX G165SocialOtherSciences and
EngineeringPhysicsEcologyOceanographyToxicology Economics
XXXXXXXXXXXXXX
XXXXX
XXX
The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.166APPENDIX GHydrology, Geology, Oceanography (5)Dispersion of chemicals in groundwater and subsurface water (3); globalcycling (2)Ecology (4)Climate questions (4); ecotoxicologySocial Sciences (3)Chemical footprint of society (2); integrated assessment (1)Computer Science (2)Hardware: advanced simulations on high-performance computers; design ofnew computer architectures; software: analysis of high-throughput datasets (1)Mathematics (2)Multiscale computing (time and space)Agriculture and Soil Science (11)Closed-system agriculture (recycle all); precision farming (e.g., using GPCto improve farming); advances in pesticides, herbicide, and fertilizers; avoiding
agricultural runoff; reducing agricultural footprint (largest impact on the environ-
ment)Biology (8)Biochemistry and biocatalysis; (green chemistry); genetic engineering;genomics and proteomics; epidemiology; effects of contaminants on humans;
biomimetic processesEarth Sciences (7)Biogeochemical and Earth systems analysis; mechanisms and impact of natu-ral contaminants; global cycles; C, N, etc.; subsurface detection and mapping;
ocean ecology; climate; solid waste management; actinides in the environmentThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX G167Engineering (5)Process monitoring; sensors, spectroscopy, end users; process development(batch to continuous; throughput); material sciences; bringing chemistry to other
engineering disciplines; systems and life-cycle analysisMathematics, Computational Science, Statistics (2)Bioinformatics (handling huge databases); integration and mining of datasets (how to use the datasets); modelingSpace Sciences (2)Remote sensing; recognition of rate of change on Earth; astrophysics (chem-istry, biology)Physics (1)Moving technology out of hands of physicists; green chemistry for micro-electronics; amorphous systemsAll + Other (overarching)Surface science; analytical techniques applied at the interfaces; integrationwith business model (economics); combinational chemistry at the interface with
other disciplines; reduction of wastesGrand ChallengesIntegrated environmental education; exploiting natural remediation process;agricultural as a closed system; development of renewable energy sources;
development of renewable chemical feedstocks economically; mimicking natural
componentsBlack Group ReportTechnical SolutionsBiochemists, molecular biologists, separation scientists, physicists, materialscientists (bio-based approaches; physics and material approaches)The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.168APPENDIX GRisk AnalysisMedicine and health, social sciences, ecology, economics (health effects;ecological effects; social and political effects)State of the EnvironmentBiologists, computer science, ecologists, meteorologists, instrumentation sci-entists, physicists (air quality; global warming; water quality; life-cycle analysis;
biogeochemical cycles)CHALLENGESWhat are the environment-related grand challenges in the chemical sciencesand engineering?Red Group ReportIndustrial Sustainability (1)
Ionic LiquidsLife cycle (1)RemediationCost-effective methodsContaminant Capture or Sequestration (3)(Physical Chemistry)CO2; Radioactive wasteLifecycle of Particulates  (2)
Properties and effects on health and climateFuel CellsH2 Economy (2)
Environmental footprintBiogeochemical CycleRole of chemical cycles on climate, greenhouse gases, cloudsHeterogeneous Characteristics of Environmental Materials (e.g., solids) (7)The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX G169Characterization of the Organic Composition of the AtmosphereSensing techniques; instrumentationEnvironmental Change (Indicators) (2)Traces in ice, trees, sediments; other indicatorsWater (5)Purification; industrial use; desalinizationToxicityIdentify materialsComputational chemistry (1)Instrumentation at Trace Levels (6)Methods that will allow breakthroughs in air samplingCatalysis by Design (3)Instrumentation; computation; materials scienceFunction and Sensitivity of Nonculturable Organisms (1)Photoinduced Processes
Macromolecular Science (3)Biological molecules; catalysts; humicUnderstanding Chemical Reactivity (7)Complex processes in atmosphere; water; soil; all of the precedingStudy of Heterogeneous Processes (1)Diversion of Funding of Core Sciences to Hot Initiatives
Separations (3)Water purification; dilute solutions; air; bioproductsGreen Group ReportGlobal-Scale Chemistry (11)Global biogeochemistry; flux measurements; prediction, fate, and transportThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.170APPENDIX Gof pollutants; speciation of all contaminants; chemistry and climate; carbon man-agement; scaling in time and space; global-scale chemical monitoringWaste Management (6)Waste disposal technology; chemical; nuclear; mining; agriculture; animalresidue; carbon sequestration; in situ remediation of contaminated mediaControl and Understand Chemical Transformation (6)Early life-cycle analysis; pollution prevention through alternative chemicalprocesses; technologies for water conservation; controlled oxidation of organic
molecules; end-to-end chemical production processesHealth effects (1)Molecular basis for dose-response relationships; quantification of health risksfor particulate matterNew Tools (9)Better computational tools; acquiring relevant high-quality datasets; en-hanced analytical capabilities; better models, theory, instrumentation; better ana-
lytical-theoretical tools to understand chemistry at interfacesBlue Group ReportFundamental UnderstandingUnderstanding climate and chemical links (11)¥Unraveling mechanisms: chemical reactions and cycles in the environ-ment¥Characterization of chemical processes in the atmosphere, biosphere,and lithosphereMeasurement of trace reactive species in atmosphere, ground- and surfacewater (7)Sensor development for subsurface (e.g., pH, flow, microbial activity, pol-lutants, metals (6)Better instruments for monitoring¥Predictive chemical modeling of biological chemistry (4)¥Long-term monitoring and tools, networks (1) Chemical  Approaches to Solutions
Predictive modeling for catalysts and custom-designed enzymes forbioremediation (10)Chemical engineering pathways to environmental sustainability (5)
Conversion of solar energy into electrical and chemical energy (renewable) (4)The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX G171Transformation of complex agromaterials into advanced products (3)New materials: designed for recycling (triggerable disassembly) (3)
Conversion of wastes to useful products (2)
Organic reductive chemistry for biorenewable feedstocks (2)
Remediation of mercury (1)
Mimicking natural processes
Using methane and hydrogen sulfide as feedstocksBlack Group ReportEnablersComputing (hardware and software); genomic sciences; nanotechnologies;materials by design; self-assembly; instrumentation (in situ measurement of pol-
lutants)EnergyGlobal warming mitigation; carbon sequestration (6); economical solar en-ergy (6); energy efficiency technologies (2)Chemical-Organism InteractionsMolecular toxicology (5); fundamental understanding of microbes/metabolicpathwaysÑÒPerryÕs Handbook for BugsÓ (4); models of exposure effects
Air and Water IssuesUnderstanding heterogeneous chemistry (4); the structure of natural organicmatter (2); air: sources and characterization of toxics (1); speciation of toxic met-
als (1); smokestack emissions beyond SOx and NO
x (1); chemical sources of tox-
icity of fine particulate matter (PM2.5) (1); environmentally persistent free radi-
cals (1); understanding of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere (carbon cycles and
sinks)RemediationMetabolic engineeringÑunderstanding pathways (3); economical metal se-questration methods (3); dioxins, MTBE (1); defluorination of fluoroorganicsGreen Chemistry, Pollution PreventionCatalysis by design (7); solvent-free processes (2); persistence of chemicalsin the environment (1); alternative materialsÑstructure-function relations (1);microreactorsÑjust-in-time and local manufacturing (1); carbon source forchemicalsThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.172APPENDIX GFundamental UnderstandingTechniques for assessing multisource risk (6); multimedia multiscale sys-tems modeling (5); understanding natural environmental processes (3); control of
chemical transformation (3); modeling of episodic events in the climate and envi-
ronment (1); genetic and proteomic markersINFRASTRUCTUREWhat are the issues at the intersection of environmental studies and thechemical sciences for which there are structural challenges and opportunitiesÑinteaching, research, equipment, codes and software, facilities, and personnel?Red Group ReportWhatÕs Working WellSome user facilities such as SSRL, EMSL computational facilities; ACS en-vironmental chemistry option; green chemistry funding has raised profile (but
may have taken from other environmental programs); multidisciplinary programsWhatÕs Not Working Well?EPA: lack of internal coordination and communication; deterioration of scien-tific facilities; coordination of environmental research effortÑintra- and interagency;continuity of funding; user facilitiesÑease of access; principal investigator rewardstructure in national laboratories; lack of emphasis on environmental chemistry
in NSF; initiativesÑhowever valuableÑhave come at the expense of core sci-ences and engineering; lack of overall strategyÑwe are taking away from core tofund fads; disconnect between graduate research and undergraduate curriculumNeedsUser facility for geosciences (set of field sites); strengthen EPA R&D; anagency looking at environment over the long term; environmental equivalent of
NIH (i.e., relationship to EPA as NIH is to FDA); educate people with broad-
spectrum knowledge of the environment; curriculum reform to emphasize the
environment; chemical programs to incorporate broad range of topics that are
part of environmental chemistry; continued development of sensors and of instru-
mentation that is deployable in real time (for water); general support for instru-The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX G173ment development (as in the medical field); interdisciplinary systems approachÑresources and reward systemsChallengesInter- and intra-agency coordination; gulf between environmental sciencesand others; market environmental chemistry as NIH does for health; environmen-
tal chemistry not well-regarded compared to ÒrealÓ chemistry; atmospheric chem-
istry more accepted in academia than condensed-phase studies; if funding pot
doesnÕt grow, allocation needs to be done smartlyPayoffsFundamental lead to prediction; our well-being is at risk and must be ad-dressed; better use of resources; social and political stability; ability to predict
and plan for environmental change on global scale (could prevent global up-
heaval)A Final WordÉThe environment should not be considered a fad!Green Group ReportStudent training in the environmental area (7)Tenure process inhibits interdisciplinary collaboration (5)
Insufficient emphasis on classical measurements (5)Kinetics; thermochemicalEnvironmental chemistry is not considered a core subject in chemistry andchemical engineering departmentsÑneed accreditation (5)Coordination and interaction of similar programs across federal agencies (4)
Research needs (3)Aircraft, ships, spaceStatus of environmental chemistry in universities (e.g., few chemistry de-partments have major activities in the field) (2)Transitioning-leveraging:  need for engineering expertise to develop instru-
ments (2)Concepts from researchers; how to implement the design and constructionNeed environmental science home in NSF for sustained funding of individual
investigators (2)Heavy-metal actinide chemistry (expertise is being lost)
Increased NIH funding has put a strain on national centers (computing, spec-troscopy, etc.) for environmental projectsThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.174APPENDIX GBlue Group ReportThere is no single federal agency that is responsible for funding environmen-tal science. EPA is an environmental regulatory agency! There is a pressing needfor one centralized government agency for funding fundamental science with re-
spect to the environment.The NSF Science and Technology Centers and Environmental MolecularScience Institutes and Collaborative Research in Environmental Molecular Sci-
ence Grants Program are small steps toward improved funding in the environ-
mental science research area.Sustained long-term support for individual investigators in the environmen-tal chemistry/science area is needed (applies also to technicians and support staff
for research groups.)Industry is a failure in environmental science R&D area and in providingattractive jobs for environmental chemistry students! (Not all in blue group agree
with this statement).Mechanisms for attracting more young people to environmental science andthe basic sciences are needed.  Good jobs are necessary to achieve this need.
Cross-training of students among interdisciplinary areas is lagging far be-hind need.Basic science and math training is absolutely essential for students in envi-ronmental science.There is only one national facility dedicated to environmental science re-search (EMSL at PNNL)Faculty in basic science departments who focus on environmental scienceresearch often have difficulties at tenure decision time because of a general lack
of respect for environmental science research by other scientists.Physical chemistry is not thriving in modern research universities, yet it pro-vides the basic underpinnings of environmental chemistry.Research agendas should be driven in part by societal needs (e.g., humanhealth), but basic, curiosity-driven research funding must be protected and al-
lowed to thrive.More scientific expertise is needed in policy making.Black Group ReportAgency Funding and MissionsContinuing mismatch between core competencies and problem-driven re-search (programs, time frames, etc.); chemistry and chemical engineering subdi-
visions not coherent with environmental problems; funding sources need to be
tied to problem horizons; need to avoid discontinuities for funding specific areas;The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX G175need more sustained funding for instruments and instrumentation; mission align-mentÑpressure on regulators to declare problems solved; need for continuity forlong-term monitoring; need appropriate mixture of individual investigators and
centers to meet various challengesChemistry Chemical Engineering EducationChemistry and chemical engineering subdivisions not coherent with envi-ronmental problems; environmental aspects of chemistry and chemical engineer-
ing not always treated or sold well; barriers to cross-disciplinary work; need more
use of environmental examples at undergraduate level; greater need to align
multidisciplinary programs and expectations of graduate studentsToolsStructure-activity relationship models are too empiricalThings That Are Working WellIncreases in joint agency funding (clarity of purpose); utilization of SBIR;funding of large field studies; centersÑsome successesThe Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.176HList of Acronyms
ACSAmerican Chemical Society
3G1,3-propanediol

BHCbrominated hydrocarbon

CFCchlorofluorocarbon
CHCchlorinated hydrocarbon

CIRPASCenter for Interdisciplinary Remotely-Piloted Aircraft Studies

CMAQcommunity modeling of air quality
DDTdichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane
DEADrug Enforcement Agency

DODDepartment of Defense

DOEDepartment of Energy

DOMdissolved organic matter

DSIDAdisodium iminodiacetic acid
EDCendocrine disrupting chemical
EMSLEnvironmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory

EPAEnvironmental Protection Agency

EPRelectron paramagnetic resonance
FDAFood and Drug Administration
FOMA1,1-dihydroperfluorooctyl methacrylate
The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX H177GC-MSgas chromatographyÐmass spectrometry
GOMEGlobal Ozone Monitoring Experiment

GPCgas-to-particle conversion

GPSGlobal Positioning System
HCCIhomogeneous-charge compression ignition
HCFChydrochlorofluorocarbon

HFChydrofluorocarbon
INDOEXIndian Ocean Experiment
IPCCIntergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

ITCZIntertropical Convergence Zone
MTBEmethyl 
tertiary-butyl etherNASANational Aeronautics and Space Administration
NCARNational Center for Atmospheric Research

NIHNational Institutes of Health

NMRnuclear magnetic resonance

NOAANational Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration

NRELNational Renewable Energy Laboratory

NSFNational Science Foundation
ORDOffice of Research and Development

PAGphotoacid generator
PAHpolycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon

PBDEpolybrominated diphenyl ether

PCBpolychlorinated biphenyl

PCDD/Fpolychlorinated dibenzodioxins and furans

PCRpolymerase chain reaction

PMparticulate matter

PM2.5fine particulate matter (smaller than 2.5 microns in diameter)

PNNLPacific Northwest National Laboratory

ppmparts per million

pptparts per trillion

psipounds per square inch
SBIRSmall Business Innovation Research Program
SCRselective catalytic reduction

SSRLStanford Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory

STARScience to Achieve Results (an EPA grant program)

SVA/lbshareholder value added per pound
The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.178APPENDIX HTHPMA2-tetrahydropyranyl methacrylate
USGSU.S. Geological Survey

VOCvolatile organic compound

XASx-ray absorption spectroscopy
