DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/10805The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial Performance264 pages | 6 x 9 | HARDBACKISBN 978-0-309-38522-0 | DOI 10.17226/10805Committee on the Impact of Academic Research on Industrial Performance; NationalAcademy of EngineeringThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSWashington, D.C.www.nap.edu

The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS ¥ 500 Fifth Street, N.W. ¥ Washington, D.C. 20001This study was supported by Grant No. 97-3-4 between the National Academy ofSciences and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation and by the National Academy of
Engineering Fund.  Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressedin this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the viewsof the organizations or agencies that provided support for the project.International Standard Book Number 0-309-08973-5 (Book)International Standard Book Number 0-309-52602-7 (PDF)Copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 500 FifthStreet, N.W., Lockbox 285, Washington, DC 20055; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area); online at http://www.nap.edu.
Copyright 2003 by the National Academy of Sciences.  All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of AmericaThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of
distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to thefurtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare.  Upon the

authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandatethat requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters.  Dr.
Bruce M. Alberts is president of the National Academy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the
National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers.  It is
autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the
National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government.The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed atmeeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior
achievements of engineers.  Dr. Wm. A. Wulf is president of the National Academy
of Engineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciencesto secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examinationof policy matters pertaining to the health of the public.  The Institute acts under the
responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to
be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues ofmedical care, research, and education.  Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute
of Medicine.The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in
1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the AcademyÕspurposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government.  Functioning in

accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the Council has become theprincipal operating agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the NationalAcademy of Engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the
scientific and engineering communities.  The Council is administered jointly by both
Academies and the Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts and Dr. Wm. A. Wulf are
chair and vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.www.national-academies.orgThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ivCOMMITTEE ON THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ONINDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEJEROME H. GROSSMAN (IOM), chair, Lion Gate Management Corporationand Harvard University, Cambridge, MassachusettsLILLIAN C. BORRONE (NAE), Port Authority of New York and New Jersey(retired), New York, New YorkCOLIN CROOK, Citicorp (retired), New York, New York
DONALD M. ENGELMAN (NAS), Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut
DAVID J. FARBER, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia
ANNETINE C. GELIJNS, Columbia Medical Center, New York, New York
DANIEL GREGORY, Greylock Management Corporation, Boston,MassachusettsGEORGE H. HEILMEIER (NAE), Telcordia Technologies, Inc. (retired),Morristown, New JerseyADAM B. JAFFE, Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts
JACK L. KERREBROCK (NAE), Massachusetts Institute of Technology(retired), CambridgeKENT KRESA (NAE), Northrop Grumman Corporation, Los Angeles,CaliforniaH. DONALD RATLIFF (NAE), Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta
J. DAVID ROESSNER, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta
ROBERT F. SPROULL (NAE), Sun Microsystems, Inc., Burlington,MassachusettsMORRIS TANENBAUM (NAE), AT&T Corporation (retired), Short Hills,New JerseyThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vPANEL ON THE NETWORK SYSTEMSAND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRYROBERT F. SPROULL (NAE), chair, Sun Microsystems, Inc., Burlington,MassachusettsALFRED V. AHO (NAE), Columbia University, New York, New York
JOHN M. CIOFFI (NAE), Stanford University, Stanford, California
DAVID J. FARBER, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia
GEORGE H. HEILMEIER (NAE), Telcordia Technologies, Inc. (retired),Morristown, New JerseySTEPHEN WOLFF, Cisco Systems, Inc., Washington, D.C.PANEL ON THE MEDICAL DEVICES AND EQUIPMENT INDUSTRYANNETINE C. GELIJNS, chair, Columbia Medical Center, New York,New YorkPAUL CITRON (NAE), Medtronic, Inc., Minneapolis, Minnesota
DONALD M. ENGELMAN (NAS), Yale University, New Haven,ConnecticutJEROME H. GROSSMAN (IOM), Lion Gate Management Corporationand Harvard University, Cambridge, MassachusettsHOMER PIEN, SRU Biosytems, Woburn, Massachusetts
FREDERICK W. TELLING, Pfizer Inc., New York, New YorkPANEL ON THE AEROSPACE INDUSTRYJACK L. KERREBROCK (NAE), chair, Massachusetts Institute ofTechnology, CambridgeANTONIO L. ELIAS (NAE), Orbital Sciences Corporation, Dulles, Virginia
KENNETH C. HALL, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina
ROBERT J. HERMANN (NAE), Global Technology Partners, LLC, Hartford,ConnecticutKENT KRESA (NAE), Northrop Grumman Corporation, Los Angeles,CaliforniaThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viPANEL ON THE TRANSPORTATION, DISTRIBUTION,AND LOGISTICS SERVICES INDUSTRYH. DONALD RATLIFF (NAE), chair, 
Georgia Institute of Technology,AtlantaCYNTHIA BARNHART, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,CambridgeROBERT E. BIXBY (NAE), ILOG, Inc., Houston, Texas
LILLIAN C. BORRONE (NAE), Port Authority of New York and NewJersey (retired), New York, New YorkA. RAY CHAMBERLAIN, Parsons Brinckerhoff, Inc., Denver, Colorado
ADAM B. JAFFE, Brandeis University, Waltham, MassachusettsPANEL ON THE FINANCIAL SERVICES INDUSTRYCOLIN CROOK, chair, Citicorp (retired), New York, New YorkCAMILO C. GOMEZ, private consultant, Santa Fe, New Mexico
ADAM B. JAFFE, Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts
BLAKE D. LeBARON, Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts
JOHN M. MULVEY, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey
MORRIS TANENBAUM (NAE), AT&T Corporation (retired), Short Hills,New JerseyNAE PROGRAM OFFICE STAFFPROCTOR P. REID, Study DirectorDIANE ALBERT, J. Herbert Hollomon Fellow (until January 1999)
CAROL R. ARENBERG, Managing Editor
THOMAS C. MAHONEY, Consultant
ROBERT P. MORGAN, NAE Fellow and Senior Analyst (through January 1999),and Consultant (after January 1999)PENELOPE J. GIBBS, Program Associate
NATHAN KAHL, Senior Project AssistantThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiPreface
American universities are integral to the success of American industry.  Thecore mission of the university, educating much of the American workforce, is
essential to productivity growth, innovation, technological progress, and virtually
every other national economic and societal objective.  Academic research
Ñinphysical sciences, social sciences, computer sciences, and engineeringÑprovidesa constant flow of ideas, analyses, and breakthroughs that vitalize industry.  The

strengths of academic researchÑprincipally the resources to focus on long-term,fundamental, risky goals and to mount broad collaborative projectsÑcomple-ment the applied research and development (R&D) performed by industry.  Uni-
versities are a source not only of scientific and technological ideas that lead to
new products and processes, but also social and political insights that strengthen
the nationÕs ability to adapt to new technologies and, therefore, to embrace con-tinued innovation.  As industries have become more dependent on innovation,

new skills, and technological prowess, academic contributions have become in-
creasingly critical to economic success.To assess and document the contributions of academic research to industry,the National Academy of Engineering initiated a study of the impact of academic
research on five diverse industries:  network systems and communications; finan-

cial services; medical devices and equipment; transportation, distribution, and
logistics services; and aerospace.  All five industries are important in terms of

sales and employment, technological intensity, and expected growth rates; each
provides a distinct example of current and historic patterns of interaction with
academia.  The study is based on the opinions and judgments of a 15-member

committee of experts from industry and universities, supported by five panelsThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.(one for each industry) that reported to the study committee.  The committee
Õsdeliberations were informed by surveys of industry executives and leading aca-
demics, workshop discussions, and reviews of relevant publications.These five industries illustrate the wide range of contributions of aca-demic research to industrial performance:  graduates trained in modern re-

search techniques; fundamental concepts and key ideas emerging from basic
and applied research; and the development of tools, prototypes, and market-
able products, processes, and services.  The impact of academic research

derives from many disciplines, including the natural sciences and engineering
as well as the social and behavioral sciences, with the value of research in one
field often heavily dependent on advances in complementary fields.  Contri-

butions also emerge from the broad base of knowledge resident at universi-
ties, which provide environments where ideas developed in one context often
flourish in very different contexts.  This broad knowledge base often results

in contributions in areas essential to successful innovation but beyond any
specific technology or field; examples include industry regulation and deregu-lation and the development of industry standards.The study identifies major cross-cutting challenges for university-industryresearch collaboration, including a growing imbalance in federal funding for
academic research, an underdeveloped interface between research universities
and services industries (roughly 80 percent of the U.S. economy), and reconcil-
ing traditional university missions of teaching, research, and service with the

increased emphasis on the management of intellectual property.  The commit-

tee recommends actions to meet these challenges for government, universities,

and industry.On behalf of the National Academy of Engineering, I want to thank the studychairman, Jerome H. Grossman, the chairs of the industry panels, Colin Crook,
Annetine C. Gelijns, Jack L. Kerrebrock, H. Donald Ratliff, and Robert Sproull,
and other members of the study committee and the five industry panels (named
on pp. iv-vi) for their considerable efforts on this project.  I also want to thank

Proctor P. Reid, the study director, who managed the project and helped the
committee members reach consensus.  Thomas C. Mahoney, consultant to the

committee and lead staff support to the aerospace industry panel, and Robert P.
Morgan, former NAE Fellow and lead staff support to the panels on the medical
devices and equipment industry and the network systems and communications
industry were extremely helpful throughout the project,  particularly during the

closing phase of the study.  Diane Albert, former NAE J. Herbert Hollomon

Fellow, provided lead staff support to the panel on transportation, distribution,
and logistics services throughout the fact-finding phase.  Penelope Gibbs and

Nathan Kahl from the NAE Program Office provided critical administrative and
logistical support.  Carol Arenberg, NAE managing editor, was instrumental in

preparing the report for publication.viiiTHE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACEixI want to extend the committeeÕs thanks to everyone from government, in-dustry, and academia who contributed to the project.  In particular, I want to

express our appreciation to the participants in the fact-finding workshops,
roundtables, and e-mail surveys during the initial stages of the project (see ad-
denda to chapters 2 through 6) and to those who briefed the committee.Finally, I would like to express my appreciation to the Alfred P. SloanFoundation for its generous support of this project.Wm. A. WulfPresident
National Academy of EngineeringThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiAcknowledgments
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for theirdiverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures ap-
proved by the NRCÕs Report Review Committee.  The purpose of this indepen-
dent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institu-tion in making its published report as sound as possible and to ensure that thereport meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness
to the study charge.  The review comments and draft manuscript remain confi-

dential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process.  We wish to thank the

following individuals for their review of this report:  Chris Caplice, SABRE

Group; Irwin Feller, Pennsylvania State University; James Flanagan, Rutgers
University; James F. Gibbons, Stanford University; Cliff Goodman, The Lewin
Group; Patrick T. Harker, University of Pennsylvania; David Heebner, Heebner
Associates; Kenneth H. Keller, University of Minnesota; Ed Lazowska, Univer-
sity of Washington; Robert W. Lucky, Telcordia Technologies, Inc.; Hans Mark,
University of Texas at Austin; Richard Nelson, Columbia University; George L.
Nemhauser, Georgia Institute of Technology; John Parrish, Harvard Medical
School and Massachusetts General Hospital; Sholom Rosen, Citibank (retired);
Chester S. Spatt, Carnegie Mellon University; Donald E. Strickland, Southern
Illinois University; Marie C. Thursby, Georgia Institute of Technology; Chelsea
C. White III, Georgia Institute of Technology; David C. Wisler, GE Aircraft
Engines; Ben T. Zinn, Georgia Institute of TechnologyAlthough the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive com-ments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recom-
mendations nor did they see the final draft of the report before its release.  The

review of this report was overseen by NAE member Elsa Garmire, DartmouthThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.College appointed by the National Academy of Engineering, who was respon-sible for making certain that an independent examination of this report was
carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all review com-
ments were carefully considered.  Responsibility for the final content of this

report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.xiiTHE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiiExecutive Summary11Introduction
15Setting the Context, 16Assessing the Impacts, 20
Sector-Specific Studies, 232Report of the Panel on the Network Systems and
Communications Industry29Definition of the Industry, 30Innovation System, 34
Contributions of Academic Research, 46
Mechanisms for University-Industry Cooperation, 59
Findings and Recommendations, 60
Addendum, 713Report of the Panel on the Medical Devices and
Equipment Industry77Definition of the Industry, 79Innovation System, 82
Contributions of Academic Research, 88
Impact on Industrial Performance, 102The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Recommendations, 104Addendum, 1094Report of the Panel on the Aerospace Industry
115Scope of the Study, 116Innovation, 121
Findings, 123
Conclusions, 135
Addendum, 1385Report of the Panel on the Transportation, Distribution,
and Logistics Services Industry145Definition of the Industry, 146Integrated Logistics: A Competitive Differentiator, 147
Innovation System, 152
Contributions and Impact of Academic Research, 154
Findings, 162
Recommendations, 165
Addendum, 1676Report of the Panel on the Financial Services Industry
173Definition of the Industry, 174Innovation System, 178
Contributions of Academic Research, 183
Transfer Mechanisms, 188
Opportunities for Future Academic Research, 191
Findings and Recommendations, 192
Addendum, 1987The Contributions and Impact of Academic Research
205Patterns of University-Industry Interaction, 205The National Innovation System, 206
Contributions of Academic Research, 208
Vectors of Contribution, 213
Impact of Contributions, 2148Challenges for the Future
219Services, 219The Regulatory Climate, 220xivTHE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSxvIntellectual Property, 221Information Technology, 223
A Balanced Research Portfolio, 223
Keeping Pace and Moving Forward, 2259Conclusions and Recommendations
227General Recommendations, 229Biographical Information235The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xviPREFACEThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Executive Summary
Universities have a long history of contributing to industry and the economyin a variety of ways.  Yet only recently has attention been focused systematically

on the nature and extent of these contributions to specific industries.  With sup-

port from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the National Academy of Engineering
initiated a study in 1998 to document and assess the contributions of academic
research to the performance of five industry sectors:  network systems and com-

munications; medical devices and equipment; aerospace; transportation, distribu-
tion, and logistics services; and financial services.  A 15-member committee of

industry and university experts conducted the study, with integral support from
five panels (one for each industry).Since this study began, there has been growing recognition of the importanceof universities and academic research to industrial  innovation and performance.

There has also been greater recognition of how the role of academic research has
changed over time, especially over the last 25 years as many universities have
become more directly involved in the commercialization of the fruits of their
research.  This study documents the contributions of university research to five

very different industry sectors and provides a qualitative assessment of the im-
pact of that research.  The committeeÕs conclusions cut across all five sectors; the

recommendations propose steps that should be taken to meet a variety of chal-
lenges in academic research and industry-university interactions.Few data are available to support a quantitative assessment of the impact ofacademic research on the performance of specific industries.  Quantitative mea-

sures of the output of academic research seldom go beyond counts of research
papers, patents, and royalty income, none of which directly correlates with the
impact on industry.  Industrial performance can be measured by shareholder
The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEvalue, employment growth, market share, technical advances, and other factors,all of which tend to be cyclical and company specific.  Therefore, the committee
relied on informed opinion and expert judgments, supplemented by reviews of
the literature, e-mail surveys, workshop discussions, and panel deliberations, to
make qualitative assessments of the impact of academic research.All five industry sectors examined in this study are important in terms ofsales and employment, technological intensity, and expected growth rates.  Two

sectors, medical devices and equipment and network systems and communica-
tions, have a recent history of extensive collaboration with academic researchers.
The other three, aerospace, financial services, and transportation, distribution,
and logistics services, have had more limited, less systematic interactions with
the academic research enterprise.  All five have demonstrated significant capaci-
ties for innovation over the past decade.  However, the financial services industry

and the transportation, distribution, and logistics services industry, the two pre-
dominantly service industries, have only recently begun to integrate research and
development (R&D) into their way of doing business.  Ultimately, the committee

concluded that academic research has had a significant impact on performance in
the network systems and communications, medical devices and equipment, and
financial services industries.  The impact on performance in the aerospace and the

transportation, distribution, and logistics services industries has been moderate.Academic research has made substantial contributions to all five industries,ranging from graduates at all levels trained in modern research techniques to
fundamental concepts and key ideas based on basic and applied research to the
development of tools, prototypes, and marketable products, processes, and ser-
vices.  The disciplinary sources of research contributions span the fields of engi-
neering, the natural sciences, and the social and behavioral sciences, with ad-
vances in one field often combining and building on developments in other fields.
Pathways linking academic research and industries include:  direct hires of stu-

dents, graduates, and faculty; temporary exchanges of researchers; faculty
consultancies; joint research involving industry and academic scientists and engi-
neers; industry-sponsored research contracts and grants; a variety of institutional
mechanisms at universities (e.g., research centers, consortia, industrial liaison
programs); technology licensing; start-up companies; publications; conferences;
and short courses.Each industry studied illustrates a distinct pattern of collaboration withuniversities and has developed different mechanisms for taking advantage of
academic contributions.  For example, network systems has a history of drawing

upon academic research for fundamental innovations, as well as using universi-
ties as test beds for new networking concepts that have provided the under-
pinnings of the Internet, the World Wide Web, and e-commerce.  Figure ES-1

shows the complex pattern of academic and industrial research over many years
in this industry.  The medical devices and equipment industry has also looked to

universities for fundamental multidisciplinary research in the physical sciencesThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY3and engineering and the unique capabilities of academic medical centers forresearching, developing, testing, and improving devices, as well as conducting
the clinical trials necessary to obtaining regulatory approval, all in an atmo-
sphere of close industry-university collaboration.  In financial services, contri-

butions of academic research in economics, engineering, and mathematics have
been important to the development of new financial models and instruments, in
spite of the industryÕs lack of a well developed R&D infrastructure.This study confirms that graduates trained in research are a major componentof academiaÕs contribution to industrial performance.  U.S. universities are indus-
triesÕ primary source of people with research training and experience
Ñunder-graduates, graduate students, postdoctoral researchers, and faculty.  Research-

trained students and graduates at all degree levels play a critical role in the
development, transfer, diffusion, and application of new knowledge and technol-
ogy both within and between industry and academia.A second consistent message that emerges from a study of these five indus-tries is that basic, long-term research performed by universities across a wide
range of science and engineering disciplines has made significant contributions
to industry over time.  For instance, portfolio theory, linear programming, deriva-

tive pricing theory, and prospect theory, all of academic origin, have laid thefoundation for whole new families of financial products and services.  Academic

contributions to linear and integer programming and to queue theory are the
building blocks of the information-management and decision-support technolo-
gies at the heart of the integrated logistics revolution.  Medical devices, such as

magnetic resonance imaging machines and pacemakers, are based on the contri-
butions of fundamental research arising from multiple disciplines in the natural
sciences and engineering.Universities perform roughly half of all basic research in the United States,most of it funded by the federal government.  Over time, basic research results

build on one another and intermingle with results in other fields, often through
the free exchange of people and ideas that universities facilitate.  Typically pur-

sued with no specific commercial application in mind, basic research has pro-
vided the technological underpinnings for commercial innovation.  Relevant re-

search findings have come from multiple disciplines, indicating that a portfolio of
research investment in many different fields is essential to continued progress.  In

some cases, the original academic source of a basic understanding of a process or
technology is forgotten by the time the knowledge is put to use; in other cases,
Nobel prizes are awarded years later for fundamental breakthroughs.  Individual

academic researchers may or may not receive the credit they deserve for the
constant flow of commercial innovations, but there can be no doubt that basic
research and the publication of its results have made a unique and essential
contribution to industrial performance.Contributions from applied academic research are also very important toindustry.  Today, academic applied researchers and their academic research
The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEFIGURE ES-1Examples of academic government-sponsored (and some industry-sponsored) IT research and development in the creation of commercial products andindustries.  Source:  NRC, 2003.
LANsRings, HubnetEthernet, Datakit, AutonetLANs, switched EthernetGraphical user interfaces 
Workstations
GraphicsSketchpad, UtahGM/IBM, Xerox, MicrosoftE&S, SGI, ATI, Adobe
Lisp machine, StanfordXerox Alto
Xerox Star, Apollo, Sun
Engelbart / Rochester
Alto, SmalltalkStar, Mac, Microsoft
Timesharing
CTSS, Multics / BSDUnixSDS 940, 360/67, VMSInternetARPANET, Aloha, Internet
PupDECnet, TCP/IPRISC  processors
Berkeley, Stanford

IBM 801SUN, SGI, IBM, HPVLSI designBerkeley, Caltech, MOSIS
many19651970197519801985199019952005
19651970197519801985199019952005
Client/server computingBerkeley, CMU, CERN
PARC, DEC, IBM
Novell, EMC, Sun, OracleEntertainmentSpacewar (MIT), Trek (Rocheste
rAtari, Nintendo, SGI, PixarUniversityIndustry R&DProducts$1  bil. marketto World Wide Web
The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY5RAID /disk servers
Relational databasesBerkeley, Wisconsin
IBMOracle, IBM, SybaseBerkeleyStriping/Datamesh, Petalmany19651970197519801985199019952005
World Wide Web
Alta VistaNetscape, Yahoo, Google
19651970197519801985199019952005
Speech recognitionCMU, SRI, MITBell, IBM, DragonDragon, IBMBroadband l in last mileBellcore (Telcordia)
Amati, Alcatel, BroadcomStanford, UCLAPortable communicationLinkabit, HughesQualcommBerkeley, Purdue (CDMA)
Parallel databasesTokyo, Wisconsin, UCLA
IBM, ICLICL, Teradata, Tandem
Parallel computingIlliac 4, CMU, Caltech, HPCIBM, IntelCM-5, Teradata, Cray T3D
Data miningWisconsin, StanfordIBM, ArborIRI, Arbor, Plato
CERN, Illinois (Mosaic)from InternetUniversityIndustry R&DProducts$1  bil. marketThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEinfrastructure are directly involved in the development of industrial tools, proto-types, products, and production processes, as well as the delivery of products
and services.  Box ES-1 shows examples of specific applied academic research

contributions to each of the five industries.  Sometimes academic applied re-

search yields cumulative, incremental advances over time that prove to be of
major importance to industry.  Individual companies have also greatly benefited

from university-based research to solve discrete practical problems related toBOX ES-1Contributions of Applied Academic ResearchNetwork Systems and Communications.  Contributions include packet switch-
ing and the Internet TCP/IP protocol, both key elements in the development of
the Internet.  The Mosaic web browser interface was an important step in the
rapid evolution of the worldwide web.  University researchers and other univer-
sity personnel have contributed in significant ways to routers, the development
of ATM switches, digital subscriber line (DSL) technology, third-generation wire-less transmission, computer graphics, search engines, traffic management,stable broadcast networking, the evolution of new networks, and the develop-
ment of standards.Medical Devices and Equipment.  The development of a wide range of thera-
peutic and diagnostic devices has resulted from the involvement of academic re-searchers and academic medical centers in R&D, prototype testing, evaluation,and clinical trials.  Devices and equipment include magnetic resonance imaging

equipment; whole-body CAT scanners; flexible endoscopy; lasers for a broadrange of medical applications, from gastrointestinal surgery to eye surgery; car-diac assist devices; organ and joint replacements; ultrasound and minimally inva-
sive surgical techniques; and advances in tissue engineering.Aerospace.  Contributions to the development of tools, include advanced non-
intrusive instrumentation, flow visualization techniques, and computational fluiddynamics.  Contributions to specific technologies have been made in the areas ofheat transfer, combustion cooling, and aeromechanics; low-Reynolds-number air-
foil design; Internet by satellite, including protocols and computational tools fordata integration; and folding-wing design for small unmanned aerial vehicles.Transportation, Distribution, and Logistics Services.  Contributions include
optimization modeling for shippers, software applications/decision support sys-tems for routing, production scheduling, logistics, and distribution management.
Academic spin-off companies have commercialized much of this software.Financial Services.  Contributions include new financial instruments, including in-
dex funds and derivatives; financial information and research tools, including risk/credit metrics and financial risk management software; models for pricing deriva-tives and securities; and advances in cryptography for specific financial services.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY7their businesses.  University-based research centers, with industrial participa-
tion, have become another important venue for applied research as well as more
directed basic research of value to industry.  Applied research through

multidisciplinary collaboration among science, engineering, and/or medical fac-
ulties is a unique strength of academia.  Most of the funding for applied research

at universities comes from federal agencies that want specific problems solved
related to their missions.  Industry funds some academic applied research di-

rectly via research contracts and also indirectly through support of university-
based research centers.  Industry funding of academic research increased

throughout the 1990s, but industry still provides only a small proportion of total
funds for academic research.The natural sciences and engineering disciplines are not the only fields thatmake important research contributions to industrial innovation and performance.
The contributions of the social and behavioral sciences to industry have been
greatly undervalued.  Researchers in business, economics, psychology, and many

other fields have made valuable contributions to progress in the industries stud-
ied.  For example, in network systems and communications, social and behav-

ioral scientists have provided the knowledge base for the formulation of regula-
tory policy and have generated useful knowledge and insights into group
dynamics and decision making, the diffusion of new technologies, the nature and
value of network externalities, and the relationship between organizational char-
acteristics and information dissemination and sharing.CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIESThe industry studies revealed six major, crosscutting challenges and oppor-tunities for university-industry research that warrant careful attention by univer-
sities, industry, and government.First, there is a growing imbalance in federal R&D funding.  Current invest-
ments in life sciences far outpace investments in the complementary disciplines
of physical sciences, engineering, and the social and behavioral sciences.  The

industry studies show time and again that the value of research results in one field
often depends heavily on advances in complementary fields.  In addition, univer-

sities must maintain a mix of basic and applied research to sustain their role as
repositories of expertise and resources in many disciplines.  Federal funding is

now virtually the only source of support for basic research, which makes the
effective management of federal research programs of paramount importance.
Program managers in federal agencies must work with academic and industrial
researchers to develop research agendas that might lead to major new insights.
The challenge is not just to maintain a balance between basic and applied re-
search, but also to ensure that the basic research portfolio is sufficiently diverse to
stimulate innovative thinking by academic researchers in many fields.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCESecond, the industry studies underscore the need for industries and universi-ties to continue exploring mechanisms and pathways for bringing the benefits of
academic research to industry, keeping in mind that what works well in one
industry may not work well in another.  Both partners should experiment with

new approaches.  University-industry linkages must be adaptable, and universi-

ties should be on the lookout for opportunities to link up with new industries and
explore leading-edge industrial research activities and challenges.  Cross-sectoral

movement and interaction between individual academic and industrial research-
ers are essential to promoting the effective two-way exchange of knowledge
and technology.Third, the studies suggest that services industries represent a significantsource of opportunity for university-industry interaction.  Services account for

more than 80 percent of the U.S. gross domestic product, employ a large and
growing share of the science and engineering workforce, and are the primary
users of information technology.  In most manufacturing industries, service func-

tions (such as logistics, distribution, and customer service) are now leading areas
of competitive advantage.  Innovation and increased productivity in the services

infrastructure (e.g., finance, transportation, communication, health care) have an
enormous impact on productivity and performance in all other segments of the
economy.  Nevertheless, the academic research enterprise has not focused on or

been organized to meet the needs of service businesses.  Major challenges to

services industries that could be taken up by universities include:  (1) the adapta-

tion and application of systems and industrial engineering concepts, methodolo-
gies, and quality-control processes to service functions and businesses; (2) the
integration of technological research and social science, management, and policy
research; and the (3) the education and training of engineering and science gradu-
ates prepared to deal with management, policy, and social issues.Fourth, in recent decades, universities have increasingly emphasized tech-nology transfer and the generation of income from research activities by patent-
ing and licensing research results and the creation of technology transfer offices.
The increased attention to the management of intellectual property has had many
positive consequences for both industry and academia, including providing in-
centives for invention and innovation and the dissemination and commercializa-
tion of new technologies.  However, many questions remain regarding the net

returns on investments in technology transfer, as well as their impact on the core
research and educational missions of universities.  These are questions that aca-

demic researchers are well equipped to address.Fifth, regulation and regulatory changes continue to have a profound influ-ence on industry receptivity to contributions by academic research.  In turn,

academic research continues to shape the regulatory environment of many in-
dustries, including most of those in this study.  Research universities are well

equipped to provide interdisciplinary expertise that can inform ongoing regula-
tory debates in these and other industries.   Moreover, the influx of academically
The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY9trained scientists and engineers into financial, health, communication, transpor-tation, and other regulatory bodies has strengthened these agenciesÕ ability to
draw effectively on research advances across a spectrum of disciplines relevant
to their tasks.  The rapid pace of technological change in many sectors and its

effect on the structure, competitive dynamics, and economic and societal im-
pacts of many industries underscores the importance of sustaining, as well as
deepening, the current productive relationship between academic researchers
and regulators.Finally, information technologies are critical to the performance of all indus-tries and will continue to be so in the future.  Industry
Õs need for the continueddevelopment, diffusion, and effective application of advanced information tech-
nologies presents major opportunities for academic research in mathematics,
computer sciences, physical sciences, life sciences, multiple engineering disci-
plines, and social and behavioral sciences.CONCLUSIONThe committeeÕs review of these five very different industries shows thatacademic research has clearly provided benefits to industry and has had a posi-
tive, long-term impact on industrial performance.  However, it is difficult to

identify specific mechanisms by which this impact can be maximized.  The

research competencies, the ability to interface with industry, the quality of infra-
structure, and many, many other characteristics vary greatly from university to
university.  In addition, industries in the abstract do not interface with universi-

ties; only individual companies do.  And companies in a given industry also vary

in their ability to manage interfaces with universities, in their expectations of
what academic researchers can provide, in the complexity of their research prob-
lems, and in their time horizons.  And all of these vary over time.  When this

study began, high-technology industries, such as network systems and communi-
cations, were booming, attracting academic researchers and potential graduate
students to well funded industrial laboratories, growing operations, and a plethora
of start-up companies.  As the study comes to a close, this same industry is

experiencing decreases in sales, stock prices, investments, research funding, and
employment.  Thus, both the unique characteristics of individual institutions and
the changes brought about by economic cycles must be kept in mind in assessing
the impact of academic research.Ultimately, the study of these five industries underscores the core strengthsof the academic research enterprise.  Because universities are venues for a

greater range of ideas and disciplinary perspectives than any other institutions in
the U.S. innovation system, they have vast potential for multidisciplinary re-
search.  In addition, universities are the only places where advanced research

and education are integrated on a large scale.  The constant flow of new students

through universities continuously revitalizes the academic research enterprise,The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEchallenging the assumptions of faculty and bringing fresh perspectives to re-search.  Indeed, the rich and varied interaction between university research

faculty and students and companies in many industries exposes the former to
industrial challenges that often serve as stimuli to basic and applied research in
academia.  These core strengths augur well for the future of academic research

and its continuing contributions to industry performance.GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONSThe general recommendations of this study call for actions that could en-hance the contributions of university research to industrial growth and perfor-
mance.  Recommendations for individual industries can be found in the body of

the report.  The general recommendations address crosscutting challenges and

opportunities that apply to more than one industry.General Recommendation 1.Because the contributions of academic researchare diverse and often indirect,  a broad and balanced portfolio of academic re-

search should be maintained.  Recent trends in federal funding indicate that

funding levels for research in the physical sciences, engineering, and the social
and behavioral sciences should be increased.¥Congress and the administration should restore the balance in federalfunding of academic research by increasing support for research in the
physical sciences, engineering, and the social and behavioral sciences to
complement and leverage the results of recent heavy investments in the
life sciences and medical sciences.¥Federal funding of academic research should continue to emphasize long-term basic research, as well as applied research (typically funded by
mission agencies).  Multidisciplinary research should be encouraged

through support of project-specific research teams and other institution-
alized mechanisms, such as engineering research centers and other
university-industry research centers.General Recommendation 2.Industries and universities should continue toexplore mechanisms and pathways for bringing the benefits of academic re-
search to industry, keeping in mind that what works well in one industry may not
work well in another.  Both partners should experiment with new approaches.

University-industry research linkages should be adaptable, and universities
should be on the lookout for opportunities to link up with new industries and
explore leading-edge industrial research activities and challenges.Given the importance of personal relationships among academic and indus-trial researchers for productive collaboration and knowledge transfer, universitiesThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY11and industry should foster interactions between university- and industry-basedscientists and engineers in the following ways:¥A major program of fellowships should be established to attract and sup-port graduate students in science and engineering.¥Sabbatical programs should be established and/or expanded to encourageacademic and industrial researchers to spend time in each otherÕs homeresearch settings.¥More balanced participation by academic researchers and their industrycounterparts in major conferences on specific sectors, technical systems,
and disciplines should be encouraged.¥New ways of supporting personal interactions across academia-industryboundaries, including using technology to support collaboration, should
be explored.¥University-industry research centers should be structured to facilitate closeinteraction between academic and industrial researchers.¥Academic reward structures, such as promotion and tenure criteria, shouldbe reviewed and modified (as necessary) to encourage and reward re-
searchers who attract research support from industry and/or address sig-
nificant research questions of direct importance to industry.¥Intellectual property rights policies and practices that facilitate productiveresearch collaboration with industry should be promulgated at universities.General Recommendation 3.The ability of academic researchers to contributeto services industries and the receptivity of leaders in the services industries to
the potential contributions of academic research must both be improved.  The

following steps would have immediate benefits:¥Academic research contributions and capabilities relevant to each indus-try should be documented and promoted in the targeted communities to
educate senior managers about how academic research might improve
company performance in the marketplace.¥Common legal frameworks acceptable to industry and academia shouldbe established detailing the terms of confidentiality and related conditions
to facilitate academic researchersÕ access to operational networks and
real-time data.¥Federal mission and regulatory agencies with primary responsibility forthe services industries (e.g., Securities and Exchange Commission, Inter-
nal Revenue Service, Federal Communications Commission, and U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services) should consider funding aca-
demic research in ways that encourage greater participation by the ser-
vices industries.  Engineering research centers funded by the National
The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEScience Foundation and university transportation centers funded by theU.S. Department of Transportation could serve as models.General Recommendation 4.Individual researchers and organizations, such asthe Association of University Technology Managers, that gather data on univer-
sity research and technology-transfer activities should continue to monitor and
assess the effectiveness of incentives for transferring academic research results
(particularly intellectual property policies and practices) and the impact of entre-
preneurial activity by academic researchers on the traditional university missions
of education, research, and service.  The following issues should be addressed:
¥The costs to institutions of patenting research results, including the costsof maintaining and defending patents, should be assessed and compared
to the benefits, in terms of income from licenses and royalties.¥Steps being taken to disseminate patent information to improve the
chances of commercialization should be reviewed and best prac-
tices identified.¥Best practices in the long-term management of patent inventories shouldbe shared among research institutions.¥The effectiveness of technology transfer via patented inventions shouldbe assessed and compared to transfer via more traditional mechanisms,
such as publications.  The benefits to faculty and universities should also

be compared.¥The impact of university-industry research collaboration and technologytransfer activities on undergraduate, graduate, and continuing education,
the composition of academic research, the stability of academic research
funding, the private and social returns from academic research, the many
traditional service roles of the university, and other related issues should
be assessed.General Recommendation 5.Government regulatory agencies, including theFood and Drug Administration, the Environmental Protection Agency, the Fed-
eral Communications Commission, and the Securities and Exchange Commis-
sion, should be encouraged to sustain and strengthen their productive interaction
with academic researchers and to continue to explore new mechanisms for bring-
ing scientific and engineering advances, including scientifically based concepts
and tools, to bear more rapidly and effectively on regulatory processes.General Recommendation 6.Government, industry, and universities shouldwork together to meet the challenges and opportunities created by information
technologies.   The following steps would be beneficial:
The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY13¥Boost federal funding for fundamental research in information technolo-gies, as part of an effort to redress the imbalance in federal funding for
various disciplines in academic research.¥Increase public and private sector investment in software research, withan emphasis on (1) engineering methods for assessing and improving
quality and (2) software that is more flexible and responsive to changing
business conditions.¥Support more interdisciplinary research on existing and potential infor-mation technologies that combines engineering methods and the social
and behavioral sciences.REFERENCENRC (National Research Council).  2003.  Innovation and Information Technology.  Washington,
D.C.:  The National Academies Press.
The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1IntroductionThe importance of research universities to the strength of the U.S. innovationsystem and the national economy has long been recognized. In recent decades,
public policies have sought to bolster the contribution of the nationÕs academic
research enterprise to U.S. industry and economic growth. Nevertheless, as of the
late 1990s relatively few studies had been done on the contributions and impact
of academic research on specific industrial sectors of the economy. To address
this gap, the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation sponsored a number of industry-specific
studies in the late 1990s. In 1998, as part of that series, the National Academy of
Engineering (NAE) was asked to undertake this study to assess the contributions
of academic research to five high-technology manufacturing and service indus-
tries reflecting the diversity and shifting balances in the national economy. The
five industries are: network systems and communications; medical devices and
equipment; aerospace; transportation, distribution, and logistics services; and
financial services.This report, based on the deliberations of the study committee and the fact-finding activities of industry-specific panels of experts, describes specific contri-
butions of academic research to these industries and modes of interaction be-
tween industries and universities. It also provides qualitative assessments of the
impact of academic research on the performance of each industry and, where
applicable, identifies trends and emerging opportunities for increasing contribu-
tions from academic research.15The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCESETTING THE CONTEXTThe critical role of university-based research and associated activities in theU.S. system of technological innovation is well documented (e.g., Brooks and
Randazzese, 1998; Cohen et al., 1998; Florida and Cohen, 1999; Journal ofTechnology Transfer, 2001; and Mowery et al., 1999). With the increase in gov-
ernment support after World War II, university research flourished. In the 1970s,
research and development (R&D) performed by universities comprised around
10 percent of all R&D in the United States. After a slight dip in the early 1980s,
universitiesÕ share rose to about 13 percent in 2002 (NSB, 2000; NSF, 2003). In
2002, nearly three-fourths of total university R&D expenditures were classified
as basic research and about 22 percent as applied research (NSF, 2003). Univer-
sities account for roughly half of the basic research performed in the United
States (NSF, 2003).1Figure 1-1 shows the sources of funding for university R&D from 1953 to2002. Since 1953, the largest share has been provided by the federal govern-
ment, although the percentage of federal support fell from a high of more than
70 percent in the mid-1960s to 60 percent in 2002. By contrast, funding from
industry fluctuated from 8 percent in the 1950s to a low of 2 percent in 1966 to
7 percent from 1988 to 2001 (NSF, 2003). From 1968 to 2002, however, indus-
try was the fastest growing source of funding for academic R&D. In constant
1996 dollars, industrial support of academic R&D grew nearly 900 percent05,00010,00015,00020,00025,00030,00035,00040,0001953195519571959196119631965196719691971197319751977197919811983198519871989199119931995199719992001NonprofitsUniversitiesIndustryNonfederal government Federal government$ millionsFIGURE 1-1  University R&D funding by source (constant 1996 dollars).
Source: NSF, 2003.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION17during this period (although it started from a relatively small base) (NSF, 2003).Several surveys from the 1990s indicate that industry accounts for a signifi-
cantly larger share of funding for academic R&D in specific fields, especially
engineering. A 1993 survey of engineering faculty members active in research
showed that 17 percent of their research support came from industry (Morgan et
al., 1994). A survey of more than 1,000 university research centers in 1990,
many of which were founded during the 1980s, revealed that 31 percent of their
support came from industry (Cohen et al., 1994).2Figure 1-1 also shows that, since 1968, the second fastest growing sourceof funding has been internal academic resources, which increased by nearly
700 percent and accounted for 20 percent of R&D funding in universities and
colleges by 2002. Internal funds from universities include general-purpose state
and local appropriations, general-purpose grants from outside sources, royalty
income, endowment income, and unrestricted gifts.Figure 1-2 shows changes in federal support for academic research byagency. The most striking change since 1970 is the large increase in funding
from the National Institutes of Health (NIH); the share of funding from other
agencies remained level or declined slightly. This shift has resulted in a corre-
sponding shift in the technical fields supported by federal research funds
(Rapoport, 1999). Figure 1-3 shows that, from 1973 to 2001, the percentage of
total federal funding for academic research dedicated to the life sciences rose01,000,0002,000,0003,000,0004,000,0005,000,0006,000,0007,000,0008,000,0009,000,00010,000,000NIHDODNSFAll others1973197619791982198519881991199419972000$ millionsFIGURE 1-2  Federal obligations for academic R&D by agency, 1973
Ð2001 (constant1992 dollars). Source: NSF, 2001a.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEfrom 54.8 to 63.7 percent, and the share allocated to mathematics and computerscience research increased slightly from 3.1 to 5.5 percent. During this period,
engineeringÕs share of the total federal funding of academic research remainedflat at roughly 8 percent; funding for the physical sciences decreased from
14.7 to 9.9 percent; funding for the social sciences decreased from 5.8 to
1.8 percent (NSF, 2001b). During this same period, federal funding for aca-
demic research increased from $1.6 billion to $15.2 billion in current dollars
(NSF, 2001b). The amount and distribution of support for academic research in
specific subfields (e.g., aeronautical engineering vs. biomedical engineering)
varies widely over time.30%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%197319751977197919811983198519871989199119931995199719992001  Other sciences                Social sciences, total              
  Engineering, total                  
  Math & computer sciences, total     
  Environmental sciences, total       
  Physical sciences, total            
  Psychology, total                   
  Life sciences, total                
FIGURE 1-3  Percentage of federal obligations for total academic research by field,
1973Ð2001. Source: NSF, 2001b.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION19Another indicator of the role of universities in the U.S. research enterprise ispatenting. Throughout the 1970s and early 1980s, government policy increas-
ingly favored stronger protection for intellectual property resulting from publicly
funded research. Several universities had already increased patenting activity in
the 1970s, largely as a result of the emergence of biotechnology, but the propen-
sity to patent increased markedly after 1980.4 Before 1980, all American univer-sities were issued fewer than 250 patents annually; by the mid-1990s the number
had exceeded 1,500, the majority in the health care and life sciences (Nelson,
2000). Overall, the number of university-held patents increased more than 10-
fold between 1982 and 1998 (NSB, 2000). In fiscal year 2000 (FY00), U.S.
universities applied for more than 6,300 new patents and were issued more than
3,700 (AUTM, 2001). Other indicators of the growing industrial relevance of
academic research are the approximate doubling of the percentage of papers
coauthored by university and industry personnel from 1981 to 1995 (NSB, 1998)
and an increase in the percentage, from 49 percent in 1988 to 55 percent in 1996,
of front pages of industrial patents that cite university papers (Jankowski, 1999).Research by the Association of University Technology Managers (AUTM)shows that university involvement in several kinds of commercially relevant
activities accelerated in the 1990s (AUTM, 2000). In FY00, at least 368 new
companies were formed based on academic discoveries. More than 100 licenses
to university patents generated over $1 million apiece for their university own-
ers, with the University of California system holding 10 of these and Columbia
University 16. Total license income to universities in FY00 was $1.076 billion,
much of it attributable to a few big winners (AUTM, 2001). Examples include
the $160 million earned by Michigan State University over the life of two
cancer-related patents, the $143 million lifetime earnings of Stanford University
for the recombinant DNA gene-splicing patent, the $27 million paid to Iowa
State University for the fax algorithm, and the $37 million earned by the Univer-
sity of Florida for Gatorade (Rogers et al., 2000).The combination of growth in nonfederal funding sources, shifts in the tech-nical fields receiving the largest share of government support, the increase in
academic ownership of intellectual property resulting from academic research,
and the increase in financial rewards from the licensing and commercialization of
research results have changed the role of academic research in the U.S. innova-
tion system. The universityÕs role of participating in large government researchprograms driven by Cold War priorities has given way to an environment in
which university researchers  and  research managers are much more aware of the

potential for the commercialization of their research. Greater ownership, and
therefore greater control, of intellectual property has put research universities
more directly into the value chain of new technology development, especially
in the life sciences. Technology transfer offices have been created at more than
200 research universities to manage patents, licensing and royalty contracts, and
other business and legal issues related to universitiesÕ intellectual property
The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCE(Sampat and Nelson, 1999). Although the flow of license and royalty incomeremains confined to a small number of universitiesÑjust 10 universities plus theUniversity of California system accounted for more than two-thirds of license
income in FY00Ñuniversity managers now recognize the potential of generatingincome from their research and are paying much more attention to increasing
returns on their intellectual property by managing relationships with corpora-
tions, supporting start-up companies by faculty, and negotiating beneficial licens-
ing agreements and royalty terms (AUTM, 2001).ASSESSING THE IMPACTSIf the economic benefits of academic research could be unambiguously quan-tified, the choice of effective research investment policies might be straight-
forward. Unfortunately, it is extremely difficult to apportion the economic output
of an industry to the results of academic research. Although a large number of
specific results of university researchÑcertain drugs, software applications,algorithmsÑhave been applied directly to industrial practice and products, theoverall benefits of academic research are surely much larger. The cumulative
scientific and technological knowledge in a field that underlies varied products
and services may be even more important than specific inventions or innovations.
A programmer who writes a Web-based order-entry system for a new business,
for example, makes use of countless contributions from academic research that
led to low-cost integrated circuit chips, software tools, the Internet, and a myriad
of related technologies.Several economists have attempted to calculate the private returns (returns toinvesting firms) and the social returns (returns to both firms and consumers) from
university research.5 Others have used regression analysis to evaluate the impactof academic research on industrial patenting, manufacturing productivity, and
other measures of industrial performance (Adams, 1990; Jaffe, 1989). Possible
approaches to a quantitative assessment of the impact of academic research on
industrial performance are summarized in Box1-1.
No matter which approach is adopted, measuring the impact of academicresearch is an inexact science. Isolating, tracking, and measuring the contribu-
tions of a given body of academic research to the performance of particular firms,
industries, and regional economies is complex and difficult (Feller, 1996). There-
fore, this committeeÕs assessments of individual industries are necessarily quali-tative, based on informed judgments by knowledgeable experts in industry and
universities, as well as case studies, informal surveys, workshop deliberations,
and examples.The NAE deliberately selected diverse industries for this study. Each indus-try is influenced by many factors, such as size, age, trade dependence, and re-
search intensity, all of which influence both the amount of relevant research
performed and the ability of an industry to absorb the results. On the one hand,The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION21 (continued)
Box 1-1Quantitative Measurements of the Impact ofAcademic ResearchPatents and patent citations could be used as proxies for industrial perfor-mance to trace the contributions of academic research to patents. Francis Narinand colleagues at CHI Research, Inc., identified a sizable increase in the citation
linkages between U.S. patents and scientific research papers from the late 1980sto the mid-1990s. ÒReferences from U.S. patents to U.S. authored research papershave tripled over a six year period, from 17,000 during 1987Ð1988 to 50,000 dur-
ing 1993Ð1994, a period in which the U.S. patent system grew only by30 percent.Ó The authors concluded that Òpublic science plays an essential role insupporting U.S. industry, across all the science-linked areas of industry, amongst
companies large and small, and is a fundamental pillar of the advance of U.S.technology . . . [furthermore] the data show that the science that is contributing tohigh technology is mainstream; it is quite basic, quite recent, published in highly
influential journals, authored at major universities and laboratories, and supportedby NSF, NIH, the Departments of Defense and Energy, and by other public andcharitable institutionsÓ (Narin et al., 1998). Although this study did not focus specif-
ically on universities, the authors also found that about half of the U.S. papers citedin U.S. industry patents were authored at academic institutions.Porter and Stern (1998) used international patents per million persons as anoutput measure of innovation, and correlated it with other inputs, such as investmentsin education and R&D. Perhaps academic patents could be used in this fashion.SurveysSurvey research could be used to obtain information about a variety of indica-tors of university research and industrial performance. Based partly on a 1994survey of industrial R&D managers, W. Cohen and associates at Carnegie Mellon
University concluded that Òuniversity research provides critical short-term payoffsin some industries (such as pharmaceuticals) and is broadly important in numer-ous industriesÓ (Cohen et al., 1998). The survey provided information about the
percentage of industry R&D projects using university research and the extent towhich industries used various university research results, including patents, formoving information from universities to industrial R&D facilities.Morgan, Strickland, and colleagues conducted mail surveys and telephone inter-views with engineering and science faculty about research they conducted that theybelieve contributed to industry (Morgan et al., 1997). Interviews were also conducted
with industry counterparts or collaborators. The authors concluded that university en-gineering and science research is often relevant to industry and that real, tangiblecontributions are being made. However, when interviewees were asked to place a
dollar value on their contributions, relatively few responded (Morgan et al., 1997).Quantifying Dollar ValuesOverall impacts of individual universities. A study released in 1997 attempt-
ing to measure the impact of one research university, MIT, on the economy andemployment concluded, ÒIf the companies founded by MIT graduates and facultyformed an independent nation, the revenues produced by the companies would
make that nation the 24th largest economy in the world. The 4,000 MIT-related com-panies employ 1.1 million people and have annual world sales of $232 billion.Ó MIT-The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCErelated firms are prominent in electronics, software, and biotechnology and tend to
be concentrated in Silicon Valley and Boston. More than half of the companiesfounded by MIT graduates were founded by graduates in electrical engineering(BankBoston, 1997).In a study conducted in the early 1990s, the Stanford University licensingoffice compiled information about technology-based companies founded by mem-bers of the Stanford community (graduates, faculty, etc.). An aggregate estimate
of roughly $31 billion in revenue was attributed to firms in the San Francisco Bayarea (Leone et al., undated).1Dollar impacts of university patents and licenses. Using economic impact models,
the Association of University Technology Managers (AUTM) estimates that in FY98,$33 billion of U.S. economic activity was attributable to the results of academic licens-
ing from U.S. universities that participate in the AUTM survey, supporting 280,000 jobs(AUTM, 1999). In another study, Pressman (2000) reports that 150 licensees withagreements to use MIT-owned patents sold $3 billion in licensed products. More than
500 of some 850 MIT patent license agreements since 1980 are active.Estimating Economic and Social ReturnsMansfield estimated the annual social returns from academic research, whichinclude returns to both firms and consumers, from 1975 through 1978 to be 28 per-cent, although he warned that the estimate was very rough. Mansfield also esti-
mated that sales of new products in 1985, based on academic research that was first
commercialized between 1982 and 1985 in seven industries, including drugs, instru-ments, and information processing, totaled about $41 billion, or 5 percent of totalsales for those industries (Mansfield, 1991). Additional benefits were estimated for
process improvements. MansfieldÕs work was based in part on surveys of firms thatindicated that without university research, about 10 percent of industrial innovationswould not have occurred or would have occurred only after sizable delays.Trajtenberg (1999) estimated the social return of computerized tomographyscanners to be more than 200 percent. A question that then arises is what portionof the returns from this innovation can be attributed to academic research. Given
that fundamental scientific discoveries provided the basis for producing CT scan-ners, direct dependencies are difficult to discern; thus, the contribution of aca-demic research is also extremely difficult, if not impossible, to quantify.Cohen et al. (1998) summarized studies by Jaffe (1989) and Adams (1990) inwhich regression analyses were used along with production functions to evaluatethe impact of academic research on industry. JaffeÕs (1989) study was focused onthe effects of academic R&D on industrial patenting, whereas Adams (1990) ex-amined effects on manufacturing productivity.Using Multiple Approaches and ProxiesJaffe (1998) suggested a combined approach to quantifying the impacts ofacademic research on industrial performance. ÒI do not believe that it is possible toperform a reliable and comprehensive measurement of the outcomes of science and
technology programs. This does not mean, however, that measurement is pointless.By looking at multiple indicators, captured and evaluated at multiple levels of aggre-gation (individual projects, individual programs, agencies, and the economy as a
whole) we can draw reasonably reliable conclusions. Further, the use of multiple
indicators reduces the need to be overly concerned about the limitations of any one.Ó_________________________1MIT and Stanford may be counting some of the same people (e.g., someone with a B.S.from MIT and a Ph.D. from Stanford or vice versa).The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION23the diversity of the five industries precludes the emergence of universal, economy-wide truths. On the other hand, the committee was able to identify best practices
that could be generally implemented, as well as critical issues and shortcomings
common to these five industries, and perhaps others.For example, the studies of the five industries clearly indicate the importanceof research in both the natural sciences and engineering, as well as the social and
behavioral sciences, in the development and broad implementation of innova-
tions. Academic studies of consumer behavior, for instance, have been important
to the emergence and success of electronic commerce. Policy research on regula-
tions and standards has contributed to changes in banking (the end of Glass-
Steagall, which prohibited banks from accepting deposits and underwriting secu-
rities and established the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation),
communications (the break-up of AT&T), logistics (the deregulation of trucking
and airlines), and a wide range of similar legal and regulatory changes. The
contributions of academic research to a social, legal, political, and economic
environment that encourages innovation are often overshadowed by the more
familiar contributions to advances in science and technology.SECTOR-SPECIFIC STUDIESThis study is based on the premise that the research and technology needsand strategies of industries are sector specific as well as company specific, as is
the character of academic-industry interactions. Because the frontiers of commer-
cial research, development, and innovation vary widely among companies in the
same industry and among industries, research and resulting innovations can have
a wide range of effects on commercial success. Some of the differences are a
function of the characteristics of science and technology, but most of them are
attributable to differences in research intensity, necessary returns on investment,
market size, competition, product mix, and other distinctive characteristics of
an industry. The five industries examined in this study encompass a great
many variations.Box 1-2 summarizes the five industries, all of which are important in termsof U.S. sales and employment, technological intensity, expected growth rates,
and other metrics. One of the difficulties encountered in defining these indus-
tries is that subsectors in an industry may differ widely. In network systems and
communications, the panel focused on the innovative computer networking seg-
ment of the industry rather than on older communications services, such as
telephony. In the medical devices and equipment industry, the panel assessed
only the more sophisticated subsectors of the industry. The aerospace panel
focused on five subsectors of the aerospace industry, three of which are large,
mature businesses whose interactions with universities differ substantially from
those of the two smaller subsectors. In transportation, distribution, and logistics
services, the panel focused primarily on the contributions of one technologicallyThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEdriven approach, namely integrated logistics, to the movement of freight. Thissubsector has undergone a good deal of innovation with significant contribu-
tions from academic research; the industry as a whole, however, has not. The
financial services panel took a comprehensive view of the industry, including
consumer and commercial services, investment banking, and insurance. The
medical devices and equipment industry and the network systems and communi-
cations industry have a history of extensive collaboration with academic re-
search. The aerospace industry, the financial services industry, and the transpor-
tation, distribution and logistics services industry generally have had more
limited, less systematic interactions with academic researchers.Box 1-2Industry DefinitionsNetwork Systems and Communications. Focused was on the innovative com-
puter networking segment of the industry, including computing and communica-tions equipment, software, and services (basically all information technology ex-cept for integrated circuits). The industry generated roughly $715 billion in sales
and more than 2.2 million jobs in 2000.Medical Devices and Equipment. Includes five North American Industrial Classi-fication System (NAICS) codes: (1) surgical and medical instruments, (2) surgical
appliances and supplies, (3) dental equipment and supplies, (4) irradiation appa-ratus, (5) and navigational, measuring, electromedical, and control instruments.Medical information systems are also included. As of 1999, the global market for
medical devices was $138 billion, and the U.S. market accounted for 37 percent ofglobal demand.  The U.S. industry supplied 40 percent of the global market with
shipments of $55 billion and employed nearly 300,000 workers.Aerospace. Includes five sectors, ranging from the mature (1) large-scale air-frames, (2) jet engine, and (3) launch-vehicle businesses to the newer businessesof (4) unmanned aerial vehicles and (5) space-based information systems. The
industry as a whole accounted for more than $146 billion in sales and 800,000 jobsin 2000.Transportation, Distribution, and Logistics Services. Focuses on integratedlogistics services, including inventory carrying costs and transportation and ad-ministrative costs associated with moving freight and people. The industry hadroughly $1 trillion in sales and employed more than 3.6 million people in 2000.Financial Services. Includes all services associated with the packaging and de-scription of financial securities and the implementation of financial transactions.The industry accounted for roughly $820 billion of U.S. gross domestic product
and provided nearly 6 million jobs in 2000.Sources: AIA, 2001; Delaney and Wilson, 2001; McGraw-Hill and U.S. Department of
Commerce, 2000; U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2001, 2002.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION25All five industries have demonstrated an impressive capacity for innovationover the past decade. However, only the three manufacturing industries (net-
work systems and communications; medical devices; and aerospace) have long-
standing, well developed R&D functions. By contrast, the two predominantly
service industries (transportation, distribution, and logistics services; and finan-
cial services) have only recently begun to develop an R&D ethos in the tradi-
tional sense. The following chapters describe each industry in greater detail and
summarize the findings for each industry.NOTES1There are serious limitations to using the categories basic research, applied research, and devel-opment to characterize the R&D enterprise (Stokes, 1997). In spite of the uncertainty in placing
specific research projects into these categories, science and technology agencies that produce R&Ddata routinely use them.2In some cases, the federal government requires that a university obtain matching funds fromindustry as a prerequisite for supporting a research center.3The five industry sectors examined in this study do not correspond exactly to categories forwhich industry research and other data are collected. Furthermore, academic research in several
fields may contribute to these industries, making it difficult to assign the contributions of specificdisciplinary research in universities to a specific industry sector.4Several factors contributed to this: a 1980 Supreme Court decision, Diamond vs Chakrabarty,upheld the validity of a broad patent in biotechnology; the Patent and Trademarks Law AmendmentsAct (P.L. 96-517), often referred to as the Bayh-Dole Act of 1980, changed long-standing federalpolicy that had not allowed research institutions to own inventions developed under federal research
contracts or to license or otherwise pursue commercialization of the invention; and the creation ofthe Federal Circuit Court of Appeals in 1982 provided a strong champion of patent-holder rights(Mowery et al., 1999).5In an assessment of seven industries, Mansfield (1991) estimated that the annual social returnsfrom academic research from 1975 to 1978 were 28 percent. Mansfield also estimated that 1985 salesof new products based on academic research that were first commercialized between 1982 and 1985
totaled about $41 billion, or 5 percent of total sales for those industries. For a review of approachesto measuring social returns of R&D not specifically focused on academic research, see Jones andWilliams, 1998.REFERENCESAdams, J. 1990. Fundamental stocks of knowledge and productivity growth. Journal of PoliticalEconomy 98(4): 673Ð702.AIA (Aerospace Industries Association). 2001, Aerospace Facts and Figures: 2001/2002. Washing-ton, D.C.: Aerospace Industries Association. Available online at: http://www.aia-aerospace.org/stats/facts_figures/ff_01_02/ff_summary.cfm. [August 21, 2003]AUTM (Association of University Technology Managers). 1999. FY 98 Licensing Survey. Availableonline at: http://www.autm.net/index_ie.html. [June 24, 2003]
AUTM. 2000. AUTM Licensing Survey, FY 1999. Northbrook, Ill.: AUTM.AUTM. 2001. AUTM Licensing Survey, FY 2000. Northbrook, Ill.: AUTM.
BankBoston. 1997. MIT: The Impact of Innovation. Special Report of the BankBoston EconomicsDepartment. March. Available online at: http://web.mit.edu/newsoffice/founders/. [June 24,2003]The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEBrooks, H., and L.P. Randazzese. 1998. University-Industry Relations: The Next Four Years andBeyond. Pp. 361Ð399 in Investing in Innovation: Creating a Research and Innovation Policythat Works, L.M. Branscomb and J.H. Keller, eds. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.Cohen, W.M., R. Florida, and W.R. Goe. 1994. University-Industry Research Centers in the UnitedStates. Pittsburgh, Pa.: Center for Economic Development, Carnegie Mellon University.Cohen, W.M., R. Florida, L.P. Randazzese, and J. Walsh. 1998. Industry and the Academy: UneasyPartners in the Cause of Technological Advance. Pp. 171Ð199 in Challenges to Research Uni-versities, R. Noll, ed. Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.Delaney and Wilson. 2001. Managing Logistics in a Perfect Storm. 12th Annual State of LogisticsReport. Washington, D.C.: Cass Information Systems.Feller, I. 1996. Technology Transfer from Universities. Pp. 1Ð42 in Higher Education: Handbook ofTheory and Research, J.C. Smart, ed. New York: Agathon Press.Florida, R., and W.M. Cohen. 1999. Engine or Infrastructure? The University Role in EconomicDevelopment. Pp. 589Ð610 in Industrializing Knowledge, L.M. Branscomb, F. Kodama, and R.Florida, eds. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.Jaffe, A. 1989. Real effects of academic research. American Economic Review 79(5): 957Ð970.Jankowski, J.E. 1999. Trends in academic research spending, alliances, and commercialization. Jour-nal of Technology Transfer 24: 55Ð68.Jones, C.I., and J.C. Williams. 1998. Measuring the social return to R&D. Quarterly Journal ofEconomics 113(4): 1119Ð1127.Journal of Technology Transfer. 2001. Symposium on Technology Organizational Issuesin University-Industry Technology Transfer. Special Issue. Journal of Technology Trans-fer 26(1).Leone, A., J. Vamos, R. Keeley, and W.F. Miller. Undated. A Survey of Technology Based Compa-nies Founded by Members of the Stanford University Community. An unpublished study com-missioned by the Stanford University Office of Licensing, Stanford, California.Mansfield, E. 1991. Academic research and industrial innovation. Research Policy 20: 1Ð12.McGraw-Hill and U.S. Department of Commerce. 2000. Chapter 45, Medical and Dental Instru-ments and Supplies, in U.S. Industry and Trade Outlook 1999. New York: McGraw-Hill.Morgan, R.P., D.E. Strickland, N. Kannankutty, and J. Grillon. 1994. Research on academic engi-neering research. Part II. How engineering faculty view academic research. ASEE PRISM 4(3):30Ð35.Morgan, R.P., D.E. Strickland, M.E. Sava, and N. Kannankutty. 1997. Academic Engineering Re-search at a Time of Change: The Tilt Towards Industry. Pp. 226Ð234 in Proceedings of IEEEInternational Symposium on Technology and Society. New York: IEEE.Mowery, D.C., R.R. Nelson, B.N. Sampat, and A.A. Ziedonis. 1999. The Effects of the Bayh-DoleAct on U.S. Research and Technology. Pp. 269Ð306 in Industrializing Knowledge, L.M.Branscomb, F. Kodama, and R. Florida, eds. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.Narin, F., K. Hamilton, and D. Olivastro. 1998. The Increasing Linkage between U.S. Technologyand Public Science. P. 101 in AAAS 1998 Science and Technology Yearbook, A. Teich, S.D.Nelson, and C. McEnaney, editors. Washington, D.C.: AAAS.Nelson, L. 2000. Many Forms of Technology Transfer from Universities. Viewgraph presented at theAAAS Science and Technology Policy Colloquium, April 2000, Washington, D.C.NSB (National Science Board). 1998. Science and Engineering Indicators 1998. Washington, D.C:U.S. Government Printing Office.NSB. 2000. Science and Engineering Indicators 2000. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government PrintingOffice.NSF (National Science Foundation). 2001a. Federal Funds for Research and Development: DetailedHistorical Tables: Fiscal Years 1951Ð2001. NSF 01-334. Arlington, Va.: NSF.NSF. 2001b. Federal Funds for Research and Development: Federal Obligations for Research toUniversities and Colleges by Agency and Detailed Field of Science and Engineering: Fiscalyears 1973Ð2001. NSF 01-331. Arlington, Va.: National Science Foundation.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION27NSF. 2003. National Patterns of Research and Development Resources: 2002 Data Update. Arling-ton, Va.: National Science Foundation. NSF 03-313. Available online at: http://www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/nsf03313/start.htm. [June 24, 2003]Porter, M., and S. Stern. 1998. Evaluating U.S. Innovative Capacity: The Innovation Index. Presenta-tion at MIT Innovation Summit, March 13, 1998, Cambridge, Massachusetts.Pressman, L. 2000. Measuring Product Development Outcomes of Patent Licensing at MIT. Paperpresented at AAAS Annual Meeting, Washington, D.C., February 17Ð22, 2000.Rapoport, A.I. 1999. How Has the Field Mix of Federal Research Funding Changed over the PastThree Decades? Issue Brief NSF 99-328. Arlington, Va.: National Science Foundation, Divi-sion of Science Resources Studies.Rogers, E.M., J. Yin, and J. Hoffman. 2000. Assessing the effectiveness of technology transferoffices at U.S. research universities. Journal of the Association of University Technology Man-agers 12: 47Ð80.Sampat, B., and R. Nelson. 1999. The Emergence of Standardization of University TechnologyTransfer Offices: A Case Study of Institutional Change. Prepared for the New InstitutionalEconomics, September 16Ð18, 1999.  Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
Stokes, D.E. 1997. PasteurÕs Quadrant: Basic Science and Technological Innovation. Washington,D.C.: The Brookings Institution.Trajtenberg, M. 1999. Economic Analysis of Product Innovation: The Case of CT Scanners. Cam-bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.U.S. Bureau of the Census. 2001. Statistical Abstract of the United States. Washington, D.C.: U.S.Government Printing Office.U.S. Bureau of the Census. 2002. Statistical Abstract of the United StatesÐ2002. Washington, D.C.:U.S. Government Printing Office. Available online at: http://www.census.gov/prod/www/statistical-abstract-02.html. [June 24, 2003]The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2Report of the Panel on the Network
Systems and Communications IndustryThe Panel on Network Systems and Communications, one of five panelsformed by the Committee on the Impact of Academic Research on Industrial
Performance, was asked to examine the impact of academic research on the
performance of the network systems and communications industry and recom-
mend ways based on trends in the industry and the research community to in-
crease this impact. The panel of six included three members of NAE (all from
industry), one other member from industry, and two from academia. Three of the
panel members were also members of the parent committee. The panel reviewed
the literature, developed several case studies, and sent a questionnaire to experts
in academia, the computer industry, the network systems and communications
industry, and government. The questionnaire was followed by a workshop at-
tended by approximately 30 senior individuals in the network systems and com-
munications sector (see Addendum).The network systems and communications business sector flourishedthroughout the 1990s, when the growth of the Internet, the technologies that
implement it, and the businesses and services that use it were unprecedented.
Telecommunications servicesÑespecially wireless digital telephones and paging
servicesÑalso grew rapidly. Much of this success was attributable to exponential
improvements in the performance-to-cost ratio of microelectronics over the past
three decades. Technical innovations emerging from within the industry and from
academic research have been essential. Some innovations were the culmination
of decades of research; some were short-term developments that entered the29The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEmarket via start-up companies; and some were incremental improvements toexisting products.In the last 30 years, digital technologies have transformed the telephonenetwork from an analog system to a computer-controlled system with digital
switching and transmission. The process of digitalization has changed the indus-
try from two distinct businessesÑcomputers and communicationsÑto one busi-ness in which computers and communications are intermingled in products and
services. This convergence was accelerated by advances in microelectronics and
increases in the bandwidth available for communications (Messerschmitt, 1996).
The result is increasingly pervasive data networking, based largely on the packet-
switching technologies that emerged from academic and industrial research to
spawn the Internet.The network systems and communications industry has a large and expand-ing services component. For the telecommunications industry, which has always
been a service provider, the challenge is to invent and offer customers new,
valuable services that generate new sources of revenue. For the computer portion
of the industry, high-performance communications are making a wide range of
new services feasible. Examples include remote sensors and control systems;
integrated supply chain management systems; application service providers; full-
time, real-time stock quotes; and instant messaging.DEFINITION OF THE INDUSTRYThe network systems and communications industry must be defined verybroadly. It clearly includes the manufacturing of telecommunications equipment
and the services that use such equipment, such as telephony, wireless telephony,
broadcast television, cable and satellite television, radio, and Internet service.
Both the equipment and services sectors increasingly require computing equip-
ment and software, and, in fact, the computer and communications industries are
no longer separate industries. For example, cellular telephony depends on a broad
range of technologies: the cell phone contains a liquid crystal display, an embed-
ded computer with a lot of software, and advanced chips that integrate most of the
components of a high-frequency radio; the transmission formats depend on ad-
vances in digital speech compression, signal modulation, and coding; the base
stations depend heavily on digital integrated circuits and computers for switching
and control and fiber-optic links between them; tracking a moving telephone
requires that computers at adjacent base stations exchange protocol messages for
the handoff; and the billing, provisioning, and maintenance of the service require
large-scale computing and software systems of the service provider. Separating
this integrated system into ÒcommunicationsÓ and 
ÒcomputingÓ components is
simply not possible. In short, computing and communications equipment and
services have converged, creating new business and technical opportunities.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORK SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY31The explosive growth of the Internet is the most visible manifestation ofthis trend toward convergence. The technologies underlying the InternetÑjust like those that underlie the cellular telephoneÑinclude computing andcommunications. Special computers serve as routers, and network services
knit together the transmission links and implement the collection of Internet
protocols that carry Internet traffic. The explosive growth of the Internet,
however, is attributable not to these basic provisionsÑwhich existed before1993Ñbut to new services that created consumer demand: electronic mail,the World Wide Web of information and its associated browser software; chat
groups; real-time delivery of audio and video media; online merchandising;
banking and financial transactions; supply-chain integration of suppliers and
customers; and numerous other applications. Some applications merely ex-
tend existing internal information technology systems to provide Internet
access. But others, such as eBayÕs success with online auctions, are entirelynew business concepts. As the Internet becomes more pervasive, old ways of
computing, in which data was created, stored, and manipulated at a single
site, are giving way to networked systems in which data can be accessed
remotely and shared extensively.The computers embedded in everyday objectsÑtelephones, cars, televisions,furnaces, hi-fi equipmentÑare becoming increasingly capable and increasinglynetworked. Some cars already can connect with a diagnostic and help center by
cellular telephone or satellite communications. Home networks in which multiple
personal computers in a household are linked over existing telephone wires and
short-range wireless devices will soon make networking of appliances routine. A
world in which all devices have an Internet address is not out of reach. Thus
computers increasingly require communications to fulfill their functions, and
communications increasingly require computers to fulfill theirs.The technologies of computing and communications are becoming indis-tinguishable. All of them depend on software to express functions at all levels
in the network. A few years ago, a modem was a complex, integrated circuit.
Today, with more complex algorithms and faster computers, modems are writ-
ten in software embedded within digital signal processors. Many algorithms
can be used equally well in computing and communications settings. For ex-
ample, schemes to digitize and compress video signals are useful both for
manipulating and storing video information on a computer disk and for trans-
mitting it over digital communications channels. Similarly, encryption technol-
ogy can be used to protect sensitive information in a computer system or in
transit over a network.These three trendsÑconvergence, embedding, and network applicationsÑcharacterize the network systems and communications sector. The panelÕs assess-ment of the contributions of academic research to this industry is based on this
broad definition.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCESizeBecause our definition has vague boundaries and because the industrialclassifications used to gather statistics have not been adapted to the rapid changes
in the industry, it is difficult to determine the size of the network systems and
communications sector. Table 2-1 summarizes sales and employment in the
information technology industry based on Bureau of the Census data (U.S. Bu-
reau of the Census, 2002). Taken together, sales of computer and communica-
tions equipment and services (all information technology minus semiconduc-
tors) were about $715 billion in 2000, and the industry employed more than
2.2 million people (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2002). Expenditures for
information-processing equipment increased almost 10 percent per year on aver-
age from 1970 to 1994; the corresponding figure for computers and peripherals
was 27.5 percent (NRC, 1999). A 1999 survey found that telecommunications
manufacturing was growing by 16.3 percent annually, computer software by
16.6 percent, and computer hardware by 9.5 percent (CTIS, 1999), however
these rates have dropped significantly since early 2000.StructureThe role of research and innovation in the network systems and communicationssector can best be understood in the context of the structure of the industry, which
influences the mechanisms of innovation and thus how new technologies and prod-
ucts are introduced. The very general description that follows is intended only to

reveal similarities and differences with the other industries studied in this report.ManufacturingThe structure of the computer industry is horizontal; the communicationsindustry was vertically integrated but has been rapidly changing to a horizontalTABLE 2-1   Sales and Employment in the Information Technology Industry, 2000
SalesNumber
NAICSaRevenuesof Jobs
Code($ billions)(1,000)
IT ManufacturingComputer and peripheral equipment3341$110.0190
Communications equipment3342119.3291

Software511288.6331
Semiconductors andother electronic components3344168.5621
IT ServicesData processing services514242.9296

Telecommunications services5133354.21,165
aNorth American Industrial Classification System. Source:  U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2002.
The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORK SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY33structure as well. In a horizontal structure, numerous suppliers manufacture partsand components that many integrators assemble into subassemblies that are then
assembled into final products by numerous competing original equipment manu-
facturers. The multiplicity of companies at each manufacturing step ensures in-
tense competition throughout the production process, not only in terms of price
but also on a wide rage of performance characteristics. For example, manufac-
turers of personal computers buy disk drives from any one of about a dozen
suppliers. A company that needs a customized integrated circuit may design the
circuit but use one of several competing semiconductor foundries to manufacture
it. Specialized circuit board assembly firms can assemble and test complete cir-
cuit boards, giving an electronic design firm the ability to design and sell a unique
computer interface board with custom chips without having to invest in either
chip or board manufacturing facilities.The divestiture of AT&T and the subsequent deregulation of communica-tions services forced the communications industry to change from a vertical to a
horizontal structure. Today there are many vendors of telecommunications equip-
ment and components. Custom integrated circuits can implement very complex
communications functions; coupled with custom-built and proprietary software
designs, equipment vendors compete intensely in terms of technology, reliability,
and cost of ownership.Another important feature of the network systems and communications sec-tor is its reliance on components with well defined interfaces. Integrated circuits

are a good example: the physical, electrical, and logical behaviors of chip inter-
faces are specified by the manufacturer and used by the customer to determine
how to incorporate a chip into a subsystem with other components. Subsystems
then become components of still larger systems. Software, another component,
plugs into the operating system that supports it by linking the software interfaces
(sometimes called application programming interfaces, or APIs). A piece of soft-
ware that is compatible with a certain operating system adheres to the interfaces
provided by the operating system. Computer systems are built from complex
hierarchical assemblies of subsystems and components, sometimes hundreds or
even thousands of them. Some of the components are custom built, and some are
standard. Thus, interfaces give rise to components, which in turn give rise to
businesses structured around buying and selling components.Key component interfaces become industry standards, which are usuallyadopted by industry groups to hasten the spread of a new technology, increase
sales volume, and, therefore, decrease cost. Standards maintained by a group with
broad representation from competitive suppliers are said to be open standards.
For example, the Personal Computer Memory Card International Association is
an industry group that establishes standards for interchangeable interface cards
for laptop computers. The standards group includes several producers of cards
and several producers of laptops to ensure that the standard cannot be manipu-
lated to benefit one competitor over another. By contrast, standards promulgatedThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEby a single vendor are said to be proprietary. For example, the programminginterface for MicrosoftÕs Windows operating system is proprietary; Microsoftspecifies it and can change it at will.Standards play a special role in communications. Broadly speaking, they are nec-essary to ensure that components and subsystems connected via a communications
channel can operate together (e.g., they obey the same conventions for encoding voice
signals, multiplexing many simultaneous phone calls on a single channel, performing
operation and maintenance functions). Standards of this kind are necessary for guaran-
teed, sustained interoperability, and changes must be carefully designed to avoid even
slight interruptions of network service. New versions of standards must be designed so
they can be introduced incrementally, connect new equipment to old, test new proto-
cols, and so on. The same considerations apply to Internet protocols.ServicesCommunication services (e.g., voice and data transmission, switching, anddistribution) are a major portion of the network systems and communications in-
dustry. The number and structure of telecommunications service providers have
been in constant flux since the divestiture of AT&T and the deregulation of local
telephone services. First, new companies emerged offering wireless telephone ser-
vices. Then another group of new companies emerged as Internet service providers.To increase their revenue, carriers have been developing value-added services,such as voice mail, call forwarding, call waiting, 800 service, electronic mail, and
virtual private networking, along with conventional transmission and switching
services. Internet service providers provide national and regional portals that offer
news, chat rooms, advertising, and direct access to the World Wide Web.Computing services are also a major element of the industry. System integration,the design and deployment of communications and information systems for large
clients, has become a major source of revenue for many equipment vendors. In recent
years, an important service has been to implement network capabilities across compa-
niesÕ existing computer systems. In some cases, networking has focused on providing
Internet access for employees and customers; in others, the focus has been on the
development of internal networks linking production and distribution facilities across
the company. So far, neither academic nor industrial research has addressed the
problems of service delivery in a structured and sustained manner.INNOVATION SYSTEMMost innovations are incremental improvements, such as design refinements,improvements in technology and manufacturing processes, a better understanding of
customer needs, and integration of previously separate products. For example, impor-
tant performance metrics for communications equipment include low power and high
density (so that many circuits can be accommodated in the confined spaces of wiringThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORK SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY35closets, boxes mounted on telephone poles, and even central switching offices). Bothpower and density can be improved by advances in integrated-circuit technologies,
which in turn, derive primarily from incremental improvements in fabrication equip-
ment, processing steps, and materials. Research results may be the basis for some of
these improvements, and research has achieved major breakthroughs in these areas;
this research is performed or funded by materials, equipment, and microchip fabrica-
tors, not by the telecommunications equipment manufacturers (see Box 2-1).BOX 2-1
The Cellular TelephoneThe rapid spread of cellular telephones probably epitomizes the popular con-ception of innovation.  The use of cellular telephony started out slowly but then

exploded.  There were 11 million subscribers in 1992 and 141 million in 2001.  The
look, feel, and weight of cell phones have also evolved rapidly.Although the original cellular concept was developed at AT&T Bell Laborato-ries in 1946, cellular technology was not the outgrowth of fundamental research onradio-frequency propagation and control.  Rather, it was the result of demand-
driven technological improvements developed by corporate researchers, primarily
at Bell Laboratories and Motorola.  The long delay from the initial idea to deploy-
ment was principally the result of regulatory and business decisions that de-emphasized the development of cellular technologies.  Only a few systems, such

as improved mobile telephone service, were deployed at all (in 1964).  Because of
the delay, developers benefited from the microelectronics revolution and were able
to use inexpensive microprocessors and integrated circuits to make equipment
cheaper, lighter, and less power hungry.Until recently, cellular telephony in the United States was dominated by theadvanced mobile phone service (AMPS) analog standard developed in the early
1970s.  The switch to digital transmission occurred more rapidly in Europe, with
the GSM (global system for mobile communication) standard, which uses time-division multiple access.  A competing digital scheme that relies on spread-

spectrum technology (CDMAÑcode division multiple access) was developed as aproprietary standard by Qualcomm.  In March 1999, the firms competing over
CDMA intellectual property and products agreed to support a single worldwide
standard to promote widespread adoption.  Personal communications systems
services in the United States use these techniques in a new, larger frequencyband.  Many cellular telephones contain electronics that will work with more than

one of these standards and thus can operate in many areas around the world.Academic research has played only a small role in the development of theseinnovations.  Until the telephone industry was deregulated, using public funds to

compete with Bell Laboratories research was considered pointless.  Moreover,
Bell Laboratories did not fund academic research in this area; instead they re-cruited graduates of broad science and engineering programs and trained them in
specialized research areas on the job.  After the breakup of the Bell system, new
firms entered the telecommunications arena, demand for engineers trained in cel-lular technologies grew, and academia began to respond.  Today, considerable

academic research is being done in these technologies.Source:  CTIA, 2003; Qualcomm Corporation, 1999; Roessner et al., 1998.
The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEFor many businesses, vendors of materials, products, and services throughoutthe supply chain are major sources of innovation. Buying an integrated-circuit chip,
for example, implicitly buys a share of the dramatic improvements in price and
performance of integrated circuits (MooreÕs Law).1 Over time, innovations will
make the chip faster or cheaper or more capable. A telecommunications carrier that
wants to deploy Synchronous Optical Network (SONET), a transmission protocol
that defines optical carrier levels and their electrically equivalent synchronous
transport signals, can purchase switches, multiplexers, and test equipment from the
vendors who developed SONET technology. This pattern is a direct consequence
of the ÒhorizontalÓ structure of the industry. Dell Computer, for example, does nothave in-house R&D; in effect, Dell is a broker that negotiates attractive deals to buy

components and computer-assembly services for its build-a-computer-to-order busi-
ness. Dell depends on R&D investments by its vendors, especially Intel and
Microsoft, that make the microprocessors and operating system software on which
the personal computer business depends. DellÕs innovations have been in its busi-ness model and supply-chain management, not in its technology.Innovation can also be purchased by acquiring other companies, especiallyventure-capital-backed start-up companies that have introduced new products
with new technologies. A start-up company is a new business, often with an
innovative technology but with considerable risk. Often the innovative technol-
ogy has its origins in academic research. If the company makes good progress,
both in technology and in the market (e.g., beta testing, or success in getting its
approach adopted by standards consortia), it becomes an attractive target for a
larger company seeking to strengthen its technology or product line. For ex-
ample, Texas Instruments bought Amati; Fore Systems bought Berkeley Net-
works and Marconi bought Fore Systems; Cisco bought Granite Systems; and
Broadcom bought Epigram. Each of the acquired companies had ventured into a
new technical area. Epigram, for example, had devised a way to use home tele-
phone wiring to transmit 10Mb Ethernet traffic and had made progress in stan-
dardizing the scheme through the Home Phoneline Networking Alliance.
Broadcom, itself an innovative fabless chip company specializing in integrating
analog and digital functions of cable and twisted-wire modems, saw buying
Epigram as a natural way to enhance its core business.Although high-tech start-ups seldom do research in the classic sense, manybehave much like 
Òapplied researchÓ projects in an industrial laboratory. They
formulate technically aggressive plans based on established principles to pursue
and evaluate; the results of experiments often inform several products. For ex-
ample, Transwitch attempted to increase the telecommunications protocol process-
ing integrated on a single chip, as well as to partition the chip functions into an
ÒarchitectureÓ so that a small number of chip designs could be used to build a wide
variety of telecommunications products. Both Amati and Epigram conceived ways
of using advanced signal-processing techniques to adapt digital transmission to the
characteristics of real-world, twisted-pair copper wires (Amati) or in-houseThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORK SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY37telephone wiring (Epigram). The technology-development activities of these com-panies are much like those in industrial research, but they are done in a commercial
setting and with strong incentives to bring innovations to market rapidly.Industrial research is concentrated in the laboratories of a few of the largestcompanies, such as Intel, Microsoft, IBM, Compaq, Lucent, AT&T, Hewlett-
Packard, Sun Microsystems, and Xerox. Although many of these firms invest 10 to
15 percent or more of revenues in R&D each year, the vast majority of this is for
Òdevelopment,Ó that is, for the engineering of the next generation of products.
Research focused on objectives more than 18 months or one or two product cycles
out is estimated to be, at most, 5 percent of that 10 to 15 percent, or far less than
1 percent of revenue.2 A few large companies eschew research, preferring instead
to buy innovative companies (e.g., Cisco). Companies in the services sector, how-
ever, generally do not engage in or support research. For example, at MCI, which is
generally considered a technology leader, the advanced technology group is primar-

ily concerned with testing new equipment and working with vendors to solve
interoperability and operation, administration, and management problems.Industry research is usually driven by market needs but often includes somefundamental or long-range projects as well. For example, IBMÕs research on theInternet and electronic commerce includes some long-term work on cryptographic

systems for security and authentication. Industrial research often links advanced
technologies to emerging product needs. For example, as the Java programming
language became popular, industry laboratories at Sun, IBM, and elsewhere
launched projects to devise advanced techniques for the compilation, synchroni-
zation, and code simplification required for its implementation. Previous research
results in these areas had not adequately addressed the needs of the Java lan-
guage, of todayÕs large memories, or of multiprocessor servers. Some of thisresearch is fundamental in the sense that it can be applied to problems other than
Java language implementations. In fact, even though research in engineering
fields is usually targeted toward meeting specific engineering needs, the results
are often useful for many other applications.One of the companiesÕ aims in operating research laboratories is to expand
their capability for bringing in new ideas and new people (Cohen and Levinthal,
1990). The laboratory is expected to recruit people who cannot be recruited by an
engineering organization; it is also expected to interact with the intellectual
community by attending conferences, publishing papers, collaborating with uni-
versities, or entering partnerships with other companies; and it is intended to
counteract the risk inherent in the narrow focus of engineering projects on prod-
uct development.A Culture of InnovationInnovation in the network systems and communications industry can takemany paths. Even when research plays an essential role, there is no linear pathThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCELANsRings, HubnetEthernet, Datakit, AutonetLANs, switched EthernetGraphical user interfaces 
Workstations
GraphicsSketchpad, UtahGM/IBM, Xerox, MicrosoftE&S, SGI, ATI, Adobe
Lisp machine, StanfordXerox Alto
Xerox Star, Apollo, Sun
Engelbart / Rochester
Alto, SmalltalkStar, Mac, Microsoft
Timesharing
CTSS, Multics / BSDUnixSDS 940, 360/67, VMSInternetARPANET, Aloha, Internet
PupDECnet, TCP/IPRISC  processors
Berkeley, Stanford

IBM 801SUN, SGI, IBM, HPVLSI designBerkeley, Caltech, MOSIS
many19651970197519801985199019952005
19651970197519801985199019952005
Client/server computingBerkeley, CMU, CERN
PARC, DEC, IBM
Novell, EMC, Sun, OracleEntertainmentSpacewar (MIT), Trek (Rochester)
Atari, Nintendo, SGI, PixarUniversityIndustry R&DProducts$1  bil. marketto World Wide Web
FIGURE 2-1Examples of academic government-sponsored (and some industry-sponsored) IT research and development in the creation of commercial products andindustries.  Source:  NRC, 2003.
The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORK SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY39RAID /disk servers
Relational databasesBerkeley, Wisconsin
IBMOracle, IBM, SybaseBerkeleyStriping/Datamesh, Petalmany19651970197519801985199019952005
World Wide Web
Alta VistaNetscape, Yahoo, Google
19651970197519801985199019952005
Speech recognitionCMU, SRI, MITBell, IBM, DragonDragon, IBMBroadband l in last mileBellcore (Telcordia)
Amati, Alcatel, BroadcomStanford, UCLAPortable communicationLinkabit, HughesQualcommBerkeley, Purdue (CDMA)
Parallel databasesTokyo, Wisconsin, UCLA
IBM, ICLICL, Teradata, Tandem
Parallel computingIlliac 4, CMU, Caltech, HPCIBM, IntelCM-5, Teradata, Cray T3D
Data miningWisconsin, StanfordIBM, ArborIRI, Arbor, Plato
CERN, Illinois (Mosaic)from InternetUniversityIndustry R&DProducts$1  bil. marketThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEfrom a research result to advanced development to product development to eco-nomic return. Ideas and people tend to bounce around; new ideas can be stymied by
political or business impediments and forced to take alternative routes. The indus-

try does not have a few mechanisms for creating and exploiting innovations. In-
stead, it enjoys what has been called a Ònational research cultureÓ that fosters
innovation (Lazowska, 1998). Some of the features of that culture are de-

scribed below.A 1995 report of the National Research Council Computer Science andTelecommunications Board documents the effect of the research culture in the
computer and high-performance computing arenas (NRC, 1995). A more recent
report (NRC, 2003), documents how technologies are born (often in academia),
are taken up and extended by other academic or industrial groups, become the
seeds of start-up companies or new products in larger companies, as well as how
the market for the technology grows and matures (Figure 2-1). All paths to
market are erratic, and often take 15 years. The diversity in the academic and
industrial sectors lends robustness to the process: a good idea is very hard to
completely eradicate. Among the findings of that report are:¥Research has kept paying off over a long period.¥The payoff from research takes time. At least 10 years, more often 15,elapse between initial research on a major new idea and commercial
success. This is still true in spite of todayÕs shorter product cycles.¥Unexpected results are often the most important. Electronic mail and theÒwindowsÓ interface are only two examples.
¥Research stimulates communication and interaction. Ideas flow back andforth between research programs and development efforts and between
academia and industry.¥Research trains people, who start companies or form a pool of trainedpersonnel that existing companies can draw on to enter new mar-
kets quickly.¥Doing research involves taking risks. Not all public research programshave succeeded or led to clear outcomes even after many years. But the
record of accomplishments suggests that government investment in com-
puting and communications research has been very productive.Mobility of IdeasAs Figure 2-1 suggests, the number and types of research structures amonguniversities and industry provide a kind of redundancy; an idea that cannot ad-
vance in one environment may flourish in another. As an example, the path of
reduced instruction set computing (RISC) started out with John CockeÕs IBM801, developed at IBM Research. Although the ideas were countercultural andThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORK SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY41did not have a great impact at IBM, they spawned two research projects, one atBerkeley and one at Stanford, to explore them further. Both university projects
resulted in prototype processor designs. The Stanford project formed the nucleus
of a start-up companyÑMIPS ComputerÑto build RISC microprocessors. TheBerkeley project led to an advanced development project at Sun Microsystems to
develop its SPARC instruction set. Both led to commercially successful products.
Moreover, publication of the work in professional journals rapidly spread aware-
ness of the technology. A related example occurred in the evolution of relational
databases. A researcher at IBM, Ted Codd, developed an idea that found little
encouragement at IBM, whose products at the time used a competing database
technology. Nevertheless, Codd was able to seed academic work at Berkeley that
enlarged the interested community and eventually led to two start-up companies,
Ingres and Oracle, and a huge industry (NRC, 1999). Both processor and data-
base technologies were later embraced by IBM.Table 2-2 shows one way that ideas can move between academia andindustry. A key idea of this sketch is the ÒdemocratizationÓ phase, in which a
tiny research community is deliberately enlarged into a community with a
critical mass of researchers exchanging ideas, building prototypes, and teach-
ing others. This step was clearly discernible in the histories of both RISC and
relational databases, and was, perhaps, the key step in the spread of very large-
scale integration design techniques that Carver Mead and Lynn Conway devel-
oped in the late 1970s. Democratization in that case involved writing a text-
book, teaching teachers, and starting courses in a half-dozen graduate
departments to spread the ideas. These efforts resulted in a self-sustaining
research community that built computer-aided design software, built a short-
run chip fabrication system (MOSIS), designed a number of novel chip archi-
tectures, and trained hundreds of students in the art of integrated-circuit design
and computer architecture.TABLE 2-2   How Ideas Can Move between Academia and Industry
UniversityIndustry/Government
1.Theoretical result2.Student graduates to industry laboratory
that encourages individual researchers
and builds a basic prototype.3.Democratization phase, in which many
people work on the idea (e.g., RISC)4.Advanced development leads to a
commercially successful product in a
small but significant market.5.Academics study the details and fill in6.Market explodes.  Industrial research
the gaps [lots of difficult research here]advances technologies.
Source:  Tennenhouse, 1998.
The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEMobility of PeoplePeople often move on to new challenges, sometimes taking with them inno-vative ideas. The industry asserts, Òtechnology transfer is a contact sport,Ó that
ideas transfer best when people carry them. Universities are, of course, a primary
source of people, graduate and undergraduate students, many of whom have had
research experience. University graduates with research experience are very valu-
able to industry, not only as staff for its research functions, but also as technical
leaders in product development organizations. Curious people with broad techni-
cal knowledge who are trained in solving technical problems through research are
extremely valuable in todayÕs product engineering groups.People with ideas often feel impelled to find a receptive environment, and inthe 1990s start-up companies were a powerful attraction. University graduates
sometimes embarked immediately on a start-up company, based on ideas formu-
lated or prototyped while they were students. Faculty members often took leave
to start companies or to consult with companies that embraced their new ideas. In
fact, departing faculty members and students left some academic computer sci-
ence departments with large gaps in their curricula and research programs, espe-
cially systems and networks programs (Morris, 1998).3 The lures are not only
financial. Many students who would otherwise go to graduate school complain
that academic research is sterile and irrelevant; they prefer to actually do engi-
neering, to build a product that will change the world.The mobility of people includes flow from industry to academia. For in-stance, in a 2001 survey, many computer science programs reported record num-
bers of applicants for doctoral programs, attributable to the demise of many
Internet start-ups (Bryant and Vardi, 2002). Anecdotal evidence also suggests
that many industry researchers have found places in universities as industrial
research spending has declined at telecommunications and computer hardware
companies. Their knowledge and industrial experience can provide valuable in-
sight for academic research.Open StructuresThe structure of the network systems and communications industry promotescertain kinds of innovation. When components have well defined interfaces,
innovators can offer improved components with the same interfaces, so they
remain compatible with their predecessors. Thus, there is a ready-made market
for the new product. Moreover, some interfaces are specifically designed to ac-
commodate innovation. For example, the Òoperating system interfaceÓ invites
application programmers to write innovative applications by eliminating the need
to deal with a myriad of details of hardware control. Standards for communica-
tions and network protocols (interfaces) allow innovative products to interoperate
with or supplant predecessors.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORK SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY43An ÒopenÓ interface by definition is an interface controlled by a consensus of
the interested parties. Formal standards, for example, are open, and the industry
has many industry consortia that develop and maintain open standards (e.g.,
IETF, X/Open, OMG). Open interfaces promote innovation by providing innova-
tors with a dependable, stable interface for new products. The success of the
deregulation of telecommunications services depends on standard interfaces. For
example, a compatible local exchange carrier must be able to connect into
the networks of other local exchanges and long-distance carriers with predict-
able interfaces.SoftwareSoftware is the universal building material of network systems and communi-cations products and services, and the importance of software as an enabler of
innovation cannot be overemphasized. The vital functions of many products and
services are controlled by software. Many innovations are merely software im-
provements, but dramatic innovations sometimes come from relatively simple soft-
ware. For example, the World Wide Web is essentially a set of common standards
applied to a preexisting Internet communications infrastructure enabled by browser
software. Another example is an easy change in software to use a digital compres-
sion algorithm to increase the effective speed of a modem; this change was based
on digital signal processors becoming fast enough to implement a high-speed mo-
dem in software alone. An encryption feature could also be added easily.Software coupled with telecommunications has another virtueÑupdated soft-ware can be distributed rapidly to customers over a network. Whether the new
version fixes a bug or introduces a new feature, customers can easily upgrade
their equipment, and new software systems are frequently introduced by allowing
free downloads over the network (e.g., the Netscape browser, media players). By
distributing software widely at zero or low cost, firms count on network effects to
generate even broader use and to build a strong market base for their products.4Software can be customized to meet the special needs of individual cus-tomers. Although many vendors do not offer variants because of the expense of
testing and maintaining separate versions for separate customers, Òopen sourcesoftware,Ó makes the source code available to customers allowing them to inno-
vate independently. Although some large pieces of software (e.g., the Linux
operating system and Gnu software tools) are available in open source, it is too
soon to tell whether open source software will become a significant pattern in
the industry.Multiplier Effect of InfrastructureInfrastructure is critical to the advancement of network systems and com-munications technologies. At any given time, the installed networking andThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEcomputing facilities are the substrate upon which further innovations are devel-oped and introduced. The innovations may, in turn, lead to pressure to enhance
the infrastructure, thus initiating a new cycle. The early ARPAnet is an example;
the need to connect ARPAnet to other networks led to internetworking proto-
cols, most notably the transmission control protocol and Internet protocol
(TCP/IP) (Cerf and Kahn, 1974). The demand for connections led to higher
transmission speeds, faster routers, and routing protocols that could be scaled to
a larger network. The larger network and its protocols and naming conventions,
in turn, provided the near-universal connectivity that led to the creation of the
World Wide Web. The growth of the Web increased the demand on the capacity
and scale of the network, and today, the infrastructure is being challenged
to carry traffic with real-time requirements, such as VoIP (voice over IP)
and video.Advances in network infrastructure have been a key to fostering innovation.The federal government made the initial investments in ARPAnet and NSFnet.
As the network expanded to nonacademic customers, regional network consortia
built up the network. Today, service revenues support the network, but the federal
government continues to support experiments that may lead to significant im-
provements in performance (Internet2). A similar pattern of infrastructure invest-
ment occurred in academic computing facilities. When workstations were first
introduced, the National Science Foundation (NSF) helped equip academic re-
search centers with the new technology, which served as a substrate for academic
research in networking and interactive computing. Subsequently, parallel com-
puters were provided to encourage research on software tools for writing high-
performance parallel computing applications.Intellectual PropertyIn addition to patents, the industry also issues many licenses and cross-licenses. No company has a dominant position in the industry based on intellec-
tual property (in contrast to the way Xerox dominated the copier industry when
its basic xerography patents were still in force). Patents covering interfacesÑwhether computer buses or communications protocolsÑmust be licensed widelybecause interfaces must be open to be widely used. Therefore, to receive their
endorsement, most standards bodies require that patents covering standards be
licensed liberally.Size of the Research InvestmentGovernment FundingThe federal government has provided major support for university comput-ing and networking facilities. The Defense Advanced Research Projects AgencyThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORK SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY45(DARPA) and NSF were particularly active in the development and growth ofthe Internet and continue to provide the bulk of support for new initiatives in
networking research and infrastructure. Federal funding for research in com-
puter science increased from $129 million in 1980 to $1.5 billion in 1999 (NSF,
2001). In 1999, roughly 33 percent of this funding was provided to universi-
tiesÑthe rest went to industry and government agencies; more than 75 percentof funding for basic research went to universities. In electrical engineering, of
which communications is a subset, federal funding for research remained basi-
cally flat throughout the 1980s and 1990s, peaking at $881 million in 1993 and
retreating to $699 million in 1999 (NSF, 2001). The share of total funding for
electrical engineering research that went to universities rose, however, from
10 percent to 27 percent during this period. The two federal agencies that
support research in computing and communications are the U.S. Department of
Defense (DOD) and NSF, in that order.Federal funds support roughly two-thirds of university research in computerscience and electrical engineering. Some of this funding is used to support the
acquisition of research equipment and to support graduate students. The number
of graduate degrees in electrical engineering and computer science increased
rapidly through the 1980s and the 1990s; the number of masterÕs degrees awardedmore than doubled; 925 doctoral degrees in computer science and 1,596 in elec-
trical engineering were awarded in 1998 (Hill, 2001). The proportion of nonresi-
dent aliens in total doctoral degree enrollments in computer science and computer
engineering has risen steadily since 1945, up to 55 percent in 2001. Interestingly,
data from the most recent Taulbee Survey indicate that only 17 percent of new
faculty are nonresident aliens; proportionately fewer foreign students take posi-
tions at U.S. universities (Bryant and Vardi, 2002).Industry FundingComputer-related industries tend to be R&D intensive. Firms in this sectorspend a greater percentage of sales revenues on R&D than any other industry
except medical devices and pharmaceuticals. In computer-related industries,
roughly 10 to 20 percent of corporate R&D funds are spent on research (rather
than development). According to a 1999 report by the National Research Coun-
cil, ÒSuch expenditures tend to derive from, and result in, the fast pace of innova-tion characteristic of the fieldÓ (NRC, 1999). Although the volume of R&D
investment in computer-related industries has kept pace with the growth of busi-
ness over the past decade, the R&D spending of the telecommunications compo-
nent of the network systems and communications sector has contracted in the
wake of AT&TÕs divestiture, deregulation, and most recently, deep recession inthe telecommunications industry.Although the amount of industry support for university research in networksystems and communications is not known, overall industry support for researchThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEin science and engineering in universities represents about 7 percent of the totaluniversities receive. The percentage is higher, perhaps as high as 15 to 20 per-
cent, in engineering; support varies by the rank and reputation of the university
program (Morgan and Strickland, 2000). For the most part, computer-related
industries have tended to draw on academic research more extensively than the
telecommunications industry.Some of the largest firms in information technology provide significant sup-port for university research. IBM currently spends several hundred million dol-
lars per year for research at universities. Support for university research provides
IBM with access to activities at universities and contact with potential future
employees. Microsoft has established a large research organization that empha-
sizes fundamental research. It too has established research collaboration with a
number of universities, including Southern California, Utah, Yale, and West
Virginia University. Other firms have established relationships with a small num-
ber of universities. One example is the AT&T Center for Internet Research at
UC-Berkeley that was funded by AT&T in 1998 for three years. Another ex-
ample is Intel Corporation, which has established research sites at the University
of California at Berkeley, Carnegie Mellon University, and the University of
Washington among others (http://www.intel-research.net/).Some research organizations require or encourage both industry and govern-ment funding. NSF supports university-based engineering research centers and
science and technology centers that must have industry contributions to supple-
ment government funding. Initiatives like Internet2 and Next Generation Internet,
which are funded principally by government, solicit industry support.CONTRIBUTIONS OF ACADEMIC RESEARCHAcademic research has made essential contributions to the network systemsand communications industry. The special strengths of universities are reflected
in the ways they have contributed to the industry:¥Human capital. Undergraduates and graduate students educated in univer-
sities have become key players in industry as individual researchers, devel-
opment engineers, technical leaders, and entrepreneurs. Research experi-
ence in universities is highly valued by industry even for nonresearch
employees. As students and faculty flow to industry and start-up compa-
nies, they provide an effective form of Òtechnology transfer.Ó¥Long-term fundamental research. With proper funding, academic re-
search is able to work on long-term problems that may be ignored by
industry or may even be anathema to dominant industry businesses, tech-
nologies, regulations, or prejudices.¥Intellectual diversity. Academia provides an open setting that can en-
gage colleagues in various disciplines and industries; the results areThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORK SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY47reported in the open literature. Concurrent research projects and differ-ent approaches provide a kind of redundancy and expand the commu-
nity of researchers on promising topics. Shared artifacts of experimental
research, especially software, are an important way to disseminate re-
search results.¥Collaboration with industry. Direct collaboration between industry and
academia, both on specific projects and in longer term relationships, has
produced significant contributions to network systems and communica-
tions. There are many collaborative structures but no dominant or ÒbestÓcollaboration scheme.¥Test beds. University laboratories can serve as test beds for new tech-
nologies. Most of the early participants in the ARPAnet, for example,
were universities, which played an important role in testing and refining
the technology. The pattern has continued with the Gigabit Testbed,
vBNS, and other networks, such as a campus-wide wireless network at
Carnegie Mellon University.¥Nuclei for start-up companies. University research can lead to tech-
nologies and people that become the seeds of new businesses.
Examples are Google and Yahoo, both spin-offs of research at Stan-

ford University.At an October 1998 NAE workshop to collect information and exchangeideas for this study, the participants came to the following conclusions: (1) the
network systems and communications sector has benefited greatly from a na-
tional research culture in which individuals move frequently between academia
and industry, thereby increasing their knowledge of both and their contributions
to both; (2) personal relationships are crucial; and (3) universities not only in-
vigorate the research culture with fresh students each year, but they also house
open research projects that anchor technical disciplines.Human CapitalIndustry looks to universities to educate and train students who will staffindustry R&D projects. Industry considers human capital to be the most impor-
tant product of universitiesÑeven more important than new knowledge capturedin research results. The question of whether industry wants students with a broad
technical education or with training in specific skills, such as programming in a
given computer language or the operation of a certain kind of computer or com-
munication device, is answered differently by different businesses. Larger com-
panies tend to prefer broadly educated candidates who can learn skills quickly on
the job. Smaller companies that do not have people to serve as mentors and
trainers prefer trained candidates.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCETraining in research is extremely important to innovation, even if an indi-vidual does not continue to do research. Industry considers research experience
valuable because it demonstrates the abilities necessary for any technical en-
deavor: self-motivation, problem solving, teamwork, knowledge of related re-
search, contact with other researchers and colleagues, the ability to organize an
amorphous problem, and the perseverance to overcome setbacks. Graduates with
advanced degrees have already shown greater than average ability; and research
training is considered evidence that an individual can tackle difficult technical
problems, such as designing and building complex systems.Students of electrical engineering and computer science have typicallybeen in great demand, not only by companies in the network systems and
communications sector, but also by other companies trying to modernize their
information technology. The Bureau of Labor Statistics estimates that almost
4 million information-technology workers will be needed by 2010, compared
with 1.9 million in 2000 (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2001). If this projection
remains accurate, the current rate of graduation in U.S. universitiesÑapproxi-mately 27,600 undergraduates and 900 Ph.D.s in computer science per yearÑwill not bridge the gap (Hill, 2001). Students and faculty who participate in
start-up companies are important to the culture of innovation. A significant
number of network systems and communications businesses have been founded
by students straight from universities or by faculty, who either take a leave of
absence or leave permanently. These companies are often formed to exploit a
technology developed in the university. One of the best-known examples is Sun
Microsystems, which began as a start-up company to commercialize a com-
puter workstation designed at Stanford and Unix software originally conceived
and developed at Bell Laboratories by Thompson and Ritchie then further
developed by Bill Joy at UC-Berkeley. In the summer of 1998, six (out of 60)
members of the electrical engineering faculty were on leave from Stanford
University to work with start-up companies. Faculty members who return to the
university report that their research has been stimulated greatly by their experi-
ence. A founder of Granite Systems, for example, said that he now has a far
better sense of what it takes to produce a product, as well as the state of the
industry (D. Cheriton, Stanford University, personal communication, Septem-
ber 8, 1998).A report by BankBoston on the impact of a research university concludedwith the following statement: ÒIf the companies founded by MIT graduates andfaculty formed an independent nation, the revenues produced by the companies
would make that nation the 24th largest economy in the world. The 4,000 MIT-
related companies employ 1.1 million people and have annual world sales of
$232 billionÓ (BankBoston, 1997). MIT-related firms are especially prominent in
electronics and software. More than half of the companies founded by MIT
graduates were founded by graduates in electrical engineering (which at MIT
includes computer science).The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORK SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY49Research in Engineering and Computer ScienceUniversity research in electrical engineering and computer science has madesignificant contributions to the network systems and communications industry. In
some cases, academic research projects have been essential to the creation of
billion-dollar businesses (see Figure 2-1 for some examples).Academic research has also built a foundation of techniques and analysistools that are widely used as enabling tools by the industry. These include tech-
niques for the optimization of computer programs, for the automatic design of
integrated-circuit chips, and for the verification of bus specifications. These tech-
niques are not dramatic developments that spawned businesses, but they have
been important to the industry as a whole. The digital cryptographic techniques
widely used today to ensure privacy and authentication in electronic commerce
and related applications were invented in academia (NRC, 1996). The develop-
ment of object-oriented programming, from the first step (Simula 67) to the most
recent form (Java), took 30 years. Most of the research was necessarily conducted
in academia, because industry typically does not invest in risky research that
offers only long-term prospects for payoff.The two case studies below illustrate how academic research has contributedto the network systems and communications sector: (1) the Internet, which shows
a 30-year trajectory of academic and industrial R&D to build a revolutionary
communications technology; and (2) research in signal processing that led to
a start-up company, Amati Communications, that successfully exploited
the technology.Case Study: The InternetAcademic research played a key role in the development of internetworking,the connection of disparate networks into a worldwide, scalable, packet-switched
network. The Internet, which now connects more than 100 million people and
computers, was the direct result of government-funded research begun in the late
1960s to link different kinds of academic research computers. Although industry
was essential to the scaling of the Internet and the development of services, the
early technical development depended almost entirely on university research (for
a more detailed case study, see SRI International, 1997; for a brief chronology,
see Box 2-2). The ARPA funded research, development, and deployment of this
revolutionary packet-switching technology, because the telecommunications in-
dustry showed no interest in participating.
The story begins with the ARPAnet, which was initiated by DARPA in thelate 1960s as a way to share access to expensive or special-purpose research
computers around the country. Precursor ideas for packet-switching networks
had been developed at MIT and UCLA, but Paul Baran is credited with discover-
ing packet switching while at the RAND Corporation in the early 1960s. Donald
Davies, a researcher at the U.K.Õs National Physical Laboratory independentlyThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEdiscovered the idea of packet switching in 1965, deciding upon some of the sameparameters for his network design as Baran, such as a packet size of 1024 bits.
ARPA built an early network by contracting with Bolt, Beranek, and Newman to
build packet switches (IMPs) at research computers at about a dozen universities.
In addition, academic research projects were initiated to develop protocols by
which different types of computers could communicate, to outfit the computers
with suitable hardware and software interfaces to the network, and to measure the
performance of the operating network. Similar networks were also developed,
such as a network using satellite or radio-transmission links to connect the
packet switches.Early protocol experiments, together with the clear need for interconnectingthe various kinds of networks being developed, pointed to a need for
Òinternetworking.Ó The key idea is the Internet datagram, a universal way of
formatting network packets, together with associated protocols (TCP/IP), intro-
duced in a paper by Cerf and Kahn (1974) while Cerf was a member of the
Stanford faculty. This paper provided the first definition of Internet architecture
and led to implementations and experiments at several universities. With the
TCP/IP implementation developed in ÒBerkeley UnixÓ software (at the Univer-
sity of California at Berkeley) and released in the late 1970s, it was easy to
connect academic research computers to the network. Ad hoc committees of
academic researchers refined the TCP/IP protocol standards, including applica-
tion protocols.In the late 1970s, academic computer science research centers not served bythe ARPAnet banded together to form CSnet, also using the TCP/IP protocol. InBOX 2-2
Chronology of the Internet Development1969DARPA commissions ARPAnet to promote networking research.
1974Vinton Cerf and Robert Kahn publish a paper specifying the TCP/IP
protocol for data networks.1981NSF provides seed money for CSnet (Computer Science NETwork) to
connect U.S. computer science departments.1982DARPA establishes the TCP/IP protocol as standard.
1984The number of hosts (computers) connected to the Internet exceeds 1,000.
1986NSFnet and five NSF-funded supercomputer centers are created.  NSFnet
backbone operates at 56 kb/s.1989Number of hosts exceeds 100,000.
1991NSF lifts restrictions on commercial use of the Internet. World Wide Web
software is released by CERN, the European Laboratory for Particle Physics.1993Mosaic browser developed at NSF-funded National Center for Super-
computer Applications at the University of Illinois is released.1995U.S. Internet traffic is carried by commercial Internet service providers.
1996Number of Internet hosts reaches 12.8 million.
Source:  SRI International, 1997.
The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORK SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY511983, the new network was linked to the ARPAnet, an event that could be calledthe birth of the Internet. Subsequently, the network continued to grow, and the
demand for connections increased. In 1986, with the creation of NSFnet, the
responsibility for the principal ÒbackboneÓ of the nationwide network shifted
from DARPA to NSF. The network could be used only for research and educa-
tion, and academics continued to play a major role in network governance
and engineering.With the emergence of the World Wide Web, the Internet was no longer onlyfor research and education but became a worldwide network connecting busi-
nesses and consumers, as well as researchers. The idea of browsing text docu-
ments obtained in a uniform way from any machine connected to the Internet was
developed in 1991 by Tim Berners-Lee, then at the CERN nuclear research
facility in Geneva, Switzerland. Documents on the Web may contain ÒhyperlinksÓto other documents, thus linking documents into a complex Òweb.Ó Marc
Andreesen and other researchers at the University of Illinois later extended the
Web to include pictures and other types of data. They also built a graphically
oriented browser, called Mosaic, that allows users to ÒclickÓ to follow a hyperlink,
thus opening browsing to a wide range of people. Jim Clark recruited Andreesen
to cofound Netscape Communications, which developed NetscapeÕs Navigatorbrowser product based on Mosaic. Microsoft soon developed a competing prod-
uct, Internet Explorer. The combination of pictures, ease of use, and supported
products enabled the Web to grow with astonishing speed. It quickly developed
into a mechanism for publishing, for finding information, and for transacting
business electronically.As more computers were connected to the network, the bandwidth andswitching capacity had to be expanded. DARPA and NSF, with university and
industry support, organized a series of test beds to explore high-speed networking
technologies and test emerging products and protocols. Between 1990 and 1994,
NSF and DARPA funded the Gigabit Testbed Initiative, a university-industry-
government effort to explore networking technologies at speeds of 155 Mb/s and
higher; one of these test beds achieved long-haul transmission at 800 Mb/s. NSF
operated the vBNS network (very high-speed backbone service) in conjunction
with MCI to link more than 75 universities in a network with backbone speeds of
622 Mb/s to 2.4 Gb/s and access links of 43 Mb/s to 155 Mb/s until the vBNS
network was terminated in April 2000. The participants explored new applica-
tions of advanced communication bandwidth and protocols, as well as opera-
tional and governance issues. Universities are presently engaged in a new round
of infrastructure enhancement, Internet2, designed to meet a full range of aca-
demic research needs.As the Internet expanded, commercial businesses and services grew up along-side government and academic operations. New companies were started to sell
packet switches (routers), application software, authoring tools, and network
services. The leaders were not the telecommunication companies, but start-upThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEcompanies, such as Cisco and Netscape, using technologies developed in univer-sities. Network service providers emerged as regional networks (e.g., NEARnet,
BARRnet) and were encouraged to connect to the national backbone operated as
part of NSFnet. International connections were also developed. As the Internet

grew, major telecommunications companies began to offer Internet service as
well. In the United States today, businesses and residents in most densely popu-
lated areas have a choice of several Internet connection methods and ser-
vice providers.The governance and engineering of the Internet are unique: a governing body(the Internet Activities Board) and engineering standards organization (Internet
Engineering Task Force) consist of volunteers from Internet participants. At first,
committees of academics and the few government contractors that were building
and operating the network set protocol and other engineering standards. Today,
these committees have broad participation from academia, industry, and non-
profit organizations.Academic ContributionsAn SRI study commissioned to analyze the nature of the research that con-tributed to the Internet described the contribution of academic research in some
detail (SRI International, 1997):The Internet appears, overall, to be primarily a problem-driven, technology-basedinnovation that required little direct input from fundamental research for its real-ization. The driving forces, interestingly, were not profit incentives in the privatemarket, but public goods, first in the realm of national defense and subsequentlyin the university and government research infrastructure, as a means of fostering
communication among computer scientists. What we are calling the InternetÕsintrinsic technologiesÑnetwork design, packet switching, routers, protocols,browsersÑwere the products of problem-driven research conducted in universi-ties and government contractor laboratories with government support. One pos-
sible exception is the research conducted at the University of IllinoisÕ NCSA
[National Center for Supercomputer Applications], which took place in an envi-
ronment (according to Andreesen) that enabled researchers to head off in direc-tions that looked ÒinterestingÓ without seeking justification. Nonetheless, the con-
text was one of application, as suggested by the Center
Õs name. Although theevolution of the Internet did not encounter technical roadblocks that requiredfundamental research for their resolution before further progress could be made,there is obvious, fundamental research content in both the InternetÕs intrinsic andsupporting technologies. The electronic and physical infrastructures that comprisethe Internet clearly depend on information theory, solid-state physics, electro-optics, and other fields on which modern communications technology is based
and for which NSF has provided substantial support.The SRI study stresses the importance of government, industry, and univer-sities in the development of the Internet and points out that, as the focus ofThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORK SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY53technical and organizational innovation shifted from government to industry overa 30-year period, universities played a constant supportive role. By following the
career trajectories of some key individuals who moved among the three sectors,
the SRI study highlights the importance of networks of individuals and the im-
portance of human capital. The study also cites the frequent opportunities for
interactions and linkages among the three sectors and the ease with which indi-
viduals can move across sectors in the United States as important factors to
success (SRI International, 1997).The Internet is an example of the major impact academic research can havein the creation of an entirely new technology. Although the enormous impact of
the Internet is unusual, this case illustrates how government, academia, and in-
dustry can contribute to technologicalÑand therefore economicÑsuccess.Case Study: Amati CommunicationsAmati Communications was founded in 1991 by Stanford University profes-sor John M. Cioffi to commercialize technology for transmitting high-speed digi-
tal signals over copper telephone wires. The technology, named discrete multitone
(DMT) modulation, was one of several technologies competing to be adopted as
an industry standard. DMT is now an accepted standard for providing DSL (digi-
tal subscriber line) service and a commercial success.ResearchThe original work on DMT was conducted in 1987 by a research group atStanford directed by Cioffi, who was then an assistant professor. Cioffi used
funds from an NSF Presidential Investigator Award (1987Ð1992), with matchingfunds from several companies, including Bell Communications Research, to in-
vestigate asymmetric digital subscriber lines. The initial objective was to develop
reliable transmission of high-quality digital movies over phone lines, which re-
quired speeds about 10 times faster than integrated service digital network (ISDN)
lines, the existing technology. Later, the objective evolved to encompass high-
speed Internet access and other data applications. The researchers investigated
many methods and focused on an old encoding technique called multitone trans-
mission, in which separate frequency channels (tones) carry separate digital sig-
nals. A crude analogy would be sending several channels of Morse code over a
telephone line, with each channel using a different audible frequency (like the
seven separate tones used in touch-tone dialing). A receiver can split out the
separate tone frequencies and decode each Morse sequence.The goal of CioffiÕs research was to transmit data as fast as possible, whichwould require using many separate frequency bands and sophisticated signaling
techniques (not Morse code!) in each band.  This objective led Cioffi and his

team to seek fundamental improvements in digital signal processing algorithmsThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEthat could be applied to various channels. But the most important innovation wasthe adaptation of each band to the bandÕs transmission characteristics. In effect,DMT measures the properties of signals transmitted over each band and then
allocates data accordingly. A band that attenuates signals less than another band
carries more data. A band that introduces less noise than another also carries
more data. DMT also measures and compensates for the transmission character-
istics of each pair of copper wires. This complex scheme is practical because of
inexpensive digital signal-processing hardware.Some of the key innovations for DMT were patented while CioffiÕs groupworked to refine, promote, and publish the method in IEEE journals and at
American National Standards Institute standards meetings. Three of the patents,
which are assigned to Stanford, are still valuable and are licensed throughout the
telecommunications and data communications industry. At least one patent, on
pioneering artificial intelligence techniques used in the adaptation, is considered
necessary to comply with any of the existing or emerging DMT standards. In
addition to patents, Cioffi and his graduate students acquired valuable know-how
that would benefit any company that attempted to use DMT.Amati Start-up CompanyIn 1991, after an unsuccessful search for corporate partners, Cioffi foundedAmati Communications Corporation with Stanford University and a Stanford
alumnus, Mr. Kim Maxwell, who was the companyÕs first CEO. AmatiÕs visionwas to Òget DMT on every phone line in the world.Ó To be successful, Amati had
to make DMT an industry standard, which involved working with national and
international standards organizations and competing with other technologies. On
March 10, 1993, after competitive testing against several other technologies,
including an alternative promoted by AT&T, DMT technology was selected
unanimously as a U.S. standard.As part of StanfordÕs contribution to the company, Cioffi was given three yearsof leave (with 50 percent leave spread over two years to make up the third year). In
exchange for an exclusive licensing and sublicensing privilege on the DMT patents,
Stanford received stock and a promise of royalties. In 1997Ð1998, Stanford re-ceived $7.9 million when it liquidated its holdings in Amati; royalties totaled more
than $8 million in 2001 (Stanford University Corporate Guide, 2001).Between 1991 and 1998, Amati employed several of CioffiÕs graduate stu-dents, at least four of whom were directly involved in the Stanford research and
had considerable knowledge of DMT. StanfordÕs then dean of engineering, JimGibbons, was chairman of AmatiÕs Board of Directors until 1998.Amati went public late in 1995 and was a growth leader on the NASDAQ forapproximately one year. In March 1998, Texas Instruments acquired Amati and
the DMT license for approximately $450 million in cash. At the end of 2001,
3.6 million residential DSL (digital subscriber lines) using DMT technology wereThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORK SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY55installed in the United States, which was then projected to grow to 13.5 millionby 2005 (InternetWeek, 2001).Academic Research in Economics, Social Sciences,Management, Design, and PolicyAcademic research in a variety of nonengineering disciplines has also contrib-uted to the network systems and communications sector. This research has focused
on how computers and communications systems fit into larger socioeconomic sys-
tems. Examples include how information technology systems increase business
productivity; the effects of e-mail on people and organizations; how people use the

Internet; the effect of the Internet on family structures; the effect of prices on
communications services; and the value of communication services to consumers.Some of these studies have formulated and tested models to explain thebehavior of people and systems in operation. For example, the GOMS model of
performance grounded in cognitive psychology (Card et al., 1983) has been used
to design interactive interfaces. John Anderson has built several successful com-
puterized tutoring systems based on a detailed understanding of how people
model specific subjects (e.g., geometry and algebra) and the errors in these
models.  Results of social psychology research on electronic communication

have been used to improve training for new users, in effect teaching them about
the social norms and effects that spring from the technology.In some cases, the models only described what had been observed, but in a fewcases they were used to predict the behavior of future systems. For example,
models can predict how well people will perform simple interactive computer
tasks. Although models cannot predict whether one chat room or e-mail system will

be more popular than another or the details of e-mail usage, general principles can

be learned. For example, people are generally less inhibited when using an elec-
tronic communication medium than in face-to-face interactions. Observations such
as this can lead to a better understanding of network systems and communications,
but they cannot be used as a guide to design. At a workshop held in connection with
this study, the consensus was that these research topics should be given more
attention, especially as the services provided by network systems and communica-
tions become more important and affect a greater portion of society.Economics, Policy, and RegulationBecause communication systems have historically been operated as regu-
lated monopolies, researchers in economics and policy were able to study them
extensively. The work of one academic, Alfred Kahn of Cornell University, was
used as a basis for the deregulation of several industries, including trucking,
airlines, and communications (Kahn, 1970, 1971). Nevertheless, a great many
questions about economics and policy remain to be answered (see Box 2-3).The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEBOX 2-3Contributions of Economics and Other Social ScienceResearch to the Development of Information TechnologyRole of regulation.  Economics research by Alfred Kahn (1970, 1971), Paul
Joskow, Roger Noll, and Kip Viscusi redefines the role of regulation from protect-ing the public interest to stepping in when markets fail to drive prices to marginalcosts.  This redefinition has helped spur deregulation in a number of industries,

including communications.Network externalities.  Work by Hal Varian, Paul David, Brian Arthur, Garth
Saloner, David Shapiro, and others shows that the network industries and infor-mation industries are characterized by Ònetwork externalitiesÓ that make the value
to a consumer of a particular product or service increase as more people use it.An example is an Internet connection that becomes more valuable with the amountof information available and the number of people connected.  This insight re-

inforces the importance of getting products and services to the marketplace quick-ly, pricing them low at first to establish markets, and then raising prices as moreunits are sold and their value grows.Internet Economics.  Research by McKnight and Bailey (1997) and others
address the implications of the pricing of Internet-based resources and ser-vices, such as the allocation of resources based on the willingness of usersto pay.Group dynamics and decision making.  Research by Sara Kiesler, Suzanne
Iaconno, Wanda Orlikowski, and others (e.g., Siegel et al., 1986) on group dy-namics and decision making in small electronic groups informs the design of groupdecision-support systems.Diffusion of applications.  Research by M. Lynne Markus (1987) and others
examine how critical mass predicts the diffusion of networked applications withinorganizations and informs the deployment decisions for information technol-ogy applications.Distribution of the benefits of information technology.  Research by Tora
Bikson, Lee Sproull, and others demonstrates that peripheral members of socialsystems benefit more from using electronic communication than central members(e.g., Sproull and Kiesler, 1991) influencing policy decisions about subsidies for
access to the Internet.Information sharing.  Research by Paul Attewell, Tora Bikson, Sara Kiesler,
Robert Kraut, Lee Sproull, and others demonstrates how personal attributes andorganizational characteristics such as incentive systems influence peoplesÕ use of
information technology for information sharing.  Research by Julian Orr (1990) and
others demonstrates that service technicians often have more useful technicalexpertise than system designers and share their knowledge in a community of
practice.  This work influenced the design of a community-based troubleshooting
database at Xerox Corporation that has significantly improved service perfor-mance (Bell et al., 1997).Sources:  Sirbu, 1998; NRC, 2000.
The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORK SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY57The Telecommunications Policy Research Conference is an annual forum forscholars engaged in research on policy-relevant telecommunications and information
issues and public-sector and private-sector decision makers engaged in telecommuni-
cations and information policy. The wide range of topics at the 2002 conference

reflected the intense academic interest in telecommunications policy. Topics included:

comparative telecommunications policies in the United States and abroad; broadband
deployment and uptake; spectrum management; computer and Internet security; wire-
less communications standards; mergers and acquisition; intellectual property; basic
research in telecommunications; mass media; and numerous other topics. University
researchers presented the majority of research results at these sessions, reflecting the
active involvement of academic research.Business and ManagementBusiness schools have long been concerned with how information technol-ogy can be exploited for the benefit of businesses (see Box 2-4). For example,
research on decision-support systems not only developed techniques for collect-
ing and presenting relevant business data to management, but also compared the
quality of decisions made with different kinds of supporting technology. The
rapid development of the Internet has opened up new avenues for study, such as
supply-chain integration, which uses the network to connect a manufacturerÕsprocess-planning system to the corresponding systems of its suppliers to ensure a
smooth flow of the component parts required to fulfill orders. Success will de-
pend on solving problems related to information technology, network protocols,
and control theory. Electronic commerce will certainly face new problems that
must be addressed.Optimizing network design in network systems and communications busi-nesses is a similar problem to the transportation problems studied by operations
research. In the early development of the ARPAnet, attention was focused on
optimization of network design. Today, the emphasis is on techniques to expand
networks to meet burgeoning demand.Psychology and Social SciencesResearch by psychologists and social scientists has focused on how people usecomputer and communication systems, the effects of these systems on people, how
people interact with each other, and how they work in organizations. These studies
are retrospective, conducted after the technology has been deployed long enough
for transient behaviors to abate. De Sola Pool
Õs classic book, The Social Impact ofthe Telephone (1997), is a fine example. Other examples are Computers in Class-
room Culture (Schofield, 1995), Connections (Sproull and Kiesler, 1991), 
TheHomeNet Field Trial of Residential Internet Services (Kraut et al., 1996), and 
TheSecond Self (Turkle, 1984), a study of personal interactions with computers.
The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEResearch has also helped guide the design of computer and communicationsystems. The Psychology of Human-Computer Interaction, a classic work byCard, Moran, and Newell (1983), showed how studies in cognitive psychology
could be used to estimate human performance when interacting with a computer.
These and other performance studies have influenced the design of graphical user
interfaces. Ethnographic studies of the behavior of boys and girls at play have

been used to inform the designs of many products.BOX 2-4Contributions of Business Research to the Development ofInformation TechnologiesCritical success factors.   Rockart (1981) identifies factors critical to the successof information systems in business settings.  The author addresses the question of
which information is critical to the success of a business; the questions a databaseshould answer; and how information systems can be designed to support busi-
ness objectives.Decision-support systems.  Work by Keen and Scott Morton (1978) promul-
gates the idea of using information systems to support corporate decision makingat a variety of levels.Information technology and strategic management.  Research by Earl (1988)stresses that IT is not just for back-office operations but contributes to a firmÕscompetitive advantage.  Companies that deploy and employ information technol-
ogy systems wisely can benefit in the marketplace.Computer-supported cooperative work.
  This research introduces the idea of
using information technology to allow people to work cooperatively within and acrossorganizations, thereby overcoming differences in geography or time.Productivity and information technology.  Productivity gains from investments
in information technology have been hard to measure, but BrynjolfsonÕs (1991)analysis of firm-level data (as opposed to industry-level data) indicates that invest-ments may have large payoffs, but not immediately.  The author identifies factors
that contribute to positive returns from investments and the characteristics of firms
that do and do not experience increased productivity.Software development methodologies.  Research by Cusumano (1991) pro-vides guidance on software development methodologies from the point of viewof management.Process handbook.  This repository of business-process knowledge developed by
the MIT Process Handbook Project (Malone et al., 1999) can facilitate further re-search and help determine best practices for deploying information technology.  The
classification and structure of the database itself is a powerful tool.Source:  Based on Malone, 1998.
The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORK SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY59Design ResearchSeveral universities have developed broad multidisciplinary programs aimedat harnessing developments in information technology to human needs. A leader
in this area, the MIT Media Laboratory, brings together individuals from a broad
spectrum of disciplines, including the humanities and fine arts, to conduct re-
search and application development. For example, the News in the Future Project
explored innovative ways to present the news to people using electronic media by
tailoring content, presentation, and structure to the needs of the viewer. In addi-
tion to developing prototype applications, the laboratory often works on funda-
mental technologies, such as video compression or image understanding.MECHANISMS FOR UNIVERSITY-INDUSTRY COOPERATIONCollaborations between industry and academia raise some obvious questionsabout the kinds of organizations and mechanisms that work best. A questionnaire
on the subject sent to 60 researchers for this study elicited a wide range of
responses. For example, one respondent felt that Òcenters which promote closeinteractions between academic researchers and knowledgeable industrial spon-
sors are probably a prerequisite for making progress.Ó Another mentioned several
collaborative arrangements: joint research programs, like MITÕs Project Athena;experimental test beds and university centers, like the NSF-supported
supercomputing centers; and consortia. Another respondent felt that ÒCentershave an indifferent record in communications . . . I doubt that such forms of
collaboration will ever be a success.Ó Still others felt that the structure of the
organization didnÕt make much difference as long as the participants understoodeach otherÕs value systems.NSF has several programs to create university-based, industry-universityresearch centers and engineering research centers (ERCs), both of which require
industrial participation. The ERCs, which are designed to integrate research and
education, have generally received favorable reviews (Parker, 1997). However,
the Telecommunications Research Center at Columbia University, funded by
NSF from 1985 through 1995, was the only ERC established in the network
systems and communications area.The network systems and communications sector does not have an institu-tion comparable to the Semiconductor Research Corporation, an organization
that provides industrial support for university research relevant to semiconduc-
tors, based on a 10-year technology Òroad mapÓ to help guide research funding
decisions (Bailey et al., 1998). Although the establishment of a consortium of
network systems and communications businesses has been discussed, nothing has
come of it so far. A consortium of computer storage peripheral companies, Na-
tional Storage Industry Consortium, has been established to support academic
research through focused programs like optical storage. In addition, some firmsThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEhave targeted their research support for a small number of universities; for ex-ample, in late 1998, AT&T and the International Computer Science Institute at
UC-Berkeley announced formation of the AT&T Center for Internet Research
(ACIR), a multimillion-dollar research center that AT&T agreed to fund for at
least three years (AT&T and International Computer Science Institute, 1998).
Recently, Intel has sited research operations at UC-Berkeley, Carnegie Mellon
University, and University of Washington, all centers where researchers are Intel
employees and university professors are engaged as laboratory directors and
technical leaders (Intel, 2003).The Microelectronics Innovation and Computer Research Opportunities(MICRO) Program in the University of California system is an example of a state
government effort to encourage university-industry cooperation. The MICRO
Program was established in 1981 by the state of California to support innovative
research in microelectronics technology, its applications in computer and infor-
mation sciences, and its necessary antecedents in other physical science disci-
plines. The program is a partnership between industry and the state in which the
state supplements industry funds and waives overhead on university research
funding. In 2001Ð2002, 96 companies contributed approximately $6 million incash and equipment to fund 98 different projects (MICRO, 2002). In some cases,
MICRO support has led to increased federal funding, as well as long-term part-
nerships between universities and industry. For instance, after an initial concept
phase, the RAID (redundant arrays of inexpensive disks) project at UC-Berkeley
received MICRO support, which led to the creation of an industrial consortium in
1988Ð1990. The federal government became a research sponsor in 1990. By1996, RAID was a $10 billion industry.In general, university-industry collaborative arrangements in network sys-tems have received mixed reviews. No structure has emerged as the Òbest,Ó nor
has any scheme emerged that works robustly in different circumstances. It ap-
pears that strong personal leadership and a collaborative spirit between an aca-
demic researcher and his or her industrial counterpart are the elements essential
to success. The problem, of course, is that a good collaborative project can
founder if one key individual (e.g., the ÒchampionÓ in the firm) is transferred or
moves elsewhere.FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONSAcademic research has made essential contributions to the network systemsand communications sector. Although these contributionsÑtrained researchers,new technologies, algorithms, and prototype systems; early operating experience;
studies of social and economic effectsÑcannot be quantified, they have undoubt-edly had a substantial impact. In this industry, the academic ivory tower has been
heavily populated by entrepreneurial engineer-researchers.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORK SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY61FindingsFinding 2-1.  Academic research has played and will continue to play an important
role in the research culture of the network systems and communications industry.University-industry collaborations are fostered by a vigorous research cul-ture, and academic research has been crucial to the technical evolution of the
industry, especially in the development and deployment of the Internet. To be
sure, the recent deep recession in the telecommunications sector, which has forced
significant reductions in corporate R&D budgets and manpower, has further
diminished the industrial research contributions of this important subsector of the
network systems and communications industryÑa trend begun with the breakupof the Bell system and further deregulation. Given the historical reliance of the
telecommunications sector on internal industrial research, changes may be
needed. If trends in industrial research persist, academic research in telecommu-
nications will have to be increased. However, for the most part, the research
culture that supports the network systems and communications industry is func-
tioning well and needs no major repairs.People are the key components of this research culture. Collaboration be-tween universities and industry often depend on sometimes fragile personal rela-
tionships that can be threatened if an industry researcher is reassigned or an
academic researcher goes off in a new direction. Students, faculty, postdoctoral
students, researchers with long-term visions, and researchers who focus on ap-
plied problems play different roles. Contrary to popular opinion, university-
industry projects are not devoted exclusively to long-term basic research; teams
of faculty and students often address pragmatic, applied problems in close coop-
eration with industry.The flow of people from academia to industry and vice versa is essential tothe well-being of the industry and to academic research. The universityÕs role offueling the research culture with trained students is unique, and training in re-
search is extremely important for innovation, even if the researcher does not
continue to perform research but becomes part of an academic-like cadre that
pursues innovations in industry (such as the groups awarded the Association for
Computing MachineryÕs Software System Award).Universities also have a very broad research culture, and network systemsand communications systems have increasingly drawn on the wide range of tech-
nologies and expertise available at research universities. Electrical engineering
and computer science are, of course, central to the industry, but other areas, such
as cognitive science, social science, economics, and business modeling, are be-
coming increasingly important, especially as the importance of information
technology-delivered services increases. Some research universities (e.g., UC-
Berkeley, University of Michigan, Indiana University) have created information-
centered schools that focus on the social, political, and organizational context
of information.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCETo participate in the research culture, a company must have a capacity toabsorb innovation, an industrial research laboratory, for example, that can absorb
people and ideas from outside the firm and exploit them within the firm. Despite
the trend in industry research toward applied problems, industry laboratories
have so far retained this absorptive capacity. In the last 15 years, innovations in
the industry have focused on completing the digital revolution in telecommunica-
tions (e.g., new switching gear); new transmission protocols (e.g., SONET and
Asynchronous Transfer Mode), and transmission equipment; faster modems; the
refinement and deployment of fiber optics; the refinement of IP protocols; and
the widespread deployment of the Internet.The focus is now shifting toward innovative services, which requires anunderstanding of psychology, consumer behavior, social phenomena, and other
disciplines that can inform the design and operation of new services. The explo-
sive growth of the World Wide Web can be attributed to its social properties more
than to its technical capabilities. Industry is most likely to devise and launch new
services, but formal research on the uses and effects of these services is most
likely to be undertaken in academia.Finding 2-2.  Innovation cycles in the network systems and communications
industry have worked well.An astonishing number of incremental changes have cumulatively taken onthe character of breakthroughs. The Internet, for example, had its roots in the
ARPAnet in 1969, was developed and deployed incrementally, and was
launched into the public arena by the World Wide Web and browsers in 1993.
The effect on the industry was of a breakthrough; the telecommunications
industry today is utterly different from the industry of 10 years ago. Similarly,
the incremental evolution of technologies (e.g., batteries, low-power circuits,
integrated radio-frequency elements) to support small portable devices spawned
breakthrough products, such as pagers, cellular telephones, and packet-
radio modems.Innovations in the network systems and communications industry have beencharacterized by the integration of a wide range of technologies: chip designs
with increasing levels of integration; digital-analog integration in wireless and
wireline communications (e.g., cellular and satellite telephony, wireless devices,
such as pagers and security devices, modems and cable modems, local-area net-
work and intranetwork systems and communications receivers, optical network
interfaces); internetworking technologies; and, above all, the increasing use of
software technologies of all kinds. The convergence of computing and telecom-
munications has brought together a wide array of technologies for new products.Academic contributions to these innovations have varied widely. Some inno-vations originated in university research and were spun off into venture-capital-
backed start-up companies. This route is supported by established university
policies, a workforce eager to engage in risky start-ups, and a mature venture-The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORK SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY63capital industry that has been willing to back telecommunications and network-ing businesses. Many academics have been consultants for network systems and
communications companies. Academic design departments have worked on in-
dustry projects, and some companies have supported academic research, often
directed toward solving specific problems. Sometimes, new companies or prod-
ucts have emerged from business-school entrepreneurship programs.Finding 2-3.  The success of industry-academic collaboration (as defined by
participants) depends more on leadership and people than on the type of collabo-
rative structure.Organizational structures, such as research centers that foster university-industry collaboration, receive mixed reviews in network systems and communi-
cations. Success appears to depend less on the choice of structure, the funding
arrangements, or the legal agreements than on the leadership and passion of the
people involved. A committed leader is essential for establishing personal rela-
tionships, and, in general, researchers consider inducements to individuals (as
opposed to institutions) more effective than collaborative organizational struc-
tures. Dependence on personal relationships can sometimes lead to problems,
however. A collaborative effort between industry and a university can founder if
a key individual (the ÒchampionÓ within the firm) is transferred or moved else-
where within the company. Overall, therefore, the diversity of approaches to
industry-academic collaboration is healthy for both partners.Finding 2-4.  Creating standards is an important aspect of innovation in commu-
nication systems.Standards are necessary for interoperability, which is essential to the indus-try. The more interoperability, the faster the growth of the user base and the faster
the increase in value of the system. The success of many businesses depends on
the number of other entities that can communicate in a networkÑthe value ofnetwork externalities.Committees of industry members, sometimes with academic participation,usually determine standards. Many Internet standards groups, such as the Internet
Engineering Task Force (IETF); the ATM Forum, which was organized to pro-
mote data-networking uses of Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM); and the
discrete multitone modulation standard for asymmetric digital subscriber lines,
have academic participants. In the United States, university researchers often
have difficulty participating in setting standards because of time and travel de-
mands. In Europe, academic participation has been stronger. U.S. researchers
could be helpful in gathering data and analyzing standards proposals; good data
and independent analysis could reduce squabbling over business biases and focus
more attention on design issues.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEFinding 2-5.  
Academic institutions have been at the forefront of network infra-structure deployment.The United States led the way in deploying advanced infrastructure criticalto enabling research (e.g., ARPAnet, NSFnet, vBNS, NGI, Internet2). The de-
ployed infrastructure has led to further developments. For example, the World
Wide Web was successful partly because networking infrastructure had already
been installed.Academic institutions have played a crucial role in the deployment of net-work infrastructure. Ever since NSFnet was formed, universities have recognized
the importance of the Internet to academic endeavors of all kinds, not just com-
puter science and engineering research. With funding from NSF and other sources,
universities have been willing to deploy leading-edge technologies. Deployments
such as Internet2, which was spurred in large part by universities, are likely to
increase the speed and throughput of network services available to universities
and thus to support research that requires high-performance networking infra-
structure. However, this may not necessarily stimulate research on networking.
Conflicting demands on these systems has created some tension between provid-
ing robust services for other research fields and experimentation for networking
research. A state-of-the-art network that can be used for experiments in network-
ing has not been developed.Finding 2-6.  
The network systems and communications industry is evolving indirections that may require new kinds of university-industry partnerships to ex-
ploit research.As communicating appliances proliferate, the need for harmonizing the tech-nological and human elements increases. Examples include: designing communi-
cation services that users can understand and exploit; integrating multiple devices
and services to create personalized configurations; designing new user interfaces;
and streamlining or automating customer service functions. Even within a net-
work, areas that are not purely technical will also require research: the provision
of services; the quality of service; incompatibilities between heterogeneous prod-
ucts and services; security; and network management and operation. Optimal
interactions among product design, network organization and management, ser-
vice provision, and technology will require close collaboration between univer-
sity researchers in the social, behavioral, and management sciences on one hand
and engineers and scientists on the other. As the industry moves toward offering
more Òinformation servicesÓ rather than 
Òcommunications devices,Ó it must turn
to the market rather than to research for guidance. In the future, university re-
search might focus on how individuals and society as a whole value and use
network systems and communications services.Finding 2-7.  
Many Internet service providers are not willing to make their dataavailable to researchers.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORK SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY65Many pressing research questions in network systems and communicationsrequire studies of the characteristics of networks under normal operating condi-
tions as a basis of comparison. Research on limiting congestion, improving the
quality of service, and improving routing requires traces or other logs of actual
network activity. Although data are available for some experimental networks,
many Internet service providers have not been willing to make their data avail-
able to researchers. This has hampered university research that might lead to
improved network design and operation. The problem could get worse if service
providers become more vertically organized and less open about their operations,
problems, and needs.Finding 2-8.  The high cost of protecting intellectual property could im-pede research.Industry and academia are both becoming increasingly protective of theirintellectual property rights, and the enormous economic activity in the network
systems and communications sector encourages this trend. The processes of
working out licensing and sharing agreements could impede the free flow of
ideas necessary for research to flourish. Whenever universities band together in
a research consortium or a single university-industry collaboration is started,
researchers spend much time and energy working out intellectual prop-

erty agreements.The trend can be counteracted in several ways. ÒOpen sourceÓ software licensesthat implicitly recognize that unused intellectual property has no value explicitly
promote sharing. Other ways of reducing the costs of intellectual property protection
could include standardized forms of collaborative research agreements.Finding 2-9.  Long-term research is important to the future of the network sys-tems and communications industry.Despite the apparent success of network systems and communications tech-nologies, many difficult problems must be solved for the industry to continue to
grow and prosper. Continued rapid expansion of a sophisticated communications
infrastructure with millions or billions of network elements is bound to face some
difficult problems. The industry needs software-engineering discipline to ensure
that modules intended to fit together do so and that upgraded modules can be
introduced without disrupting network operation. Distributed systems must be
designed to be robust under failure, to remain stable under all operating condi-
tions, and to guarantee performance requirements. Some long-term problems,
such as the quality of service and security, are related to scale limitations. Current
data networks require many people with sophisticated skills; and the design
complexity and deployment scales of these systems exceed our engineering
knowledge. As the extraordinary growth of the industry slows, new problems will
have to be addressed, such as the impact of microelectronic components with
different costs and technical properties, new computational needs as the rate ofThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEminiaturization slows, and the technical implications of these changes. Indeed, asindustrial research investments change, and as human capital stresses wax and
wane, it is important to keep long-term academic research activities alive, pre-
cisely because they are the long-lived seeds from which both ideas and people
can spring, regardless of the short-term financial health of the industry.RecommendationsRecommendation 2-1.  Universities and industry should take steps to ensure that
faculty and students are available to carry on research in computer science and
other information technology fields in the future.Innovation, either from research or incremental engineering, depends on trainedresearchers. Projected demand for computer science and other information technol-
ogy graduates indicates periodic shortages in coming years. To maintain the pipeline
of both academic and industrial researchers, the following measures could be taken:¥Universities should provide early research experiences for undergradu-ates or even secondary school students.¥Universities should provide career-development support for young fac-ulty members.¥Fellowships should be provided for graduate students to encourage themto pursue research degrees; industry should provide some of this support.¥Universities and industry should provide incentives for industry engineersto return to academia for training in research.¥Universities should develop cooperative programs in which masterÕs de-grees are based not only on course work, but also on research experience.¥Training in academic research should include training in some of thequalities students will need for jobs in industry.¥Research should involve addressing not only small technical puzzles inisolation, but also complex systems problems in context. Students should
be encouraged to confront complexity and to address real-world data and
operational problems.¥Research should encourage teamwork.¥High-caliber industry researchers and engineers should be encouraged totake sabbaticals to work in academia, thus bringing real-world research
problems into academic settings.Recommendation 2-2.  Universities and industry should continue to develop
diverse collaborative arrangements.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORK SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY67Industry and universities should resist the temptation to impose standard struc-tural mechanisms to promote collaboration. Incentives for personal interactions
between university and industry should be encouraged in the following ways:¥Provide support for strong, committed leaders and the collaborative orga-nizations they lead.¥Encourage sabbaticals in both directions, enabling academics to spendtime in industry, especially in start-up companies.¥Support people and projects that involve academic and industry research-ers in essential ways.¥Explore new ways to support personal interactions across academic-industry boundaries, including using technology to support collaboration.Recommendation 2-3.  Universities and industry should make every effort to
invigorate academic research on networking.The extraordinary success of the Internet and the lure of Internet-relatedstart-up companies have tended to focus attention on short-term goals, caus-
ing long-term research to suffer. The situation could be improved in the
following ways:¥Acknowledge that the research community must take risks.¥Focus academic research on the thorny problems of large systems: model-ing, maintenance, upgrades, quality-of-service, security, and so on. Both
funding agencies and academics must recognize that large-scale systems
can best be addressed in a university setting. Even applied systems
research can be structured in a way that accommodates a long-
term approach.¥Universities and funding agencies (and industry) should support long-term, radical research on networks.¥Universities and industry should encourage interdisciplinary research thatcombines network technologies with design and social science disciplines.
Networked devices (especially hand-held mobile devices) will have to
meet both technical and human requirements.¥Universities should recognize that valuable innovations and engineeringin the field are often not channeled through traditional peer-reviewed
publications. Therefore, effective industry interaction should be more
highly valued in decisions about academic promotion and tenure.¥To revitalize academic research on networking, the National ScienceFoundation should consider sponsoring a workshop on the subject that
brings together academic and industry participants. A new agenda could
provide a strong argument for industry support, either by individual firms
or by a consortium.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCENOTES1Gordon Moore (cofounder of Intel) predicted in 1965 that the transistor density of semicon-ductor chips would double roughly every year. See Moore, 1965.2For example, during fiscal year 2001, Microsoft spent $4.38 billion on product research anddevelopment activities excluding funding of joint venture activity. This represented 17.3 percent ofrevenue that year. Microsoft Research, the part of the company that looks more than one or two
product cycles out, has around 600 employees and a budget of roughly $200 million, less than5 percent of the $4.38 billion, or less than 0.8 percent of total revenue.3The loss of faculty to commercial endeavors was limited in time and to only a few programs.Data from the most recent Taulbee Survey of computer science and computer engineering depart-ments indicate that faculty numbers have grown and are anticipated to grow through 2004. Thesurvey also indicates that faculty departures have ranged from 2.3 to 2.6 percent over the last several
years (Bryant and Vardi, 2002).4Economists have long acknowledged Òexternalities,Ó factors that alter the value of a good viewed
in isolation. Shapiro and Varian (1998) applied the idea to networks, so-called Ònetwork effects.ÓRobert Metcalfe, a popular speaker on the value of networks, has often said that the usefulness, orutility, of a network equals the square of the number of users. This observation has been dubbedÒMetcalfeÕs lawÓ (Gilder, 1993).
REFERENCESAT&T and the International Computer Science Institute. 1998. AT&T Labs, ICSI establish Internetresearch center. Press release October 8, 1998. Available online at: http://www.icir.org/aciri.html. [June 24, 2003]
Bailey, D.E., F.S. Settles, and D. Sanrow. 1998. Designing, Controlling, and Improving SRC Re-search Quality. Presentation at the NAE-Committee on Science, Engineering, and Public PolicyWorkshop on the Role of Human Capital in Capitalizing on Research, Beckman Center, Irvine,
California, January 21, 1998.BankBoston. 1997. MIT: The Impact of Innovation. Special Report of the BankBoston EconomicsDepartment. Available online at: http://web.mit.edu/newsoffice/founders. [June 24, 2003]Bell, D.G., D.G. Bobrow, O. Raiman, and M.H. Shirley. 1997. Dynamic Documents and SituatedProcesses: Building on Local Knowledge in Field Service. Pp. 261Ð276 in Information andProcess Integration in Enterprises: Rethinking Documents, T. Wakayama, S. Kannapan, C.M.
Khoong, S. Navathe, and J. Yates, eds. Norwell, Mass.: Kluwer Academic Publishers.Bryant, R.E., and M.Y. Vardi. 2002. 2000Ð2001 Taulbee Survey: Hope for More Balance in Supplyand Demand. Computing Research News 14(2): 4Ð11.Brynjolfson, E. 1991. Information Technology and the ÒProductivity ParadoxÓ: What We Know andWhat We DonÕt Know. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Sloan School of Management.Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2001. Table 3b. Fastest Growing Occupations, 2000Ð10. Available onlineat: http://www.bls.gov/news.release/ecopro.t06.htm. [June 24, 2003]
Card, S.K., T.P. Moran, and A. Newell. 1983. The Psychology of Human-Computer Interaction.Hillsdale, N.J.: L. Erlbaum Assoc.Cerf, V., and R. Kahn. 1974. A protocol for packet network intercommunication. IEEE Transactionson Communications 22(5): 637Ð642.Cohen, W.M., and D.A. Levinthal. 1990. Absorptive capacity: a new perspective on learning andinnovation. Administrative Science Quarterly 35(1): 128Ð152.CTIA (Cellular Telecommunications and Internet Association). 2003.  CTIA
Õs Semi-Annual Wire-less Industry Survey. Available online at: http://www.wow-com.com/pdf/CTIA_Survey_Yearend_2002.pdf. [June 24, 2003]
The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORK SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY69CTIS (Corporate Technology Information Services, Inc.). 1999. Spotlight. Woburn, Mass.: Corpo-rate Technology Information Services, Inc.Cusumano, M. 1991. JapanÕs Software Factories: A Challenge to U.S. Management. Oxford, U.K.:Oxford University Press.de Sola Pool, I., ed. 1977. The Social Impact of the Telephone. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Earl, M., ed. 1988. Information Management: The Strategic Dimension. Oxford, U.K.: ClarendonPress.Gilder, G. 1993. MetcalfeÕs Law and Legacy. Forbes ASAP, September 13. Available online at:http://www.seas.upenn.edu/~gaj1/metgg.html. [June 24, 2003]
Hill, S. 2001. Science and Engineering Degrees: 1966Ð1998. Arlington, Va.: Division of ScienceResources Studies, National Science Foundation.Intel. 2003. Intel Research Network of Laboratories. Available online at: http://www.intel-research.net.[June 24, 2003]InternetWeek. 2001. Report: DSL Market to Rebound Next Year. October 24, 2001. Available onlineat: http://www.internetweek.com/story/INW20011024S0005. [June 24, 2003]Kahn, A. 1970. The Economics of Regulation, Vol. 1. New York: John Wiley & Sons.Kahn, A. 1971. The Economics of Regulation, Vol. 2. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Keen, P.G.W., and M.S. Scott Morton. 1978. Decision Support Systems: An Organizational Perspec-tive. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.Kraut, R., W. Scherlis, T. Mukhopadhyay, J. Manning, and S. Kiesler. 1996. The HomeNet field trialof residential Internet services. Communications of the ACM 39(12): 55Ð63.Lazowska, E. 1998. Remarks made during panel session on Changing the Interaction Between Aca-demic Research and Industry: University, Industry, and Government Perspectives. Presented at
the workshop How Can Academic Research Best Contribute to Network Systems and Commu-nications?, National Academy of Engineering, Washington, D.C., October 30, 1998.Malone, T. 1998. Remarks made during panel session on Contributions and Impact of AcademicResearch: Social, Management, and Policy Sciences. Presented at the workshop How CanAcademic Research Best Contribute to Network Systems and Communications?, NationalAcademy of Engineering, Washington, D.C., October 30, 1998.Malone, T.W., K. Crowston, J. Lee, B. Pentland, C. Dellarocas, G. Wyner, J. Quimby, C.S. Osborn,A. Bernstein, G. Herman, M. Klein, and E. OÕDonnell. 1999. Tools for inventing organizations:toward a handbook of organizational processes. Management Science 45(3): 425Ð443.Markus, M.L. 1987. Toward a Òcritical massÓ theory of interactive media: universal access, inter-
dependence, and diffusion. Communications Research 14: 491Ð511.McKnight, L.W., and J.P. Bailey, eds. 1997. Internet Economics. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Messerschmitt, D.G. 1996. The convergence of telecommunications and computing: what are theimplications today? IEEE Proceedings (August). Available online at: http://www.informatik.tu-darmstadt.de/VS/Lehre/WS97-98/JavaTK/convergence.html. [June 24, 2003]
MICRO. 2002. University of California Microelectronics Innovation and Computer Research Oppor-tunities. Available online at: http://www.ucop.edu/research/micro/. [June 24, 2003]
Moore, G.E. 1965. Cramming more components onto integrated circuits. Electronics 38(8): 114Ð117. Available online at: http://www.cybraryn.com/news/documents/moore-paper.pdf. [June 24,
2003]Morgan, R.P., and D.E. Strickland. 2000. U.S. university research contributions to industry: findingsand conjectures. Science and Public Policy 28(2): 113Ð121.Morris, J. 1998. Remarks made during panel session on Changing the Interaction Between AcademicResearch and Industry: University, Industry and Government Perspectives.  Presented at the

workshop How Can Academic Research Best Contribute to Network Systems and Communica-tions?, National Academy of Engineering, Washington, D.C., October 30, 1998The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCENRC (National Research Council). 1995. Evolving the High-Performance Computing and Commu-nications Initiative to Support the NationÕs Information Infrastructure. Washington, D.C.: Na-tional Academy Press.NRC. 1996. CryptographyÕs Role in Securing the Information Society. Washington, D.C.: NationalAcademy Press.NRC. 1999. Funding a Revolution: Government Support for Computing Research. Washington,D.C.: National Academy Press.NRC. 2000. Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet SocietyÕsNeeds. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.NRC. 2003. Innovation and Information Technology. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.NSF (National Science Foundation). 2001. Survey of Federal Funds for Research and Development:Fiscal Years 1999, 2000, and 2001. Arlington, Va.: National Science Foundation.Orr, J. 1990. Sharing Knowledge, Celebrating Identity: War Stories and Community Memory in aService Culture. Pp. 169Ð189 in Collective Remembering: Memory in Society, D.S. Middletonand D. Edwards, eds. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage Publications.Parker, L. 1997. The Engineering Research Centers Program: An Assessment of Benefits and Out-comes. Arlington, Va.: National Science Foundation.Qualcomm Corporation. 1999. ERICSSON and QUALCOMM Reach Global CDMA Resolution.Press release. March 25, 1999. Available online at: http://www.qualcomm.com/press/pr/releases1999/press457.html. [June 24, 2003]Rockart, J.F. 1981. The changing role of the information systems executive: a critical success factorsperspective. Sloan Management Review 22(2): 15Ð25.Roessner, D., R. Carr, I. Feller, M. McGeary, and N. Newman. 1998. The Role of NSFÕs Support ofEngineering in Enabling Technological Innovation: Final Report-Phase II. Arlington, Va.: SRIInternational. Available online at: http://www.sri.com/policy/stp/techin2/. [June 24, 2003]Schofield, J.W. 1995. Computers and Classroom Culture. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Shapiro, C., and H. Varian. 1998. Information Rules: A Strategic Guide to the Network Economy.Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Business School Press.Siegel, J.L., V. Dubrovsky, S. Kiesler, and T. McGuire. 1986. Group Processes in Computer-Mediated Communication. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 37:157Ð187.Sirbu, M. 1998. Remarks made during panel session on Contributions and Impact of AcademicResearch: Social, Management, and Policy Sciences. Presented at the workshop How CanAcademic Research Best Contribute to Network Systems and Communications?, NationalAcademy of Engineering, Washington, D.C., October 30, 1998.Sproull, L., and S. Kiesler. 1991. Connections: New Ways of Working in the Networked Organiza-tion. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.SRI International. 1997. The Role of NSFÕs Support of Engineering in Enabling TechnologicalInnovation. IV. The Internet. Available online at: http://www.sri.com/policy/stp/techin/inter1.html. [June 24, 2003]Stanford University Corporate Guide. 2001. Top 10 Stanford Inventions. Available online at: http://corporate.stanford.edu/innovations/invent.html. [June 24, 2003]Tennenhouse, D. 1998. Diagram presented during panel session on Changing the Interaction Be-
tween Academic Research and Industry: University, Industry and Government Perspectives at
the workshop How Can Academic Research Best Contribute to Network Systems and Commu-nications?, National Academy of Engineering, Washington, D.C., October 30, 1998.Turkle, S. 1984. The Second Self: Computers and the Human Spirit. New York: Simon & Schuster.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. 2002. Statistical Abstract of the United StatesÐ2002. Washington, D.C.:U.S. Government Printing Office. Available online at: http://www.census.gov/prod/www/statistical-abstract-02.html. [June 24, 2003]The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.71ADDENDUME-Mail QuestionnaireThe following questionnaire was sent to individuals selected from variousparts of the network systems and communication industry, some of whom at-
tended the October 1998 workshop. Included among the questionnaire respon-
dents were senior executives at AT&T Laboratories, Bell Atlantic, Bellcore,
MCI, and Motorola, and professors with expertise in computer science and engi-
neering, network systems, and telecommunications from Stanford University,
University of Delaware, University of California-Berkeley, University of Cali-
fornia, Los Angeles, University of Virginia, and University of Washington.THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIALPERFORMANCENETWORK SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS PANELWe invite your responses to the following questions. Your responses will beused by our Panel as background information for our report. Any material used
verbatim will not be attributed to you without seeking your permission.1. Could you describe briefly significant academic research contributions tothe network systems and communications industry? (If possible, please supply
references to published information that outlines the contributions.)2. Overall, would you describe the impact of academic research on industrialperformance in the network systems and communications industry as (Please put
an X in one box):  1. very large
  2. large
  3. medium
  4. small
  5. very small/non-existent
3. What is the role of academic research in educating people who work in
your industry? (Please focus on university research  activities, rather than univer-
sity education generally.)4. What structural forms of university-industry collaboration lead to goodresults in your industry? An example of such a structure might be a discipline- or
industry-oriented ÒcenterÓ that solicits industry sponsors for a collection of
The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEprojects that span a varied research program. What seem to be the essentialdeterminants of success of such structures?5. What are significant emerging trends or problems that the network sys-tems and communications industry will face in the future that could benefit from
academic research?6. What changes are required, if any, in academic research if it is to beresponsive to these industrial trends and problems?7. What single step could be taken by universities to enhance the impact ofacademic research on the industry?8. What single step could be taken by companies to enhance the impact ofacademic research on industry?9. What single step could be taken by government to enhance the impact ofacademic research on industry?10. Do you see any downside to enhanced university-industry research col-laboration? Things to be avoided?11. Other comments? Any comments, pointers to other studies, or sugges-tions would be appreciated.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORK SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY73WORKSHOP AGENDAHOW CAN ACADEMIC RESEARCH BEST CONTRIBUTE TONETWORK SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS?October 30, 1998National Academies Building2101 Constitution Avenue N.W.Washington, D.C.9:00 am  Welcoming remarks and self-introductionsWm. A. Wulf, President, National Academy of Engineering9:15 am  Overview of the work of the Network Systems and CommunicationsPanel and  description of the wider NAE studyBob Sproull, Panel Chair10:00 am    Break

10:15 am  Session I. Contributions and impacts of academic research on
performance in the network systems and communications indus-
try: Engineering and the Physical SciencesDavid Forney, Ambuj Goyal, Robert Kahn, H.T. Kung, David Mills11:45 am Lunch in Meeting Room
12:30 pm  Session II. Contributions and impacts of academic research onperformance in the network systems and communications indus-
try: Design, Social, Management, and Policy SciencesDan Atkins, Walter Bender, Robert Kraut, Tom Malone,
Marvin Sirbu1:30 pm   
Session III. Structures for university-industry collaborationJames Flanagan, Stewart Personick, David Roessner,
Donald Strickland, Stephen Wolff2:30 pm   Break
The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCE2:45 pm   
Session IV. Changing the interaction between academic researchand industry: University, Industry, and Government PerspectivesHamid Ahmadi, Ed Lazowska, James Morris, Rick Rashid,
George Strawn, David Tennenhouse4:30 pm   
Discussion, conclusions and recommendationsBob SproullThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORK SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY75Robert Sproull, chair *Vice President and Sun Fellow
Sun Microsystems, Inc.Hamid AhmadiAT&T LabsAlfred V. Aho *Associate Research Vice President
Communications SciencesResearch DivisionLucent Technologies
Bell Labs InnovationsDaniel AtkinsSchool of Information
University of MichiganWalter BenderMIT Media LabJohn Cioffi *Associate Professor
Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford UniversityDavid J. Farber *Alfred Fitler Moore Professor ofTelecommunicationsUniversity of PennsylvaniaJames FlanaganCenter for Computer Aids
Rutgers UniversityG. David Forney, Jr.Motorola, Inc.WORKSHOP ATTENDEESAmbuj Goyal
IBM Corporation
T.J. Watson Research CenterGeorge H. Heilmeier *Chairman Emeritus
BellcoreRobert KahnCorporation for National ResearchInitiativesRobert KrautDepartment of Social and DecisionSciencesCarnegie Mellon UniversityH.T. KungDepartment of Electrical Engineeringand Computer ScienceHarvard UniversityEd LazowskaDepartment of Computer Science andEngineeringUniversity of WashingtonTom MaloneSloan School of Management
Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyDavid MillsDepartment of Electrical andComputer EngineeringUniversity of Delaware*Panel memberThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEJames MorrisSchool of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon UniversityStewart PersonickDrexel UniversityRichard RashidAdvanced Technical Research
MicrosoftJ. David RoessnerSchool of Public Policy
Georgia Institute of TechnologyJerrard SheehanNational Research CouncilMarvin SirbuInformation Networking Institute
Carnegie Mellon UniversityGeorge StrawnNational Science FoundationDonald E. StricklandChair, Management Department
Southern Illinois UniversityDavid TennenhouseDefense Advanced Research ProjectsAgencyStephen Wolff *Executive Director
Advanced Internet Initiatives Division
Cisco Systems, Inc.Wm. A. WulfPresident
National Academy of EngineeringNAE Program Office StaffTom Weimer, DirectorProctor Reid, Associate Director
Nathan Kahl, Project Assistant
Robert Morgan, NAE Fellow and Senior Analyst*Panel memberThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3Report of the Panel on the Medical Devices
and Equipment IndustryRapid changes in the financing and delivery of U.S. health care may have asignificant effect on the incentives for universities and industrial firms to gener-
ate, evaluate, and introduce new medical devices. This report examines the inter-
actions of these two critical participants in technological changes, specifically the
contributions of academic research to the medical device industry. The Panel on
Medical Devices and Equipment, one of the five panels formed by the Committee
on the Impact of Academic Research on Industrial Performance of the NAE,
hopes this report will provide a starting point for further research on critical,
but often neglected, institutional interactions in the medical device innova-
tion process.The Panel on Medical Devices and Equipment comprised six members: oneNational Academy of Sciences member from academia, one Institute of Medicine
member from industry, one other member from academia, and three more from
industry. Three of the panel members were also members of the parent commit-
tee. The panel assessed the contributions of academic research, which may in-
clude new knowledge, inventions, and the training of people in modern research
techniques, to the medical device industry and recommended ways of improving
such contributions in the future. This assessment is especially timely in view of
the fundamental changes occurring in the American health-care system, includ-
ing academic medicine, and American higher education, which are putting un-
precedented pressures on both academic medical centers and medical device
firms. In the course of this study, the panel reviewed the literature, developed
several case studies, and sent a questionnaire to individuals in academia, the
medical device industry, and government. This questionnaire was followed by a77The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEworkshop attended by approximately 35 senior individuals in the medical devicesector (see Addendum).There are several compelling reasons for undertaking a close examination ofthe interface between firms and universities in the medical device sector. First,
although this industry, like the pharmaceutical industry, develops and markets
products that contribute to human health and well-being, it has received far less
attention than the pharmaceutical industry. Second, the number and variety of
interactions between universities and industrial firms has increased significantly.
Third, a common misperception of the relationship between industry and univer-
sities assigns to universities the role of generating fundamental (basic) knowl-
edge and to industry the role of performing applied research and developing
medical technologies. A closer look at the ways medical innovations arise and
spread suggests that both parties perform much more complex, subtle, and wide-
ranging roles than conventional wisdom suggests.This report addresses two sets of questions:¥What role has university-based research played in technological advances
in the medical device industry? What impact has academic research
had on the industryÕs performance? Are the current mechanisms for
university-industry collaboration, both formal and informal, adequate?¥How might academic research contribute more effectively to the medical
device industry in the future? Are there new modes of university-industry
collaboration that would increase the payoffs without compromising the
core mission of either sector? What specific actions might increase the
contributions of academic research to the industryÕs performance?Whereas the focus of the report is on the contributions of academic researchto industry, important contributions also flow in the other direction. Industry,
among others, contributes resources for conducting university R&D and for train-
ing students. Both academic and industrial institutions are involved in the whole
innovation cycleÑresearch, development, manufacturing, evaluation, marketing,
and product modification. Industry and universities have distinctive, complemen-
tary skills, as well as overlapping competencies. In fact, one characteristic of
innovations in medical devices is close collaboration, even codependency, be-
tween universities and industry firms.The first part of this report is a review of the main components and a defini-tion of the boundaries of the medical device industry. Following a brief overview
of the structural and performance characteristics of the industry, the main players
in the innovation system for medical devices are identified, and the multifaceted
nature of research relations between academia and the medical device industry
are analyzed. Sweeping changes are occurring in the health-care environment,
including the introduction of market forces and the widespread diffusion of man-
aged care into the delivery of health care, modifications in Food and DrugThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MEDICAL DEVICES AND EQUIPMENT INDUSTRY79Administration (FDA) regulations, and new policies and practices regarding in-tellectual property rights. This report attempts to weigh the effects of these
changes on university-industry relations and consider how university contribu-
tions to the medical device industry in this rapidly changing environment could
be enhanced.DEFINITION OF THE INDUSTRYMain ComponentsMedical devices encompass a heterogeneous group of products, ranging fromlow-tech, inexpensive devices, such as tongue depressors and disposable needles,
to sophisticated devices, such as implanted therapeutic devices, lithotripters, and
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) machines. The U.S. Department of Com-
merce currently groups medical devices into five categories, according to North
American Industrial Classification System (NAICS) codes:¥Surgical and medical instruments
 (NAICS 339112) include medical, sur-
gical, ophthalmic, and veterinary instruments and apparatuses. Examples
are syringes, hypodermic needles, anesthesia apparatuses, blood trans-

fusion equipment, catheters, surgical clamps, and medical thermometers.¥Surgical appliances
 and supplies (NAICS 339113) include orthopedic
devices, prosthetic appliances, surgical dressings, crutches, surgical su-
tures, and personal industrial safety devices (except protective eyewear).¥Dental equipment and supplies
 (NAICS 339114) include equipment
and supplies used by dental laboratories and dentists offices, such as
chairs, instrument delivery systems, hand instruments, and impression
materials.¥Irradiation apparatuses
 (NAICS 334517) include apparatuses used for
medical diagnostic, medical therapeutic, industrial, research, and scien-
tific evaluations.¥Navigational, measuring, electromedical, and control instruments
(NAICS 334510) include electromedical and electrotherapeutic apparatus,
such as MRI equipment, medical ultrasound equipment, pacemakers, hear-
ing aids, electrocardiographs, and electromedical endoscopic equipment.This report focuses mainly on the high-tech, innovation-driven segments ofthe industry, such as implantable devices, bioengineered devices, optical instru-
ments, surgical staplers, and surgical miniaturization, in which the contributions
of academia are likely to be most apparent. Most FDA Class 3 devices, for
which sponsors are required to demonstrate safety and efficacy before the FDA
grants marketing clearance, are included in this category. It also includes so-
called Ò510(k) devices,Ó which are 
Òsubstantially equivalentÓ to devices that
were on the market before the 1976 Medical Device Amendments took effect
The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEand, therefore, are subject to less stringent regulatory review. This study alsoexamines emerging market segments that are expanding the boundaries of the
traditional device industry, such as tissue engineering and health information
systems intended to improve the quality and efficiency of health-care deliv-
ery systems.The global market for medical devices was $138 billion in 1999. The U.S.market accounts for 37 percent of global demand, and the U.S. industry supplied
40 percent of the global market with shipments of $55 billion in 1999 (McGraw-
Hill and U.S. Department of Commerce, 2000). The United States traditionally
runs a positive balance of trade in medical device products (estimated to be
$7 billion in 2000), and several American firms have strong market shares in
Europe and Japan (AdvaMed, 2001). All major firms throughout the world par-
ticipate in the U.S. market; most leading foreign firms have U.S. sales subsidiar-
ies, and many also have extensive research and manufacturing activities in the
United States. As of 1999, both domestic and foreign medical device firms oper-
ating in the United States employed almost 300,000 workers, and the medical
device industry was one of the fastest growing manufacturing sectors in the U.S.
economy (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2001).Companies in this industry capture relatively few sales from any singleproduct. The norm for important therapeutic tools (e.g., vascular grafts) is a total
global market of $70 million (Wilkerson Group, 1995). Even ÒblockbusterÓ prod-
ucts rarely surpass $100 million. The Johnson & Johnson Palmaz-Schatz stent for
coronary heart disease was unusually successful in garnering sales of almost
$400 million annually in its early years. But despite the purported strength of the
Johnson & Johnson patent and its headstart in the market, new companies contin-
ued to improve stent designs for opening coronary arteries. As a result, Johnson
& Johnson lost more than 70 percent of its market share in five years to new
entrants. Johnson & Johnson is expected to make a comeback, however, because
of sharply reduced restenosis with its new drug-coated stents.In short, this is a dynamic industry driven by intense competition. Productsthat briefly capture sales are swept away within a few years by more innovative
replacements. Consequently, research activity is intense; publicly traded device
firms invest 12.9 percent of sales in R&D, and the most innovative firms reinvest
as much as 23 percent of sales revenues in R&D. This figure is comparable to
investments by aggressive pharmaceutical companies (Lewin Group, 2000).The Roles of Large and Small FirmsThe extremely diverse medical device industry includes small start-up com-panies and giant corporations. In 1999, 65 percent of firms had fewer than

20 employees, and only 12 percent had more than 100 (U.S. Bureau of the
Census, 2001). The correlation between the size of a firm and its role in the
market is not entirely clear, but it is widely believed that small firms play aThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MEDICAL DEVICES AND EQUIPMENT INDUSTRY81disproportionate role in initial innovation and that large firms determine thecommercial success of new products.Large FirmsThe underlying economics of the industry drive product development towardlarger firms that have the sophisticated assets to exploit the commercial potential of
innovations and can navigate the complex regulatory requirements for the introduc-
tion of new health-care products. First, as a result of multiple filings, large firms
have developed the capability of managing clinical trials to meet regulatory re-
quirements. An excellent example is the development of the home HIV test. Al-
though the technology was relatively simple, numerous start-up companies had
failed to demonstrate their ability to collect and test potentially contaminated blood
in the home setting. Johnson & Johnson, which has extensive knowledge of the
regulatory process, was able to shepherd the first successful home HIV diagnostic
test to market. Second, large companies often have considerable skills in manufac-
turing and marketing. The history of diagnostic imaging, for example, clearly shows
that first-mover advantages are not always a key to success in the marketplace of
new technologies that have significant commonalities with earlier technologies
(e.g., MRI with CT). Although large multinational companies were often late en-
trants, their skills in marketing and servicing and their established reputations often
enabled them to assume dominant positions (Gelijns et al., 1998). Third, large,
experienced companies understand the purchasing patterns of multiple stake-

holders in a complex hospital environment. Because buyers prefer to contract with
a limited number of suppliers, successful device companies offer a full product line
of compatible products. Small companies with the most innovative devices may
gain a foothold but can rarely maintain it.Finally, the most successful companies plan for short product life cycles, andthey swiftly introduce incremental enhancements developed by internal R&D.
These companies rarely invest in basic research because the direct returns on
basic science are relatively low during the short payback time for internalizing
and commercializing product concepts. Consequently, larger firms invest in so-
phisticated market scanning and acquisition capabilities to identify new ideas for
internal development and tend to leave Òbreakthrough innovationsÓ to others. Tobe sure, large companies do produce pioneering innovations from internal re-
search, but these breakthroughs often leverage technologies from preexisting
products. In addition, large companies can exploit the experiences of users to
produce next-generation products.Innovative Small FirmsThe existence of numerous small, innovative start-up companies in the medi-cal device industry has been well documented. A study of publicly traded medicalThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEdevice firms found that in 1997, 65 percent of firms had fewer than 50 em-ployees. Firms with less than $5 million in revenue spent an average of
252 percent of sales revenue on R&D (Lewin Group, 2000). These research-
focused companies specialize in the Òfront endÓ of R&D, and perhaps not surpris-
ingly, a study by the Wilkerson Group concluded, Ònearly all significant new andinnovative products and procedures were pioneered by start-up companies.Ó In-
deed, in their survey they cite 29 major therapeutic advances, all of which could
be attributed to start-ups (Wilkerson Group, 1995).According to Gelijns and colleagues (1994):Attempts to measure the innovative activity of [medical device] firms as afunction of their size have long been handicapped, not only by methodologicalbut by conceptual difficultiesÑfor example, the absence of an unambiguouscriterion for recognizing and, therefore, for measuring innovations, or for dis-
tinguishing between ÒmajorÓ and 
ÒminorÓ innovations. One study conducted in
the early 1980s by the Futures Group defined large firms as having more than500 employees and small firms as having fewer than 500 employees (OTA,
1984). The same study reviewed more than 8,000 innovations published intrade journals in 1982 (which were likely to have overstated the contributions oflarge firms and understated the contributions of small firms) and calculated
rates of innovation per employee for each of the 5 SIC (now NAICS) codemedical device categories. The study concluded that, with the exception of thesmall ophthalmic goods category, small firms were more than twice as innova-
tive per employee as large firms (OTA, 1984). This conclusion reflects thelikely differences in the workforces of small and large firms; small firms areoften ÒR&D boutiquesÓ that do not have large numbers of personnel in, for
instance, regulatory affairs, marketing, or distribution infrastructure that largefirms have.The medical device industry also relies on individual inventors for ideas for newproducts. Once a working prototype or proof-of-concept device has been produced,
the inventor is in a position to negotiate with large companies for a license or to create
a start-up company. Besides individual initiative, small companies capable of demon-
strating product potential require venture capitalists, high-risk/high-return investors
willing to bankroll entrepreneurs with unproven technology.INNOVATION SYSTEMThe medical device industry depends heavily on an infrastructure of institu-tions and activities outside the industry. Traditionally, both large and small firms
have depended heavily on nonmedical industry sectors (e.g., those that deliver
customized components or highly specialized materials), as well as research
universities, especially academic medical centers (AMCs).Government policies have also had a strong impact on innovation practicesand university-industry relationships. First, although only a modest percentage ofThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MEDICAL DEVICES AND EQUIPMENT INDUSTRY83the federal budget is allocated directly for R&D on medical devices, the federalgovernment is a major source of R&D funding. Second, the federal government
influences the development process through the FDAÕs premarketing approvalsand policies for medical devices. Third, the government has become a major
source of payments to the providers of medical care (e.g., Medicare). For ex-
ample, by including end-stage renal disease as coverable by Medicare, the gov-
ernment assured a market, which led to significant innovations in exchange de-
vices, biocompatible materials, and other technologies necessary for dialysis.
Government decisions have a decisive influence over how existing technologies
are used. In addition, government decisions have a powerful impact on the finan-
cial incentives for private industry to undertake R&D.Government is not the only payer that influences the market for medicaldevices. In recent years, managed care, ranging from classic health maintenance
organizations (HMOs) to modified fee-for-service programs, has grown rapidly.
Managed-care purchasers are taking a more critical and more independent stance
about which technologies they will cover and the level at which they will re-
imburse providers; thus, they too influence the demand for new technologies.Research Universities and Academic Medical CentersResearch universities are key players in the medical device innovation sys-tem. Basic advances in physics, materials sciences, optics, analytical methods,
and computer science have resulted in many new device capabilities. Bioengi-
neering research has emerged as a separate discipline in the last few decades; in
1998, 70 universities and colleges offered degrees in bioengineering.A typical AMC generally comprises a medical school, a teaching hospital, anetwork of affiliated hospitals, and a nursing school. Some AMCs also have schools of
dentistry, schools for allied health professionals, and schools of public health. These
complex, multifunctional organizations have a three-pronged mission: (1) training clini-
cians and biomedical researchers, thereby ensuring the distribution of medical skills and
specialties; (2) providing advanced specialty and tertiary care and therefore adopting the
latest technologies; and (3) conducting biomedical research, ranging from laboratory-
based fundamental research to population-based clinical studies.In the United States, AMCs, and biomedical research in particular, have beenmajor beneficiaries of post-World War II science policy. Total national invest-
ment in health-related R&D (public and private) has increased dramatically in the
postwar period, more than three-fold since 1985 to more than $42 billion in 1998
(Commonwealth Fund Task Force on Academic Health Centers, 1999). At the
same time, health insurance coverage was expanded, and Medicare was estab-
lished. Medicare pays AMCs for patient care and educational activities.These financial incentives encouraged the spectacular growth of Americanacademic medicine. Between 1960 and 1992, the average medical school budget
in the U.S. expanded nearly 10-fold in real terms (see Table 3-1). The table showsThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEthat basic science faculty increased from 4,023 to 15,579, and clinical facultyincreased far more rapidly from 7,201 to 65,913 over the three-decade period
(Iglehart, 1994). As of the late 1990s, about 30 percent of all health-related R&D
in the United States took place at AMCs (Commonwealth Fund Task Force on
Academic Health Centers, 1999). Clinical specialists are major participants in the
clinical testing and advancement of devices.The financial support structure for AMCs, which is quite different from thesupport structure for other components of universities, contributed significantly to
their past research success; AMCs have also developed a separate culture (Keller,
1998). AMC research activities are funded by a variety of sources. The federal
government has funded the majority of AMC research (nearly 70 percent), especially
for basic biomedical research. In 1996, the government funded more than 70 percent
of new AMC research projects and more than 60 percent of all new nonclinical
research or research on nonhuman subjects (DirectorÕs Panel on Clinical Research,1997). In recent years, funding for academic research has increased under a variety of
arrangements. Foundations and philanthropical organizations are also important
sources of research funding. A substantial portion of academic research is funded
internally; revenues from faculty practice plans, for example, are often used to under-
write research (they support about 9 percent of research, mostly clinical, in AMCs).
An analysis in 1999 of six AMCs showed that, on average, clinical enterprises trans-
ferred about $50 million a year to medical schools for academic purposes. Universi-
ties also provided institutional funding to support the direct costs of research (Com-
monwealth Fund Task Force on Academic Health Centers, 1999).Federal AgenciesFederal support for R&D in medical devices flows through multiple institu-tional and disciplinary channels. Although the majority of medical device-relatedTABLE 3-1  The Growth of U.S. Academic Medicine, 1960
Ð1992 (in 1992dollars)1960197019801992
Support from1,3203,0285,4198,407
NIH ($ millions)
Average medical24.164.691.9200.4
school budget($ millions)Full-time medicalschool faculty (no.)Basic4,0238,28312,81615,579
Clinical7,20119,25637,71665,913
Matriculated medical30,28840,48765,18966,142
students (no.)
SOURCE: Adapted from Iglehart, 1994.
The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MEDICAL DEVICES AND EQUIPMENT INDUSTRY85R&D funds is spent in AMCs, federal agencies also fund basic and appliedresearch in academic science departments and engineering schools, federal labo-
ratories, and industry proper.The United States spends a larger percentage of its federal research budgeton research in the life sciences than any European country (NSF, 2000). Between
1985 and 2001, federal obligations for research in the life sciences more than
doubled, totaling more than $18 billion in 2001 (NSF, 2001). Most of NIHÕsoverall budget of more than $13 billion a year is spent on extramural research at
AMCs, particularly in basic (nonhuman subjects) research. Only a small portion
of NIHÕs budget is allocated specifically to create opportunities for the develop-ment of devices. For example, in 1964 the National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute (NHLBI) created the artificial heart program to support the development
of a family of devices to assist patients with failing hearts and to rehabilitate
patients with heart failure (Watson et al., 1994). NHLBI has also invested in
clinical trials of cardiac devices, for example, to determine the effectiveness of
defibrillators in high-risk patients with coronary artery disease and in the left
ventricular-assist device for end-stage patients with heart failure.Determining the portion of the NIH budget directly related to R&D on medicaldevices, however, is problematic. A congressional study in 1992 estimated that the
government had invested about $422 million in R&D on medical devices (Littell,
1994). A 1998 report in Science estimated that NIH funding of bioengineering-related research projects, including biomaterials, prosthetic devices, and artificial
organs, amounted to $417 million in 1996 (Agnew, 1998); this figure increased to
$500 million in 1998 (Chronicle Information Resources, 1999). In 2000, NIH
created the National Institute for Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering (NIBIB)
to Òimprove health by promoting fundamental discoveries, design and develop-ment, and translation and assessment of technological capabilities. The Institute
will coordinate with biomedical imaging and bioengineering programs of other
agencies and NIH institutes to support imaging and engineering research with
potential medical applications and will facilitate the transfer of such technologies to
medical applicationsÓ (P.L. 106-580). NIBIB
Õs FY02 budget was $112 million.In addition, the government supports some applied research in industry set-tings. In the early 1980s, for example, the federal government established the
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Program; and in 2000, 10 federal
agencies awarded $1.1 billion in SBIR grants. Since the programÕs inception in1983, the life sciences, which include medical devices, have received more than
$2 billion in awards from NIH. NIHÕs SBIR awarded $435 million in 2001(Goodnight, 2002).Food and Drug AdministrationThe introduction of new or modified medical devices is subject to stringentand complex regulations. The Medical Device Amendments of 1976 wereThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEintended to ensure that new devices are both safe and effective before they aremarketed. These amendments divide medical devices into three classes, depend-
ing on their potential risks to patients.Approximately 30 percent of all medical devices are grouped in Class 1, whichcomprises instruments (e.g., stethoscopes) that do not support or sustain human life
and do not present an unreasonable risk of illness or injury. Class 1 devices are
subject to the general controls used before passage of the Medical Device Amend-
mentsÑfor example, regulations regarding registration, premarketing notification,record keeping, labeling, and good manufacturing practices. About 60 percent of
devices fall into Class 2, which includes x-ray devices and other devices that pose
some risk. Class 2 devices are subject to federally defined performance standards.
Class 3 devices include all life-supporting or life-sustaining devices that substan-
tially prevent health problems or that could pose a risk of injury or illness. For Class
3 devices, the sponsor must demonstrate safety and efficacy before the FDA grants
marketing approval. Approximately 10 percent of medical devices fall into Class 3;
examples include left-ventricular assist devices and laser angioplasty devices. Since
1976, all new devices are automatically placed in Class 3 unless the sponsor suc-
cessfully petitions the FDA to reclassify them as Òsubstantially equivalentÓ to a
device that was on the market before the amendments took effect. Demonstration of
this equivalence, called a 510(k) submission, is provided by descriptive, perfor-
mance, and even clinical data.To support a marketing approval decision, or in some instances a 510(k)submission, a sponsor must conduct clinical studies. If a device poses a signifi-
cant risk, the sponsor submits a request for an investigational device exemption
(IDE) to the FDA. Following clinical studies, the device may be approved for
marketing through a so-called premarket approval (PMA) decision. Most PMAs
are individual licenses secured by the developer for particular devices and spe-
cific clinical uses or indications. Other developers of similar kinds of devices
must submit separate PMAs and clinical data.In the 1990s, FDA regulation of medical devices changed significantly withthe passage of the Safe Medical Devices Act of 1990. Under new requirements
for premarketing studies, manufacturers are required to conduct more rigorous
studies with appropriate, and where possible randomized, controls. Postmarketing
surveillance now provides a number of separate mechanisms for collecting data.
Both device manufacturers and health-care providers must report information
indicating if the device may have caused or contributed to a death or serious
injury. For high-risk devices, companies must keep track of patients, and, in
certain cases, must conduct postapproval clinical studies to detect possible risks
associated with the use of the device, as well as information on its effectiveness.
These changes should improve the quality of evaluations and provide more infor-
mation about safety and efficacy. At the same time, they have slowed the pace of
introductions of new medical devices and increased the risk and cost for medical
device firms.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MEDICAL DEVICES AND EQUIPMENT INDUSTRY87In the early 1990s, the FDA had long review times for IDEs, PMAs, and510(k) submissions, and the agency had accumulated a considerable backlog.
Subsequently, the FDA reorganized its device branch, and then, in 1997, the FDA
Modernization Act (also known as FDAMA) was passed. This wide-ranging
legislation attempts to shift resources in the agency from relatively low-risk to
relatively high-risk areas and to specify the requirements for trials of clinical
devices. As a result of these changes, the backlog was diminished substantially
and review time was shortened considerably; in 1998, for instance, the average
review time for a 510(k) submission decreased by 12.3 percent from the preced-
ing year.Venture-Capital IndustryThe United States has a mature venture-capital industry that provides accessto liquid capital markets for the financing of high-risk ventures. Venture capital
has been pivotal to the development of the industry, because the development and
commercialization of medical devices can be a prolonged process, and few in-
ventors can survive with debt financing alone. Venture capital allows the origina-
tor to obtain operating funds and to share financial risks.Small firms with no track records often need multiple sources of funding fora substantial period of time, usually beginning with private financing and pro-
ceeding to the equity markets. Venture capitalists fund these companies when
revenues are small or even nonexistent. As recently as 15 years, ago, the venture-
capital market was small, but in 2001, health care, principally biopharmaceuticals
and medical devices, received $5.6 billion in venture capital, 17 percent of total
venture capital investments for the year (Zemel, 2002). In addition, the initial
public offering (IPO) market expanded in the 1990s, which allowed venture
capitalists to exit projects and thereby reap rewards for the risk they had borne;
small companies subsequently had access to large pools of liquid capital
for future expansion. IPO investment in the medical device industry rose from
$410 million in 1995 to $1.268 billion in 1996; much of this growth was in the
cardiovascular device sector. In recent years, with the economic downturn,
venture-capital investment in medical devices has declined sharply, and IPOs
have come to a virtual standstill. In 2001, there were only eight IPOs of medical
device firms, raising roughly $741 million.Third-Party PayersIn the last 20 years, dramatic changes have been made in the financing anddelivery of U.S. health care. Changes include the rapid growth of managed care
initiatives and the consolidation of hospitals and clinics into large integrated
delivery systems. Managed care organizations increasingly reimburse health-care
providers on a capitated basis (i.e., fixed reimbursement per patient per month),The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEpromote cost-conscious purchasing by negotiating price discounts on high-volume procedures, and may use selective contracting to concentrate sophisti-
cated devices and related procedures in a smaller number of institutions. As a
result, the incentives for industrial firms to generate new medical devices has
also changed.These changes have had many consequences for AMCs and university-
industry interactions. First, the pressures to contain the costs of medical care have
reduced the resources in AMCs for cross-subsidizing research. Second, research-
ers in AMCs in areas with high managed care penetration are less likely to obtain
NIH grants or to publish than investigators in areas with less managed care
competition (Griner and Blumenthal, 1998). The decrease is especially apparent
in clinical research, raising questions about whether the necessary level of clini-
cal research for the medical device enterprise can be sustained. Finally, the pay-
ment for treatment of patients in clinical trials is becoming increasingly conten-
tious, which could inhibit the refinement of devices and the collection of data on
medical devices.Traditionally, industry has supported the evaluation of medical devices, gov-ernment has supported the evaluation of major clinical procedures and off-label
uses, and payers have supported (often unknowingly) the treatment costs of pa-
tients enrolled in clinical trials. However, managed care organizations have be-
come increasingly reluctant to do so, and they are coming under increasing pres-
sure to support these trials. Every sectorÑthe federal government, industry,AMCs, and managed careÑwould obviously prefer that others shoulder more ofthe burden, but as both the number of evaluations and their complexity and
sophistication have increased, the need for partnerships to pool resources has
become evident. Conditional coverage, in which payers cover the costs of patient
treatment in a predetermined research protocol while government and industry
cover the costs of doing the research, is one option for intersector funding. In
1995, an Interagency Agreement between the FDA and the Healthcare Financing
Administration made certain Category B nonexperimental/investigational devices
eligible for Medicare payment during clinical trials. More than 90 percent of
investigational device exemptions (IDEs) have been made eligible for Medicare
payment in this manner. Legislation introducing conditional coverage for all
Medicare enrollees was enacted in September 2000 (42 CFR411.1).CONTRIBUTIONS OF ACADEMIC RESEARCHEducation and TrainingOne of the most important long-term contributions of academia is the train-ing of people skilled in research techniques. Universities train people in many
disciplinesÑbiological, behavioral, and physical sciences, as well as engineer-ing. Advances in the biological sciences, biomaterials sciences, and in biologicalThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MEDICAL DEVICES AND EQUIPMENT INDUSTRY89information processing and analysis have ushered in a new era of progress andinnovation in medical devices and bioengineering. In the 1990s, bioengineering
was the fastest growing specialty at engineering schools that offer these programs
(Agnew, 1998). To meet the growing need for multidisciplinary education in
engineering, biology, and medicine, beginning in the late 1960s various educa-
tional programs have been developed to integrate engineering and clinical medi-
cine. The University of Pennsylvania, Johns Hopkins University, Purdue Univer-
sity, and Rice University are some of the institutions that had early
multidisciplinary programs. NIH and NSF have funded the development of more
of these programs.Medical schools train clinicians in a wide range of specialties, as well asscientists in laboratory-oriented basic research, translational (applied) research,
and clinical evaluative sciences. In the 1970s and 1980s, NIH funding was in-
creased for basic, laboratory-oriented research, which was reflected in an in-
crease in the number of Ph.D.s receiving NIH awards and a decrease in the
number of physician/scientists receiving awards. Since then, the ratio of Ph.D.
applicants to physician applicants has remained constant at 3:1 (Commonwealth
Fund Task Force on Academic Health Centers, 1999). Between 1994 and 1996,
as pressures to contain costs increased and demands on physicians to maintain a
certain volume of clinical care mounted, the number of first-time physician appli-
cants to NIH dropped by 30 percent, raising concerns that the number of clinical
researchers might be permanently diminished. As a result, NIH created new
training (and research) initiatives for clinical researchers, in both translational
and clinical evaluative research (e.g., biostatistics, clinical epidemiology, and
outcomes research, fields that were traditionally covered by schools of public
health). The number of training programs leading to joint MD/Masters of Public
Health (MPH) degrees have increased as a result.Schools of public health train people in sociomedical, health management,and policy sciences. As device production, evaluation, and marketing become
more difficult, industry demand for people trained in outcomes analysis, bio-
statistics, health economics, and medical decision analysis has increased. Al-
though educational programs in these areas have been established around the
country, many of them are small, have insufficient clinical involvement, and are
not geared toward the assessment and regulatory approval of medical devices.
Business schools, which train people in the management sciences, have expanded
programs that offer MD/MBA programs.Research in the Physical Sciences and EngineeringBecause markets for medical devices are often fragmented and relativelysmall, the medical device industry historically has not invested heavily in basic
research but has depended heavily on scientific and technological capabilities
developed in other sectors. Medical devices have exploited research and newThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEtechnological capabilities and components developed by universities, the mili-tary, the electronics industry, and firms that manufacture specialized materials,
such as high-quality glass for fiber optics and special materials for pros-
thetic devices.Arguably, there have been two very distinct patterns to the collaborationsbetween physical scientists and engineers on the one hand and clinical research-
ers on the other. One is in the field of instrumentation where electrical engineers
and physicists either had separately developed a technology that could be used in
a device or instrument or, working on a problem defined by a clinical researcher,
had come up with a device or instrument that would solve the problem. Earl
BakkenÕs development of the pacemaker is an example of the latter.However, a very different kind of collaboration developed between me-chanical and chemical engineers and clinical researchers, in which the engineers
became directly involved in defining the problem, not merely helping to find the
solution. This manifested itself in studies of fluid mechanics and transport phe-
nomena in blood flow, and in the many studies aimed at characterizing the inter-
actions between biological fluids and synthetic materials. These collaborations
led to insights that have been key to understanding the effect of flow patterns in
certain diseases, like atherosclerosis, but also to understanding the importance of
flow patterns in prosthetic devices in promoting or inhibiting thrombosis or
hemolysis. In these cases, engineers did not borrow from other fields but became
involved in direct research in the biological systems to understand the unique
phenomena of those systems.In a 1998 study of trends in medical device technology conducted by theFDA, a survey revealed six somewhat overlapping Òtrend categoriesÓ: computer-related technology; molecular medicine; home care and self-care; minimally in-
vasive procedures; combination drug/device products; and organ replacements
and assist devices (Herman et al., 1998). Most of these categories reflect contri-
butions either from universities or other industry sectors. For example, computer-
related technologies, which include computer-aided diagnosis, intelligent devices,
biosensors and robotics, and networks of devices, all depend on the results of
R&D in computers and communications, which, in turn, interact with and build
on advances in mathematics, computer science, electrical engineering, and other
disciplines. Minimally invasive procedures include minimally invasive instru-
ments, medical imaging, microminiaturized devices, laser diagnosis and therapy,
robotic surgical devices, and nonimplanted sensory aids, all of which make use of
developments in physics, mathematics, electrical engineering, and computer sci-
ence. Organ replacements and assist devices depend on advances in the materials
sciences and, increasingly, on the interface between biology and the physical and
engineering sciences.Universities play an important role in the evolution of medical devices.University research may lead to the discovery of new scientific or technological
principles, new designs, new materials, and advances in computer sciences. Ex-
amples of academic contributions and university-industry collaborations can beThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MEDICAL DEVICES AND EQUIPMENT INDUSTRY91found in the development of lasers, endoscopy devices, and medical imagingmachines. For instance, work by Charles Townes at Columbia University in the
early 1950s resulted in the invention of the maser, a device that creates a focused
microwave beam using stimulated emission (Rosenberg, 2000). Townes later
collaborated with Arthur Schawlow of Bell Laboratories on a paper that outlined
how stimulated emission might work at the wavelength of visible light. Bell
Laboratories received a patent for the resulting invention, the laser, in 1960
(Spetz, 1995).Medical uses of the laser quickly became apparent, especially after the in-vention in 1964 of the argon laser, a light source that promoted photocoagulation.
Ophthalmologists and dermatologists were the first and most frequent users of
lasers, which enabled retinal reattachment, treatment of glaucoma, and the re-
moval of disfiguring port-wine stains. However, other uses of the laser technique
proceeded more slowly. Although clinicians recognized that the wavelength,
duration, and energy intensity of a laser beam could be manipulated, fundamental
questions about the optical, thermal, and physical properties of tissue had to be
answered before lasers could be used to treat other clinical conditions. By the
1980s, many of these uncertainties had been overcome, and lasers were soon used
in a wide range of clinical specialties, including gynecology, gastroenterology,
and cardiology.Flexible gastrointestinal endoscopy was first developed in the early 1960swith significant academic contributions by physicists van Heel in Holland and
Hopkins and Kapany in the United Kingdom (Gelijns and Rosenberg, 1999).
Their work, reported simultaneously in Nature in 1954, laid out the principles ofcoherent image transmission for sending images along an aligned bundle of flex-
ible glass fibers (Hopkins and Kapany, 1954; van Heel, 1954). Van Heel pre-
sented the concept of the coated glass fiber and the possibility of plastic coatings,
which later turned out to be unworkable. Both papers described the conveyance
of optical images along a glass fiber, a concept that had been developed earlier.
Hopkins and Kapany also elucidated the basic principles of fiber alignment.
Upon reading their work in Nature, Hirschowitz, a gastroenterologist at the Uni-versity of Michigan, Peters, an optical physicist, and Curtiss, an undergraduate
student, undertook research to develop a workable fiber-optic instrument for
visualizing the upper gastrointestinal tract (Gelijns and Rosenberg, 1999).
Hirschowitz tested the first operating gastroscope on himself in February 1957.
The academic trio subsequently licensed the technology to American Cystoscope
Makers, Inc., and collaborated with the firm to develop the first commercial
flexible endoscopes.Basic advances in physics were essential to the development of all imagingtechnologies (Gelijns and Rosenberg, 1999). These advances were typically gen-
erated in departments of physics at universities in Europe and the United States;
they can be traced all the way back to Roentgen, a professor of physics at the
University of Wrzberg in the nineteenth century.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEAs these examples illustrate, collaboration between AMCs and physical sci-ence and engineering departments has been a consistent pattern in the medical
device industry. In some cases, collaborations date back many years. Current
collaborative efforts often are continuations of long-standing cooperation be-
tween engineers, scientists, and medical faculty. Tissue engineering is an ex-
ample. One of the most productive collaborations was between Joseph Vacanti, a
pediatric surgeon at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, and Robert
Langer, a professor of chemical engineering at MIT. Basically, tissue engineering
involves creating a scaffold of an artificial, biodegradable polymer, which is then
seeded with living cells and immersed in growth factors. As the cells multiply,
they fill up the scaffold and grow into a three-dimensional tissue. R&D was
focused on creating organs and body parts, such as bone, skin, pancreas, teeth,
breast, heart valves, arteries and veins, urinary tract, and cartilage. This research,
and the involvement of academic faculty in the creation of start-up firms, spawned

an entirely new industry. Lysaght et al. (1998) documented the creation of
40 start-up firms in tissue engineering, 10 of which had gone public at a market
capitalization of $1.7 billion in January 1998.The increase in interdisciplinary research collaborations has also been stimulatedby several federal funding initiatives. For instance, several engineering research cen-
ters funded by NSF perform research relevant to medical devices. These include the
Center for the Engineering of Living Tissues at Georgia Institute of Technology and
the Emory School of Medicine, the Engineering Research Center for Computer-
Integrated Surgical Systems and Technology at Johns Hopkins University, the Engi-
neered Biomaterials Engineering Research Center at the University of Washington,
and the Engineering Research Center in Bioengineering Educational Technologies at
Vanderbilt University. Other agencies have also funded interdisciplinary research
centers. The Center for Integration of Medicine and Innovative Technology (CIMIT),
established with funding from the Massachusetts General Hospital and DOD, in-
volves various clinical specialties in the Partners Health Care System in Boston, MIT,
and Draper Laboratory, as well as industrial partners in the Partners Health Care

System in Boston (Parrish, 1998). CIMIT is devoted to the development and evalua-
tion of innovative diagnostic and therapeutic devices.Case Study: Center for Integration of Medicineand Innovative TechnologyCIMIT was founded in 1993 to accelerate the generation, development, andtime-to-practice of innovative and high-impact concepts in minimally invasive
therapy that improve the quality and lower the cost of health-care delivery. CIMIT

operates as a consortium that includes Massachusetts General Hospital and the
Brigham and WomenÕs Hospital, both of which provide clinical expertise,and MIT and Draper Laboratory, which provide basic technical and engineer-
ing expertise.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MEDICAL DEVICES AND EQUIPMENT INDUSTRY93In 1998, with the consortium structure in place, CIMIT won a competitivefederal award for minimally invasive health-care technologies, administered
through the U.S. Army. This unconventional funding source allows CIMIT to
undertake high-risk, high-reward research that spans a wide range of scientific
and technical fields. Army funding allows CIMIT to pursue short-term, un-
conventional, developmental, integrative, and sometimes speculative research, in
addition to longer term, clinical, and basic science projects.To maximize the potential for interdisciplinary collaborations, CIMIT isorganized as a matrix, with clinical focus areas: cardiovascular; stroke; trauma
and critical care, supported by a technological infrastructure comprised of tech-
nology teams; biomaterials; endoscopic tools; endovascular tools; energy deliv-
ery; medical imaging; microsensors; simulation and modeling; surgical planning;
and tissue engineering. CIMIT also has an outcomes and technology assessment
program to analyze the cost effectiveness of new therapies and devices. Research
activities are supplemented by a broad industry collaboration initiative, a
fundraising initiative, and an education/outreach initiative.Industry collaboration is a major component of CIMIT, which uses a hierarchi-cal mechanism for industry-funded research. CIMIT conducts project-specific re-
search funded or performed in conjunction with industry. At the next level, compa-
nies interested in multiple areas of CIMIT research may join the CIMIT industrial
partnership program in order to gain access to physician consultation, prepublication
reports, and symposiums. Lastly, corporations with a business interest in integra-
tive technologies that would otherwise have to negotiate multiple research agree-
ments with multiple departments can become strategic alliance partners of CIMIT,
thereby making a long-term commitment to research in minimally invasive therapy
and ancillary technologies. Industry gains early access to opinion leaders, novel
technologies, and interdepartmental expertise. For CIMIT, industry collaboration
provides a research focus as well as additional research dollars. CIMIT enables the
Army to leverage research dollars and provides a conduit for transitioning research
and technology into clinical practice or the device industry.Academic Medical CentersAMCs conduct research that contributes to the development and diffusion ofmedical devices. AMCs have been involved in: (1) generating knowledge about
human physiology and pathophysiology; (2) developing product ideas, device
prototypes, and manufacturing methods; (3) clinical testing and feedback;
(4) modifying existing products; and (5) discovering new indications of use.Physiology and PathophysiologyAMCs are an important source of knowledge concerning human physiologyand pathophysiology. Understanding the electrophysiology of the heart, forThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEexample, is critical for designing a pacemaker or implantable defibrillator, as iscirculatory physiology for designing artificial hearts and circulatory assist de-
vices. Similarly, knowledge of renal physiology, which has been crucial in eluci-
dating the pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics of hemodialysis, has con-
tributed to the development of improved dialysis machines. Research increasingly
involves collaborations between basic science departments (e.g., physiology and
pharmacology), engineering departments (e.g., mechanical, electrical, and chemi-
cal), and clinical departments (e.g., surgery and medicine).Another important research focus is health information systems. Comparedto other service industries, especially financial services, the diffusion of informa-
tion technology in health care has been slow. The role of university faculty in
developing and commercializing health information systems is reviewed in the
following case study.Case Study: Development of the Medical InformationSystem Industry in the United StatesThe advent of Medicare and Medicaid in the mid-1960s marked the beginningof the transformation of the health-care delivery system. These federal programs
provided enormous new resources for medical care, but also initiated significant
new reporting requirements for receiving institutions. The combination of increased
patient demand and the need for a more sophisticated administrative infrastructure
created a demand for information. At the same time, the development and industrial
use of information technology developed to the point that it could be adapted to the
health-care industry. One of the major barriers to the transfer and growth of infor-
mation technology was the absence of industrial organizations capable of financ-
ing, absorbing, and adapting the technology. In the 1960s, most hospitals were
charitable institutions, and most physicians were in solo practices.Research in medicine (carried out in medical schools and AMCs) has beenconcentrated in the scientific and practice arenas, focused on basic causes of
disease and the drugs, devices, and procedures to treat them. However, with the
entry by the federal government into the direct delivery of medical care, Congress
provided funds for research into medical computer applications, mainly through
NIH, but also through a number of directed programs in other federal organiza-
tions and the newly created National Library of Medicine.By the 1970s, two strategies emerged. The first, derived from the researchsupport of NIH and other agencies, was a new specialtyÑmedical informaticsÑin a relatively small number of institutions and mainly federally supported. The
second, the business needs of hospitals and doctors, spawned the development of
a growing number of commercial enterprises, often as outgrowths of IBM, which
dominated the field of business applications for hospitals. Information technol-
ogy rapidly expanded from purely business applications to more clinical areas
and, more recently, into decision support areas.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MEDICAL DEVICES AND EQUIPMENT INDUSTRY95Compared to other service industries, especially financial services, the dis-persion of information technology in health care has been slow. In 2001, almost
38 years after Medicare and Medicaid were introduced, Healthcare Informatics,which lists the top 100 medical information technology companies by revenue,
found only four that had exceeded $1 billion in revenue; the next highest was
$523 million, and the next $435 million. Number 100 was $3.7 million. The total
market is estimated to be as much as $50 billion (in a health-care industry of more
than $1 trillion). The direct, traceable transfer of academically developed systems
to commercial use has followed two tracks: (1) direct transfer of results of gov-
ernment and/or institution-sponsored programs; and (2) the results of privately
funded programs.In the late 1960s, government agencies gave grants to academic institutionsfor R&D on computer systems. In almost every case, funds were matched by
internal institutional funds because it was believed that these projects would also
be beneficial to the operation of the hospital. After initial development, the hos-
pital either gave or sold the programs to a company to develop systems for other
hospitals. The second track was university personnel who left and began start-up
companies that have become significant commercial enterprises.An example of a major academic contribution began with research at theLaboratory of Computer Science at the Massachusetts General Hospital
(MGH), one of the principal teaching hospitals of Harvard Medical School.
Government-sponsored research resulted in important commercial outcomes,
such as the language MUMPS (MGH utility multiprogramming system), which
went on to be used in many applications and was supported by both a MUMPS
users group and the MUMPS Development Committee, which managed the
MUMPS ANSI Standard.One early example of an institution-sponsored transfer was the work ofHomer Warner of the Latter Day Saints (LDS) Hospital, the principal teaching
hospital of the University of Utah Medical School (later named Intermountain
Health System), in the development of computerized hospital information sys-
tems. LDS developed both MEDLAB and Health Evaluation through Logical
Processing (HELP). In the 1980s, the rights were acquired by the 3M Company
and commercialized as a leading clinical information system.Another example, which resulted from research funded directly by govern-ment that was spun off into a private company, is Public Health Automated
Medical Information System (PHAMIS). Initially, a government contract to auto-
mate the records of the public health hospitals was given to Malcolm Glaser at the
University of Washington. In the 1980s, the government closed the hospitals and
transferred ownership of the resulting information system to Glaser who started
the commercial company. The PHAMIS hospital information system was named
Lastword. The company went public and was acquired by the IDX company in
1997. The combined company was the tenth largest in the health information
technology industry in 2001.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEA second spin-off of MGH was Meditech, now the twentieth largest healthinformation technology company. The principals who developed MUMPS left
MGH to form Meditech and it has developed several generations of proprietary
languages following MUMPS (MIS and MAGIC) and used them to develop
hospital information systems that are now installed in more than one thous-
and hospitals.A final example relates to two efforts at the Beth Israel and Peter BentBrigham Hospitals (PBBH), also principal teaching hospitals of Harvard Medical
School. A program begun in 1976 under the leadership of Warner Slack and
Howard Bleich, both professors at Harvard Medical School, sponsored mainly by
government grants, expanded from research on medical informatics to opera-
tional systems for laboratories, pharmacies, other laboratories, and routine ser-
vices. A second project (known as BICS) at PBBH focused on order entry and
other operational functions. Commercial spin-offs resulted from both projects.A related example involves the work of Dr. Dennis Gillings, a statistician andepidemiologist from the University of North Carolina School of Public Health. Dr.
Billings started a company that grew into Quintiles, a major corporation that sup-
ports clinical trials, pharmacoeconomics, and the health service research needs of
the pharmaceutical, biotechnology, and medical device industries.Examples of privately funded research that have contributed to the industryalso abound. One example of the direct translation of an AMC product develop-
ment project funded by private dollars to a public company is Transition Sys-
tems, Inc. The system was originally developed as an internal clinical cost-
accounting system for the growing managed care market. New England Medical
Center received private foundation support in 1981 to develop a management
control system that combined clinical and financial data. When Medicare shifted
from cost-based reimbursement to prospective payments to providers based on
diagnosis-related groups (DRGs) in 1984, there was a widespread demand for
cost-accounting systems, and New England Medical Center transformed the
project team into a corporate spin-off, retaining the majority ownership. The
company prospered and went public in conjunction with an investment group
partnership 10 years later.A second example is a company whose products were developed by theHealth Policy Institute at Boston University. Health Payment Review was formed
with venture capital funding to market products that added clinical appropriate-
ness to the payment methods of managed care companies. After going public, the
company was acquired by HBO, Inc., which, in turn, was acquired by McKesson
in 1999, the third largest health information technology company in 2001.The flow of researchers forming new commercial start-up companies contin-ues. The managers of many companies that serve niche markets, such as elec-
tronic medical records and disease management, started as participants in aca-
demic research teams. Thus, the array of information technology, which is
becoming critical to the success of managed care, is likely to be infused with aThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MEDICAL DEVICES AND EQUIPMENT INDUSTRY97continuing stream of developments from AMCs to industry. However, as AMCsbecome more insistent on retaining value from the results of their research, they
are beginning to take equity positions in companies willing to commercialize
their research. For example, the PBBHÕs BICS system has been incorporated intothe public company, Eclypsis, in which Partners Health Care System, the parent
of the PBBH, holds an equity position.In conclusion, it appears that the greatest impact of AMC research on informa-tion technology development has come from entrepreneurs who leave academic
environments with research experience and ideas of how that experience can be
transformed into commercial products. Successful individuals have garnered ven-
ture capital and eventually either consolidated companies into larger health infor-
mation companies or made public offerings as independent companies.Ideas, Prototypes, and Manufacturing MethodsClinicians/academic researchers not only identify the need for new devicesor improvements in existing devices, but, because they are also the eventual users
of their devices, they are often the innovators and builders of original prototypes.
Von Hippel and Finkelstein (1979), for example, described how users were in-
volved in the invention of the automated clinical chemical analyzer. Other studies
in the area of renal dialysis, intrauterine devices, catheters, and MRI machines
have presented similar findings (Shaw, 1987, Gelijns 1991, Gelijns and
Rosenberg, 1995; Gelijns et al., 1998). However, academic researchers are often
unable to advance projects beyond a certain point because critical enabling tech-
nologies are missing or are too specialized to be developed in the laboratory or
elsewhere in the university. To overcome this hurdle, researchers often form
partnerships with industrial firms with the applicable technological expertise and
interest in the proposed application.The contributions of academic faculty in the development of device proto-types can be documented for the whole clinical spectrum of medical device
categories, ranging from diagnostic devices to therapeutic devices. In diagnostic
devices, for example, Robert Ledley, professor of physiology, biophysics, and
radiology at Georgetown University Medical Center, developed the first proto-
type for a whole body CT scanner, patented the device, and created a company,
Digital Information Systems, to commercialize it. Pfizer ultimately licensed the
device and introduced it into clinical practice in 1975.In therapeutic devices, numerous examples show the central role of clinicalfaculty in the development of new or modified devices. In gynecological
laparoscopy, for example, the gynecologist Kurt Semm at the University of Kiel
worked with the device company Storz to develop a whole range of instruments
that could be moved through the operative channel of the endoscope or any other
cannula (Gelijns and Rosenberg, 1999). Through StorzÕs close collaborationswith Semm and Hopkins, this firm became the leading manufacturer ofThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEgynecological laparoscopes worldwide. The cardiologist Andreas Gruentzig,then at the University of Zurich, collaborated with the device firm Schneider to
develop the first percutaneous, transluminal, coronary angioplasty catheter. The
role of AMCs in the development of focused ultrasound therapies is another case
in point.Case Study: Development of Focused Ultrasound TherapiesClinical ultrasound works much the same way as radarÑenergy is producedby a transducer, and the reflected energy is received and processed by a receiver.
The time between signal transmission and reception correlates directly with dis-
tance, and the amplitude of the return indicates the material properties of the
reflecting surface. When an array of acoustic transducers is used, the resulting
fan-beam image shows distance and amplitude as a function of the placement of
the transducer along the array. In this mode, ultrasound is used primarily for
diagnostic purposes, such as cardiovascular or fetal imaging. Just as optical lenses
can focus light on a single spot, however, acoustic lenses can focus ultrasound on
a single spot. In this mode, ultrasound becomes a therapeutic tool, rather than a
strictly diagnostic tool.The principles behind using acoustic energy for diagnostic purposes havebeen known since at least 1942, when researchers at Columbia University dem-
onstrated the operation of a focused ultrasound generator capable of producing
focal heating in paraffin blocks, liver tissue, and inside the brains of animals
(Lynn et al., 1942).  Subsequently, significant advances were made at the Univer-

sity of Illinois, as well as the Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medi-
cal School. These early applications of focused ultrasound were used to examine
central nervous system tissue (Fry et al., 1955) and the brain (Basauri and Lele,
1962; Fry and Fry, 1960; Lele, 1962). By the late 1970s, the broader use of
ultrasound in surgery was considered a viable treatment modality (Fry, 1978;
Lele, 1975).By the 1970s, the dominant obstacle to the use of focused ultrasound fortherapy was no longer the delivery of acoustic energy, but the inability to monitor
the extent of the therapy. There are two aspects to this obstacle. First, because
focused ultrasound must operate with a relatively small focus spot to deliver
sufficiently high energy, real-time monitoring of the focus location is necessary
to ensure that the entire target zone has been treated. Monitoring is particularly
important to determine the duration of the therapyÑsometimes up to severalhours. Second, because the purpose of focused ultrasound therapy is to induce
either coagulation or tissue necrosis, the inability to monitor the induced tem-
perature changes in the targeted tissue meant that it was nearly impossible to
establish rigorous treatment protocols. For these reasons, advances in magnetic
resonance (MR) physics, which led to an understanding of how MR can be used
to monitor temperature, and the integration of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MEDICAL DEVICES AND EQUIPMENT INDUSTRY99with focused ultrasound therapy for image-based guidance became key enablingtechnologies for using focused ultrasound for therapy. Based on the interrelation-
ship between focused ultrasound therapy and MR, companies with significant
business interests in high-end imaging equipment, such as GE, began to invest in
sponsored research in focused ultrasound. GE sponsored the Brigham and
WomenÕs HospitalÑan AMC affiliated with Harvard Medical SchoolÑto fur-ther develop this technology. Indeed, the collaboration between Brigham and GE
was so complete that GE researchers were contributing, or even leading, authors
of several of the major papers on the topic of focused ultrasound (e.g., Cline et al.,
1992, 1994).By the early 1990s, the potential for focused ultrasound was beginning to berealized.  Numerous studies on the use of focused ultrasound for prostate hyper-

plasia were conducted at various AMCs; focused ultrasound therapy on brain
tissue without prior removal of a section of the skull was initially demonstrated at
Brigham (Hynynen and Jolesz, 1998), as well as new treatment options for the
ablation of breast fibroadenomas (Hynynen et al., 2001). As of the late 1990s,
numerous research activities in focused ultrasound were under way at the Univer-
sity of Michigan, the Mayo Clinic, and elsewhere (Spera, 1998).Although the market demand for focused ultrasound technology remainslow, many clearly believe in its potential. Focus Surgery, Inc., for example, has
secured licenses for therapeutic applications of focused ultrasound in a number of
organ systems, including the prostate, brain, liver, kidney, pancreas, and breast.
MRI manufacturers, including GE, Siemens, and Phillips, are all believed to be
actively pursuing this technology (Spera, 1998). Like other imaging technologies
(e.g., CT, MR), focused ultrasound is a technology that was born in academic
research settings and has gained commercial interest. Industry is now turning to
AMCs for both new insights and clinical validations.Clinical Testing and FeedbackImprovements in product design depend in large measure on extended clini-cal testing that requires close collaborative relationships between industry and
academia, sometimes involving several major medical schools and their teaching
hospitals (Gelijns and Rosenberg, 1999). The clinical data generated by testing
not only provide feedback for altering product designs, but also provide a basis
for obtaining FDA premarketing and payer coverage approval, and thereby lead
to widespread market access. In recent years, spending on clinical trials by indus-
try has increased substantially.AMCs have traditionally been involved in the testing of prototype devicesand have been the source of patients for extensive clinical trials. AMCs have been
the venue of care for patients who need implantable devices and invasive proce-
dures. AMC faculty members were often involved in designing, conducting, and
analyzing clinical trials, but in the last decade contract research organizationsThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCE(CROs) have captured part of this market (Moskowitz and Thompson, 1997).CROs are private, for-profit organizations engaged in the management of clinical
trials, including protocol design, patient recruitment, data collection, data man-
agement, monitoring, and analysis. In the medical device industry, CRO use
is not common; only 13 percent of medical device firms use CROs (whereas
90 percent of drug firms use CROs) (Centerwatch, 2001).Only a small percentage of devices (i.e., Class 3 FDA devices and a smallsubset of 510(k) devices) must undergo rigorous safety and efficacy evaluation.
As a result, the overall number of randomized controlled trials for devices is low.
The number is slowly increasing, however, as the FDA grapples with changing
its policies about which devices require rigorous evaluation. The FDA must
ensure that device trials take into account ethical, technical, and methodological
challenges at various stages of the evaluation process.To begin with, choosing the optimal time to initiate a device trial is more ofa challenge than the same decision for a pharmaceutical. A pharmaceutical com-
pound generally does not undergo substantial changes as it progresses from ani-
mal to human studies. Devices, however, undergo extensive modifications and
refinements during the development phase, and early evaluations run the risk of
failure or, at least, the need for redesign and retesting, which entails time and
monetary expenses that few start-up companies can afford.Once the optimal time to begin a clinical evaluation is established, decisionsconcerning which venue and which clinicians to engage to test the device can have
a major effect on how the results of the trial will be interpreted and whether the
device is widely adopted. In contrast to pharmaceuticals, the efficacy of a surgically
implanted device can be linked to the skill of the implanting surgeon. Thus, con-
ducting a trial in a highly specialized medical center that has unique surgical
expertise may result in a successful trial but may not lead to widespread use.Blind studies, an important technique for controlling observational bias inevaluating the safety and efficacy of new clinical interventions, is also problem-
atic in trials of invasive or implantable devices. The clinician who implants a
device cannot implant placebos; blind studies are not possible when the compara-
tive therapy is not a device. Randomization is also a problem in device trials,
especially in the case of a life-threatening illness, in which case both patient and
physician expect that the device is their best hope and would be devastated to
learn, up front, that they would not receive the preferred therapy. This deters
some patients and physicians from entering into device trials; others might enroll
but seek treatment outside the protocol if they donÕt receive the therapy theywant. This might lead to a loss-to-follow-up or out-of-protocol crossover, which
could ruin a small-scale trial. The ethical dilemma is heightened when there are
no alternative therapies and assignment to a control group means essentially no
therapy (Moskowitz and Thompson, 1997).Measuring survival in trials that compare devices and medical therapiesposes methodological challenges. When device therapy involves a high up-frontThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MEDICAL DEVICES AND EQUIPMENT INDUSTRY101operative risk, but subsequently a reduced mortality compared to the controltherapy, the survival curves are likely to cross. Analyzing the differences depends
on the analytical method chosen and the time frame of the analysis. Most analyti-
cal methods (e.g., log-rank, Wilcoxon test) average risk over the follow-up

period. So, extending or reducing the follow-up time can potentially reverse the
ordering of relative efficacy because less or more weight, respectively, will be
given to mortality in the perioperative period (Rose et al., 1999).Another technical constraint is the limitation of patient recruitment. Devicesoften have small numbers of potential users and, therefore, few eligible candi-
dates for clinical trials. Also, device implantation and monitoring usually require
specialized training or skills that may not be available in large enough numbers to
conduct trials at several AMCs.University research could make significant contributions to evaluative re-search for medical devices by addressing some of the methodological challenges
of device randomized control trials (RCTs). Moreover, academic analysis could
clarify the bases for policy changes at the FDA, for example, with respect to the
strength and limitations of RCTs, and the implications of expediting the ap-
proval process (e.g., shifting some of the premarketing research to the post-
marketing setting).Product Modification and Discovery of New Indications of UseOf course, the development process does not end with the widespread intro-duction of new products into practice. Their eventual uses depend on an extensive
improvement process that vastly increases their practical applications. Users,
often clinicians in AMCs, provide necessary feedback about the shortcomings of
new devices. Consider, for instance, the evolution of endoscopes. TodayÕs Òcold-lightÓ video-endoscope, with a computer-chip camera at its tip that can be used
both for diagnosis and therapy, is a world apart from its predecessor in the 1950s.
During those years, for instance, the lamp at the tip of the endoscope could cause
serious burns, vision was often restricted, the quality of images was poor, thera-
peutic applications were essentially nonexistent, and obtaining permanent docu-
mentation of the images was highly problematic. Feedback from users encour-
aged manufacturers to develop subsequent generations of endoscopes. Whereas
the evolution of endoscopic technology did indeed require a few major improve-
ments, such as the introduction of fiber optics and video capabilities, its current
characteristics are the result of a continuous flow of refinements that have re-
sulted in increased flexibility, miniaturization, and improved visibility, which
have vastly expanded the therapeutic possibilities of endoscopy (Gelijns and
Rosenberg, 1999).In addition, clinicians can expand the applications of a device to new clinicaluses. In the case of GI endoscopy, for instance, academicians expanded the use of
fiber-optic endoscopes from the upper GI tract to gastroenterological areas, suchThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEas the esophagus, duodenum, and colon. Lasers were originally introduced forophthalmologic and dermatologic purposes but are currently being used for a
wide variety of indications in gynecology, cardiac surgery, and oncology, to
name but a few. The identification of new applications, sometimes totally un-
expected, is an important contribution of academic researchers to the medical
device industry (Rosenberg, 1996; Gelijns et al., 1998).Mechanisms of Transfer from Academia to IndustryAdvances have been transferred to industry by various routes. Traditionally,research advances were placed in the public domain either through publications
or presentations at conferences. Another common practice was to hire academic
researchers as consultants or researchers, sometimes after firms had sponsored
their research. Another pathway that has expanded very rapidly in recent decades
is university patenting and licensing practices. Pfizer licensed GeorgetownÕswhole body scanner, whereas Syntex, Varian, and GE all entered the CT field by
licensing important technical improvements from research at Stanford Univer-
sity. University faculty members have also been active in the creation of start-up
firms to develop and market their inventions.IMPACT ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEPast and Present ContributionsOne of the defining characteristics of the medical devices 
and equipmentsector is a strong dependency between universities and industry. Based on the
results of its fact-finding efforts, the panel concludes that academic research
has had a substantial impact on the industryÕs performance. The contributionof universities goes well beyond educating new generations of employees and
making fundamental advances in scientific and technological knowledge that
may contribute to the development of new medical devices. It includes a high
degree of involvement in product development, product evaluation and intro-
duction, and product modification.In making this observation, the panel does not wish to diminish the long-
term importance of training people in research techniques or making funda-
mental advances in the scientific and technological knowledge base. In fact,
basic advances in physics, mathematics, and chemistry have directly contrib-
uted to a whole range of medical devices and equipment. Moreover, with the
integration of the biological sciences and the engineering sciences, as in tissue
engineering, the contributions of university research may be even greater in the
future. Nevertheless, the panel wants to highlight the role of AMCs in the
development, clinical testing and evaluation, modification, and extensions ofThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MEDICAL DEVICES AND EQUIPMENT INDUSTRY103use of prototype devices. The case studies above represent just a few illustra-tions of their importance.Trends, Opportunities, Challenges, and GapsAlthough university research has made substantial contributions to the medi-cal devices and equipment industry in the past, the rapidly changing health-
care environment is creating both new opportunities and new challenges for
university-industry interactions. In recent years, the NIH budget has grown, al-
lowing for an increase in research on the biological bases of health and disease.
The increase in NIH funding does not, however, obviate the need to address
questions about the allocation of these funds for different types of research.
Traditionally, NIH support for research closely coupled to the development of
medical devices has been limited. Recently, NIH, as well as NSF, created new
initiatives to encourage bioengineering research to compensate for the planned
closing in 2006 of the Whitaker Foundation, which has provided significant
support for bioengineering research in the past (Whitaker Foundation, 2001).
Moreover, most federal investment in biomedical research goes to support
laboratory-oriented (or nonhuman subjects) research; much less support is allo-
cated for studies of the very diverse activities that come under the rubric of
clinical research. The latter have traditionally depended heavily on internal fund-
ing from academic health centers, particularly cross-subsidies from patient care
revenues. As pressures for cost containment increase and clinical faculty compete
for contracts with managed care organizations, however, clinical income has
decreased substantially, which means less money is available to cross-subsidize
research. In addition, recent studies have shown that academic faculty in regions
with high managed care penetration publish fewer papers and are less likely to be
awarded NIH grants (Griner and Blumenthal, 1998). Thus, although NIH funds
continue to increase, changes in the financing of medical care are creating serious
uncertainties in the funding flow that sustains clinical research.Various disciplines and various schools in universities contribute to the de-velopment of medical devices. However, establishing interdisciplinary links in
the university between faculty in the natural sciences and engineering with fac-
ulty in medicine has been difficult in the past. With the emergence of new fields
of research, such as tissue engineering, and encouraged by interdisciplinary re-
search funding initiatives by both NIH and NSF, creating interdisciplinary link-
ages may be easier in the future.Although there has been a strong interdependency between universities andmedical devices and equipment firms in the past, opportunities are being created
for more systematic interactions. With the rapid increase in the costs of conduct-
ing research, for example, universities and companies may look for ways to share
basic facilities, such as animal laboratories or expensive equipment (e.g., a proton
beam unit) (Their, 1998). Another mechanism for improving university-industryThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCErelations may be the creation of more systematic research partnerships. Oneinteresting model is the Center for Innovative Minimally Invasive Therapy, which

involves faculty from AMCs and the physical and engineering sciences, as well
as industry partners (Parrish, 1998).Systematic partnerships may also have considerable payoffs in product modi-fication and the discovery of new indications of use. For most medical devices,
new uses result from application to other organ systems, although these transfers
often require design modifications. The first endoscopes, for example, were used
for cystoscopy early in this century. In the 1960s, after the development and
introduction of fiber optics, GI endoscopy and gynecological laparoscopy be-
came well established. It took nearly four decades to transfer laparoscopy from
gynecology to general surgery, where it transformed gallbladder surgery. Earlier
identification of such secondary indications may have substantial benefits, for
society and for industry.Universities are an important location for clinical testing. Universities, aswell as private CROs in recent years, have been active in designing, conducting,
and analyzing clinical trials. Major questions, however, remain about the appro-
priate evaluation of new devices, especially innovative and implantable devices.
These questions differ significantly from questions about the evaluation of
pharmaceuticals.Traditionally, the research results of AMCs that have been most important inthe development of medical devices were not patented but were placed in the public
domain through open publication. In recent years, as a result of a number of changes

in federal policy, there has been a major upsurge in university patenting and licens-
ing. The panel has little doubt that this increase in patenting has strengthened
university-industry interactions, to the benefit of both the economy and the univer-
sity. Despite these benefits, however, the panel believes some hard thinking and
empirical research should be done to assess the consequences of these changes on
the role of universities in the innovation system. Have these developments indeed
increased the effectiveness of technology transfer from universities to industry? Or
would the licensed technologies have been picked up by industry anyhow? And
what are the unintended consequences? Are universities changing the nature of
their research activities from fundamental, long-range research to applied research?
Has the upsurge in university patenting increased the transaction costs of science?
Are universities licensing inventions that can be classified exclusively as research
tools? All of these questions should be addressed.RECOMMENDATIONSThe panel was asked to examine the contributions of academic research tothe medical devices and equipent industry and to delineate ways of improving
such contributions in the future. This report provides evidence that academicThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MEDICAL DEVICES AND EQUIPMENT INDUSTRY105research has contributed strongly to industrial performance in the medical de-vices and equipment sector; at the same time, steps can be undertaken to improve
these contributions.Recommendation 3-1.  The panel concurs with recent recommendations by the
Commonwealth Task Force on Academic Health Centers that the National Insti-
tutes of Health and other institutions should recognize the importance and vulner-
ability of clinical research by increasing support for clinical research at academic
medical centers.Recommendation 3-2.  Optimizing the contributions of university research will
require creating effective linkages between faculty in engineering schools and
faculty in medicine. The panel recommends that universities invest in interdisci-
plinary centers to generate new knowledge for advancing medical devices and to
develop new diagnostic and therapeutic modalities. Universities are also encour-
aged to decrease barriers to conducting interdisciplinary research. Funding agen-
cies should carefully evaluate new interdisciplinary programs and initiatives in
biology/medicine and engineering and encourage the growth of the most promis-
ing ones.Recommendation 3-3.  Universities and medical device firms should explore
ways of creating more systematic partnerships between universities (especially
academic medical centers) and industrial firms for the development and evalua-
tion of new, cost-effective medical devices. Models worth contemplating include
interdisciplinary centers for the development and evaluation of medical devices
that include industrial partners, the sharing of expensive facilities (e.g., animal
laboratories), exchange fellowships, and the teaching of joint courses. Moreover,
the panel believes that both society and the medical device industry would benefit
substantially if new indications of use could be identified sooner after the devel-
opment of a device. To expedite the discovery of new indications, device manu-
facturers might draw more fully on interdisciplinary panels of academic experts
who would consider how a new technological capability (e.g., lasers or positron
emission tomography) that is useful for one purpose might also be useful (modi-
fied as necessary) in another field.Recommendation 3-4.  Federal agencies that fund academic research relevant tothe medical device industry should support research on the effectiveness of cur-
rent incentives for transferring research findings to the industry and ways of
improving the transfer process. Given the short product life cycles of many
medical devices, the timing of decisions and processes pertaining to transfer
affects the short windows of commercial opportunity.Recommendation 3-5.  Academic researchers should bring together industry,
regulatory, and clinical panels to discuss requirements for device evaluations.
Discussions should include regulatory requirements (e.g., market clearance byThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEthe Food and Drug Administration), third-party payment eligibility, market re-search, and information dissemination/marketing issues (e.g., direct-to-consumer
advertising). Regulation, payment/reimbursement systems, and marketing all have
profound effects on the pathway for getting device concepts to users. Therefore,
anticipating and understanding regulatory, payment, and marketing needs should
be incorporated and fed back into device design and refinement. Academic cen-
ters (including business schools) and industry can share considerable insight and
expertise in all of these areas.Recommendation 3-6.  Given that all partiesÑphysicians, patients, manufactur-ers, and payersÑbenefit from the rigorous information on the value of new andimproved medical devices, the panel recommends that payers, National Institutes
of Health, and medical device firms define the circumstances under which
public-private support for device trials is appropriate.REFERENCESAdvaMed (Advanced Medical Technology Association). 2001. U.S. Medical Technology IndustryStatistics. Washington, D.C.: AdvaMed.Agnew, B. 1998. Multidisciplinary research: NIH plans bioengineering initiative. Science 280(5369):1516Ð1518.Basauri, L., and P.P. Lele. 1962. A simple method for production of trackless focal lesions withfocused ultrasound: statistical evaluation of the effects of irradiation on the central nervoussystem of the cat. Journal of Physiology 160(3): 513
Ð534.Centerwatch. 2001. Assessing change in CRO usage practices. Centerwatch Newsletter 8(1): Article 201.
Chronicle Information Resources. 1999. The Chronicle of Cardiovascular and Internal Medicine.Mississauga, Ontario: Chronicle Information Resources Ltd.Cline, H.E., K. Hynynen, C.J. Hardy, R.D. Watkins, J.F. Schenck, and F.A. Jolesz. 1994. MR tem-perature mapping of focused ultrasound surgery. Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 31(6):628Ð636.Cline, H.E., J.F. Schenck, K. Hynynen, R.D. Watkins, S.P. Souza, and F.A. Jolesz. 1992. MR-guidedfocused ultrasound surgery. Journal of Computer Assisted Tomography 16(6): 956Ð965.Commonwealth Fund Task Force on Academic Health Centers. 1999. From Bench to Bedside:Preserving the Research Mission of Academic Health Centers. Boston, Mass.: The Common-
wealth Fund.DirectorÕs Panel on Clinical Research. 1997. Report to the Advisory Committee to the NIH Director.Bethesda, Md.: National Institutes of Health.Fry, F.J., ed. 1978. Ultrasound: Its Applications in Medicine and Biology. Part I. New York: ElsevierPress.Fry, W.J., J.W. Barnard, F.J. Fry, R.F. Krumins, and J.F. Brennan. 1955. Ultrasonic lesions in themammalian central nervous system. Science 122(3168): 517Ð518.Fry, W.J., and F.J. Fry. 1960. Fundamental neurological research and human neurosurgery usingintense ultrasound. IRE Transactions on Medical Electronics 7: 166Ð181.Gelijns, A.C. 1991. Innovation in Clinical Practice: The Dynamics of Medical Technology Develop-ment. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.Gelijns, A.C., and N. Rosenberg. 1995. From the Scalpel to the Scope: Endoscopic Innovations inGastroenterology, Gynecology, and Surgery. Pp. 67Ð96 in Medical Innovation at the Cross-roads. Volume VI. Sources of Medical Technology: Universities and Industry, A.C. Gelijnsand N. Rosenberg, eds. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MEDICAL DEVICES AND EQUIPMENT INDUSTRY107Gelijns, A.C., and N. Rosenberg. 1999. Diagnostic Devices: An Analysis of Comparative Advan-tages. Pp. 312Ð358 in The Sources of Industrial Leadership in Seven Industries, D. Moweryand R. Nelson, eds. Boston: Cambridge University Press.Gelijns, A.C., N. Rosenberg, and G. Laubach. 1994. Medical Device Innovation: Opportunities andBarriers for Small Firms. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.Gelijns, A.C., N. Rosenberg, and A.J. Moskowitz. 1998. Capturing the unexpected benefits of medi-cal research. New England Journal of Medicine 339(10): 693Ð698.Goodnight, J. 2002. Statement Submitted to the Record, Committee on Small Business, U.S. Houseof Representatives. June 21, 2001. Available online at: www.hhs.gov/asl/testify/t010621.html.[June 24, 2003]Griner, P., and D. Blumenthal. 1998. Reforming the structure and management of academic medicalcenters: case studies of ten institutions. Academic Medicine 73: 817Ð825.Healthcare Informatics. 2001. The Healthcare Informatics 100. Available online at: http://www.healthcare-informatics.com/issues/2001/06_01/jun01.htm. [June 24, 2003]Herman, W.A., D.E. Marlowe, and H. Rudolph. 1998. Future Trends in Medical Device Technology:Results of an Expert Survey. Rockville, Md: Center for Devices and Radiological Health, U.S.Food and Drug Administration. Available online at: http://www.fda.gov/cdrh/ost/trends/TOC.html. [June 24, 2003]Hopkins, H.H., and N.S. Kapany. 1954. A flexible fibrescope, using static scanning. Nature 173: 39Ð41.Hynynen, K., and F.A. Jolesz. 1998. Demonstration of potential noninvasive ultrasound brain therapythrough an intact skull. Ultrasound in Medicine and Biology 24(2): 275Ð283.Hynynen, K., O. Pomeroy, D.N. Smith, P.E. Huber, N.J. McDannold, J. Kettenbach, J. Baum, S.Singer, and F.A. Jolesz. 2001. MR imaging-guided focused ultrasound surgery of fibro-
adenomas in the breast: a feasibility study. Radiology 219(1): 176Ð185.Iglehart, J.K. 1994. Rapid changes for academic medical centers. Part 1. New England Journal ofMedicine 331(20): 1391Ð1395.Keller, K.H. 1998. How are Changes in the Health Care Environment Affecting University-IndustryResearch Collaboration? Presentation at the NAE workshop on Medical Devices and theUniversity-Industry Connection: Future Directions, Washington, D.C., November 2, 1998.Lele, P.P. 1962. A simple method for production of trackless focal lesions with focused ultrasound.Journal of Physiology 160: 494Ð512.Lele, P.P. 1975. Ultrasound in surgery. Pp. 325Ð340 in Fundamental and Applied Aspects of Non-ionizing Radiation, S.M. Michaelson, E.L. Carstensen, R, Magin, and M.W. Miller, eds. NewYork: Plenum Press.Lewin Group. 2000. Outlook for Medical Technology Innovation. Washington, D.C.: Health Indus-try Manufacturers Association.Littell, C.L. 1994. Datawatch. Innovation in medical technology: reading the indicators. HealthAffairs 13(3): 226Ð235.Lynn, J.G., R.L. Zwemer, A.J. Chick, and A.E. Miller. 1942. A new method for the generation and useof focused ultrasound in experimental biology. Journal of General Physiology 26(1): 179Ð193.Lysaght, M.J., N.A. Nguy, and K. Sullivan. 1998. An economic survey of the emerging tissueengineering industry. Tissue Engineering 4(3): 231Ð238.McGraw-Hill and U.S. Department of Commerce. 2000. U.S. Industry and Trade Outlook Ô00. NewYork: McGraw-Hill.Moskowitz, J., and J.N. Thompson. 1997. Preventing the extinction of the clinical research eco-system. Journal of the American Medical Association 278(1): 241Ð245.NSF (National Science Foundation). 2000. Federal R&D Funding by Budget Function: Fiscal Years1998Ð2000. Arlington, Va.: NSF.NSF. 2001. Federal Funds for Research and Development: Fiscal Years 1999, 2000, 2001. Arlington,Va.: NSF.OTA (Office of Technology Assessment). 1984. Federal Policies and the Medical Devices Industry.Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEParrish, J. 1998. Why CIMIT? Why Now? Research Perspectives Online. Available online at: http://www.mgh.harvard.edu/DEPTS/pubaffairs/ResearchPerspectives/Aug98whyCIMIT.htm. [June 24, 2003]Rose, E.A., A.J. Moskowitz, M. Packer, J.A. Sollano, D.L. Williams, A.R. Tierney, D.F. Heitjan, P.Meier, D.D. Ascheim, R.G. Levitan, A.D. Weinberg, L.W. Stevenson, P.A. Shapiro, R.M.Lazar, J.T. Watson, D.J. Goldstein, and A.C. Gelijns. 1999. The REMATCH trial: rationale,
design, and end points: randomized evaluation of mechanical assistance for the treatment ofcongestive heart failure. Annals of Thoracic Surgery 67(3): 723Ð730.Rosenberg, N. 1996. Uncertainty and Technological Change. Pp. 334Ð356 in the Mosaic of Eco-nomic Growth, R. Landau, T. Taylor, and G. Wright, eds. Palo Alto, Calif.: Stanford Univer-sity Press.Rosenberg, N. 2000. Interfaces between Universities and Industry. Submitted to the Canadian Centerfor Advanced Studies.Shaw, B.F. 1987. The Role of the Interaction between the Manufacturer and the User in the Techno-logical Innovation Process. Ph.D. dissertation. University of Sussex, Sussex, United Kingdom.Spera, G. 1998. The next wave in minimally invasive surgery. Medical Device and DiagnosticIndustry 20(8): 36Ð44.Spetz, J. 1995. Physicians and Physicists: The Interdisciplinary Introduction of the Laser to Medi-cine. Pp. 41Ð66 in Sources of Medical Technology: Universities and Industry, N. Rosenberg,A. Gelijns, and H. Dawkins, eds. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.Thier, S. 1998. Academic Medicine and the Development of Prototype Technology. Presentation atthe NAE workshop on Medical Devices and the University-Industry Connection: Future Direc-tions, Washington, D.C., November 2, 1998.U.S. Bureau of the Census. 2001. Statistics for Industrial Groups and Industries, 1999. AnnualSurvey of Manufacturers. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.van Heel, A.C.S. 1954. A new method of transporting optical images without aberrations. Nature173: 39.Von Hippel, E.A., and S.N. Finkelstein. 1979. Analysis of innovation in automated clinical chemis-try analyzers. Science and Public Policy 6(1): 24Ð37.Watson, J.T., et.al. 1994. NHLBI Program History. Pp. 27
Ð32 in Report of the Workshop on theArtificial Heart: Planning for Evolving Technologies. Bethesda, Md.: National Institutes ofHealth.Whitaker Foundation. 2001. Grant Programs to Phase Out. Available online at: http://www.whitaker.org/news/phaseout.html. [June 24, 2003]Wilkerson Group. 1995. Forces Reshaping the Performance and Contribution of the U.S. MedicalDevice Industry. Washington, D.C.: Health Industry Manufacturers Association.Zemel, T. 2002. Venture Capital Investment Stabilizes in 4Q01, According to VentureOne. PressRelease, January 28, 2002. San Francisco: VentureOne.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.109ADDENDUME-mail QuestionnaireThe following questionnaire was sent to selected individuals in variousparts of the medical devices and equipment industry, some of whom attended the
November 1998 workshop.  Included among the respondents were senior execu-

tives at Biomet, Inc., the Center for Integration of Medicine and Innovative
Technologies, General Electric Company, Health Quality, IBM, Johnson &
Johnson, MedInTec, Inc., Pfizer, and RAND Corporation; professors with ex-
pertise in biomedical engineering, mechanical engineering, medical innovation
management, and policy from Draper Laboratories, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, and Washington University; and a representative of the Food and
Drug Administration.THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIALPERFORMANCEMedical Devices PanelWe invite your responses to the questions that follow. In addition, please feelfree to add any general comments or responses under Question 11 below. Your
responses will be used by our Panel as background information for our report.
Any material used verbatim  will not be attributed to you without seeking

your  permission.
1. Could you describe briefly significant academic (i.e., university-basedresearch Ñ basic, applied, clinical, etc.) research contributions to the medical
devices and equipment industry?  (If possible, please supply references to pub-

lished information that outlines the contributions.)2.  Overall, would you describe the impact of academic research on industrial
performance in the medical devices and equipment industry as (Please put an X in
one box):  1. very large
  2. large
  3. medium
  4. small
  5. very small/non-existent
3. What is the role of academic research in educating people who work inyour industry?  (Please focus on university research activities, rather than univer-

sity education generally.)The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.110THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCE4. What structural forms of university-industry collaboration lead to goodresults in your industry?  An example of such a structure might be a discipline- or

industry-oriented ÒcenterÓ that solicits industry sponsors for a collection of
projects that span a varied research program, or an academic medical center that
provides a venue for clinical research.  What seem to be the essential determi-

nants of success of such structures?5. What are significant emerging trends or problems that the medical devicesand equipment industry will face in the future that could benefit from aca-
demic research?6.  What changes are required, if any, in academic research if it is to be
responsive to these industrial trends and problems?7.  What single step could be taken by universities to enhance the impact of
academic research on the industry?8.  What single step could be taken by companies to enhance the impact of
academic research on industry?9.  What single step could be taken by government to enhance the impact ofacademic research on industry?10. Do you see any downside to enhanced university-industry research col-laboration? Things to be avoided?11. Other comments?  Any comments, pointers to other studies, or sugges-
tions would be appreciated.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MEDICAL DEVICES AND EQUIPMENT INDUSTRY111Workshop AgendaMEDICAL DEVICES AND THE UNIVERSITY-INDUSTRYCONNECTION:FUTURE DIRECTIONSNovember 2, 1998National Academies Building2101 Constitution Avenue .NW.Washington, D.C.9:00 a.m.Welcoming Remarks and Overview of the Broader NAE ProjectJerome Grossman, President, HealthQuality, Inc.9:15 a.m.Overview of the Work of the Medical Devices and EquipmentPanelAnnetine Gelijns, (Panel Chair), Director, International Center
for Health Outcomes and Innovation  Research, Columbia

Presbyterian Medical Center9:40 a.m.How are Changes in the  Health Care Environment Affecting
University-Industry Research Collaboration?Kenneth Keller, University of Minnesota10:15Break

10:30 a.m.Session I. Basic Academic Scientific and Engineering Research:Contributions to the Medical Device IndustryModerator:  Clifford Goodman, The Lewin GroupSpeaker:   
Donald Engelman, Yale UniversitySpeaker:  Robert Nerem, Georgia Institute of TechnologyRespondent: John Linehan, The Whitaker Foundation12 p.m.Lunch in Meeting Room

12:45 p.m.Session II.  Academic Medicine and the Development of Proto-
type TechnologyModerator: Nathan Rosenberg, Stanford UniversitySpeaker:  Samuel Thier, Partners Health Care
Respondent: Paul Citron, Medtronic, Inc.
The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCE2:15 p.m.Break
2:30  p.m.
Session III.  Clinical Evaluative Research on Medical Devices:
University-Industry InteractionsModerator:  Frederick Telling, Pfizer, Inc.Speaker:  Richard Rettig, RAND
Speaker: Alan Moskowitz, Columbia PresbyterianMedical Center4:00  p.m.
Open Discussion.   What have we learned today about the
impact of academic research on performance in the medical
device industry? How can the university research contribution
and impact be enhanced?4:45 p.m.Closing RemarksJerome GrossmanThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MEDICAL DEVICES AND EQUIPMENT INDUSTRY113Workshop AttendeesAnnetine Gelijns, chair *Director, International Center forHealth Outcomes and Innovation
ResearchColumbia Medical CenterJames BensonHIMAS. Morry BlumenfeldGeneral Manager, Global AdvancedTechnologyGE Medical SystemsPaul Citron *Vice President, Science andTechnologyMedtronic, Inc.Diane DaviesPfizerDonald M. Engelman *Professor, Department of Molecular
   Biophysics and Biochemistry

Yale UniversityMarilyn FieldInstitute of MedicineRobert FischellMedIntecClifford GoodmanThe Lewin GroupJeanne GriffithDirector, Science ResourcesStudies DivisionNational Science FoundationJerome H. Grossman *President and CEO
Health Quality Inc.Elizabeth JacobsonDeputy Director for Science
Center for Devices andRadiological HealthKenneth H. KellerHHH Institute for Public AffairsJohn LinehanThe Whitaker FoundationStephen MerrillNational Research CouncilDane MillerAirport Industrial Park
Warsaw, IndianaAlan MoskowitzColumbia Medical CenterRichard NelsonColumbia UniversityRobert M. NeremSchool of Mechanical Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology*Panel memberThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEJohn ParrishCenter for Innovative MinimallyInvasive TherapyMassachusetts General HospitalHomer Pien *Manager, Biomedical Technologies,and Head, Image Recognition
Systems LaboratoryC.S. Draper LaboratoryPeer M. PortnerPresident, Novacor Division
Baxter CVGRichard A. RettigSenior Social Scientist
RANDEdward B. RobertsSchool of Management
Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyNathan RosenbergCenter for Economic Policy Research
Stanford UniversityStephen I. ShapiroManaging Director
The Wilkerson Group, Inc.Kenneth ShinePresident (until 2002)
Institute of MedicineJohn S. TaylorDirector of Research
National Venture Capital AssociationFrederick Telling *Vice President
PfizerSamuel O. ThierPresident and CEO
Partners Health Care Systems, Inc.John T. WatsonActing Deputy Director
National Heart, Lung, and BloodInstituteNAE Program Office StaffTom Weimer, DirectorProctor Reid, Associate Director
Nathan Kahl, Project Assistant
Robert Morgan, NAE Fellow and Senior Analyst*Panel memberThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4Report of the Panel on the
Aerospace IndustryThis report was prepared by the Panel on the Aerospace Industry, one of fivepanels formed by the Committee on the Impact of Academic Research on Indus-
trial Performance. The panel of five included three members of the NAE (one
from academia and two from industry), one other member from academia, and
one from industry. Two of the NAE members were also members of the parent
committee. The charge to the panel was to evaluate the past impact of academic
research on the performance of the aerospace industry and identify ways to in-
crease the impact in light of recent and ongoing changes in the structure and
economic situation of the industry. The report is intended for policy makers in
industry, government, and academia. Industry performance was defined as share-
holder value. This metric differs from the traditional measure of success in

the aerospace industry, which was its contribution to national security or to the
space program.The aerospace industry was selected for study as an example of an industry,now relatively mature, that developed with extensive funding by government in
research and technology and that is dependent on advanced technologies for its
present and future economic competitiveness. Therefore, the industry might pro-
vide a baseline for comparison with other less mature industry sectors.The aerospace industry has been the beneficiary of more than 50 years ofgovernment-subsidized research conducted by industry, universities, and govern-
ment laboratories. Subsidies have taken the form of direct funding by the Na-
tional Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and the U.S. Air Force,
other defense-related funding, incentives in government contracts, and tax incen-
tives; research was focused primarily on improving performance to meet the115The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEneeds of national defense and the space race. In recent years, large cuts in federalsupport, combined with other competitive and financial pressures, have resulted
in major changes in the industry.Dramatic consolidation, largely the result of huge cuts in defense spendingand greater emphasis on the use of commercial, off-the-shelf technologies in the
1990s, as well as increasing global competition, has changed the scope, priorities,
and practice of aerospace R&D. Spending on R&D in the industry declined
throughout the 1990s to less than half its peak in 1987. In 2000, total R&D
spending (by government, industry, and other institutions) in aerospace totaled
about $10.3 billion, accounting for roughly 9 percent of R&D among manufac-
turing industries (NSF, 2001a). Employment is down 40 percent from its peak in
1989, and the number of scientists and engineers in 1999 was less than half the
number employed in 1986 (AIA, 2001). (It is interesting to note, however, that
over the last two decades scientists and engineers in the aerospace industry have
earned more than 25 percent more than their counterparts in other industrial
sectors [AIA, 2001].) As technologies have matured, margins have shrunk, cost
reductions have taken precedence over improvements in performance, and elec-
tronics and information technology now account for a large percentage of aero-
space product value and technical emphasis. Priorities in R&D have changed
accordingly.Historic patterns of industry-university interaction, which were based onsignificant government funding of R&D, have been broken; new models will
certainly emerge that encompass not only R&D funding, practice, and expecta-
tions, but also engineering education. But first, significant cultural and practical
barriers will have to be overcome. Indeed, for academic research to have the
maximum beneficial effect on the new aerospace industry, the entire structure of
academic research in aerospace will have to change.SCOPE OF THE STUDYAccording to government classifications, the aerospace industry includesaircraft (NAICS 336411), aircraft engines and engine parts (NAICS 336412),
aircraft equipment and parts (NAICS 336413), missiles and space vehicles and
parts (NAICS 336414), guided missile and space vehicle propulsion units and
parts (NAICS 336415), and guided missile and space vehicle parts not classified
elsewhere (NAICS 336419). The panel has expanded this definition to include
space-based information systems, a burgeoning segment of space commerce. The
academic community that supports the industry was also defined broadly to in-
clude departments of mechanical engineering, materials science and engineering,
and computer science, as well as the relatively few departments of aero-
space engineering.1Overall industry sales for 2000  exceeded $146 billion (U.S. Bureau of the
Census, 2002). The panel considered it essential to limit discussion to five sectorsThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AEROSPACE INDUSTRY117of the industry that made significantly different contributions to total industryshipments of 1999Ð2000.2¥gas turbine propulsion systems: $10 billion

¥civil transport aircraft: $30 billion

¥launch vehicles: $11 billion

¥unmanned aerial vehicles: less than $1 billion

¥space-based information systems: $12 billion
Because the first three are mature sectors, cost and reliability have replacedperformance as their principle criteria for success. The last two are relatively
immature sectors that are undergoing rapid development and are, therefore, more
dependent on new technologies.Gas-Turbine Propulsion SystemsThe gas-turbine industry developed in the 1950s and 1960s with the rapidconversion of both military and commercial aircraft from reciprocating to jet
propulsion engines. Initially, several companies entered the arena, but in a rather
short time all but about a half-dozen had dropped out, either because of the large
financial investment required or because of technical difficulties. Currently, three
large manufacturers of jet enginesÑGeneral Electric Aircraft Engines, Pratt &
Whitney, and Rolls-RoyceÑare engaged in intense competition for both military
and commercial business. Smaller firms supply niche markets, such as general
aviation or missiles.Driven by competition for higher thrust/weight ratios and lower fuel con-sumption, the providers of jet engines are pressing materials and fluid mechanical
and solid mechanical design procedures to their limits. In this high-stakes busi-
ness, the development of a new engine costs up to $1 billion, and companies are
eager to take advantage of the improved understanding and new techniques that
academia can provide. The knowledge base for academic researchers is arcane,
however, and the community of researchers is small. Presently, only about a half-
dozen universities in the United States are making significant contributions.Civil Transport AircraftPrior to World War II, the commercial aircraft industry was robust. With theintroduction of the jet transport in the 1950s, the industry entered a period of
rapid growth. Since the late 1970s, sales of civil aircraft have more than doubled,
from $14.3 billion to more than $38 billion (AIA, 2001). Like the engine indus-
try, the commercial aircraft industry initially comprised several companies, all
but one of which have now been absorbed into the Boeing Company, which hasThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEdominated the field for the last decade. In fact, because some aerospace firms thatare not formally part of Boeing manufacture major components of Boeing air-
craft, its dominance is actually greater than it appears. BoeingÕs only substantialcompetition in commercial aircraft is Airbus Industry, a European consortium.The commercial transport market is fiercely contested, and market share canbe gained or lost by small differences in performance or cost. Technologies to
improve performance and manufacturing are both critical to success, which creates
a fertile field for academic research. A significant contribution of academic re-
search to the industry has been the development of design techniques based in
computational fluid dynamics. For example, the Aerospace Design Program at the
Georgia Institute of Technology receives financial support from a number of aero-
space companies. In addition, the Lean Aerospace Initiative at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (see Box 4-1) and the Automation and Robotics Research
Institute at the University of Texas-Arlington are addressing manufacturing tech-
nology and management issues and have attracted significant industry interest.BOX 4-1
Lean Aerospace Initiative at theMassachusetts Institute of TechnologyThe Lean Aerospace Initiative (LAI) is a research program of the Center forTechnology, Policy, and Industrial Development and the Department of Aeronau-tics and Astronautics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). LAI was
launched in 1993 by leaders of the U.S. Air Force, MIT, defense aerospace busi-nesses, and labor unions who recognized the potential of applying lean manufac-turing and management concepts to the aerospace industry. Lean manufacturing
practices, developed primarily by Toyota and first documented by JamesWomack, Daniel Roos, and Daniel Jones in The Machine that Changed the World(1991), have led to significant improvements in the automobile industry in terms ofcost, quality, and productivity. The elements of lean practices being addressed byLAI include integrated product and process development, optimized product flow,total quality management in an environment of continuous improvement, and
strong employee participation.Participants in LAI are members of a consortium of government, industry, la-bor, and other universities. Members include the Aeronautical Systems Center and
Space and Missile Commands of the U.S. Air Force; the Office of Safety andMission Assurance of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA);The Boeing Company, General Electric Aircraft Engines, Hewlett Packard, Lock-
heed Martin, Northrop Grumman, Pratt & Whitney, Raytheon, Rockwell, Rolls-Royce Allison, and TRW; the International Union of United Automobile, Aerospaceand Agricultural Implement Workers of America; the Aerospace Industries Associ-
ation; and the University of Chicago, University of Washington, and WhartonSchool of Business at the University of Pennsylvania.LAI represents a new model for research at MIT. The research agenda andpriorities are developed jointly by MIT researchers and customers, and users ofThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AEROSPACE INDUSTRY119Launch VehiclesThe launch-vehicle industry grew out of the ballistic missile industry withthe dawn of the space age in 1958. The new industry was entirely dependent on
government funding until the birth of the communications satellite industry in the
1970s. In the last 10 years, the commercial market for satellites has become
comparable to the government market for satellites, missiles, and NASA mission
hardware, and with the proliferation of communications satellite constellations,
the demand for launch services has grown rapidly.3 There are currently three
major U.S. suppliers of launch services (Boeing, Lockheed Martin, and Orbital)
and four foreign suppliers of either launch vehicles or launch services.All but the two or three most recently developed launch vehicles have beenderived from ballistic missile technology, which was heavily funded by the
federal government from the 1950s through the 1970s. Initially, academic re-
search made substantial contributions in key technical areas, such as reentry,the research participate directly in the research process (e.g., case studies, bench-marking, and surveys). There is a great deal of interaction between sponsors andresearchers, and research objectives are established by consortium members;specific research plans and approaches are developed by MIT researchers and
reviewed and prioritized by focus teams of members. An LAI Research Councilreviews and coordinates the research plans to ensure that the total research pro-gram meets stakeholder expectations. Research plans have been established for
factory operations, product development, policy and external environment, sup-plier relations, and test and space operations.Research results are organized into a systematic framework called the leanenterprise model (LEM), which is used to communicate results to consortium mem-bers and is a model and catalyst for change in the defense aircraft industry. LEMencompasses lean enterprise principles and practices derived from surveys, case
studies, and other research activities, and provides a framework for disseminatingLAI research results, a reference tool for consortium members to benchmark theirlean attributes, and a tool to encourage the development of new lean paradigms in
the design, development, and production of military aerospace products. For con-sortium members, LEM provides a guide to translating conceptual principles intopractical applications.LAI has developed a unique approach to academic research in aerospace be-cause it is not focused on a particular technology or product but addresses cross-cutting topics throughout the aerospace enterprise, from customer and initial de-
sign to supply chain management and final product delivery. Research and thedissemination of results depend on the active participation of consortium mem-bers. Broad consortium membership from government, industry, labor, and other
universities is also unique. The program has been of great value to sponsors andmay provide a model for other research initiatives in the aerospace industry toaddress shortcomings identified by industry.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEthe combustion of rocket engines, and the development of resin matrix compos-ites, which are widely used in solid-rocket motor cases, nozzles, and core
vehicle components.4 In the past few years, launch vehicles have not been a
very fertile field for academic research, partly because of the lack of new
developments and partly because the major problems have been developmental
rather than basic.Unmanned Aerial VehiclesAlthough drones have been used since the beginning of aviation as targetsand as research vehicles, unpiloted aircraft became important militarily with the
introduction of cruise missiles enabled by the development of very small gas-
turbine engines and terrain-following guidance systems, which extended their
range and gave them the capability of attacking designated targets. Unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs) have been operational for about two decades. Recently,
however, there has been a good deal of interest in both the military and scientific
communities in the development of very small, autonomous, aerial vehicles
(microair vehicles [MAVs] so small that they are essentially covert) equipped
with miniaturized imaging systems and guidance systems enabled by micro-
circuit technology (see Box 4-2).BOX 4-2Microair VehiclesIn 1994, Charles Ellington, a zoologist at Cambridge University, published theresults of his research on insect flight, which revealed a microscale vortex at theleading edge of the wings during the downstroke. These findings were brought tothe attention of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), which
had begun a $35 million program to develop microair vehicles (MAVs). Dr. Elling-tonÕs insight into the aerodynamics of insect flight was the basis for DARPAÕsMesoscale Machines for Military Applications Program, which began in 1998. The
program provided $20 million over a period of three years to a handful of researchinstitutions, including the Georgia Institute of Technology and Vanderbilt Univer-sity, as part of a larger program to create versatile, robust reconnaissance Òbugs.Ó
The research team at Georgia Tech, now joined by Dr. Ellington, and working withthe Ohio Aerospace Institute, has developed and is seeking a patent for a Òrecip-rocating chemical muscleÓÑa chemical power source that would power the wings,
guidance system, and payload for a device called an entomopter. The team hasachieved wing motion of 70 cycles per second with enough power to fly. Workcontinues on the Entomopter, with researchers also exploring its application for
research and mapping of Mars.Source: Toon, 2001.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AEROSPACE INDUSTRY121Another area of growing interest is unpiloted vehicles capable of long endur-ance flight at very high altitudes for atmospheric sampling or surveillance. This
type of UAV, marketed by innovative companies such as Aurora Flight Systems,
was facilitated by advances in lightweight materials, control technology, and
modeling and simulation. Several firms that emerged directly from academic
research continue to rely on research by academics.Space-Based Information SystemsSpace-based information systems include all systems that use orbital assetsto acquire or transmit information, such as observational satellites for military
surveillance, weather satellites, navigation and positioning satellites, and com-
mercial communications satellites. The first space-based information systems
were military surveillance satellites that were launched in the 1960s with great
secrecy. These systems have been systematically upgraded since then and are still
an essential component of our national defense. Weather satellites and early
geosynchronous communications satellites came next. The number and capacity
of geosynchronous satellites have increased steadily. The largest potential in-
crease in communication satellites, however, will be the launch of large constel-
lations of satellites, some in low-Earth orbit (ÒlittleÓ and 
ÒbigÓ LEOs) and some
in specialized orbits for particular markets. Although several companies address-
ing this market failed in the late 1990s (e.g., Iridium, ICO Global Communica-
tions), others (e.g., Teledesic and Satellite LLC) plan to launch extensive satellite
networks to provide broadband data communications.5The increase in the number of satellites has been enabled by the explosivedevelopment of microcircuits, which made information processing possible, in-
cluding information buffering and the passing of information between satellites
in an array and ground stations. Electronic miniaturization has also made it pos-
sible to build satellites with considerable capabilities that weigh as little as
90 pounds. The key technologies for these satellites are microcircuitry, antennae,
photovoltaic power supplies, lightweight structures, and small propulsion sys-
tems for orbital positioning and maintenance. High-volume, low-cost manufac-
turing of standardized parts has been essential to the emergence of this segment
of the industry.INNOVATIONThe most obvious innovations in aerospace have come from industrythrough the development of new products and systems. This pattern goes back
to the Wright brothers, who were motivated to conduct their research on airfoils
and control by a desire to build and market a useful aircraft. With few excep-
tions (e.g., Robert H. Goddard, who was a professor, and C.S. Draper, who
invented and developed inertial guidance), key innovations have not arisenThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEfrom academic research. The pioneers of aerospace were engineers and entre-preneurs who used available technologies to create new capabilities for flight in
the atmosphere or beyond.Several government laboratories were created to stimulate the growth ofthe industry. The first of these was the National Advisory Committee for Aero-
nautics (NACA), which was created in 1915 when decision makers in the
government became aware that the United States was far behind European
nations in the development of aeronautics. The establishment of the Langley
Aeronautical Laboratory at Hampton, Virginia, followed; research there was
initially focused on aerodynamics, structures, control, and propulsion for mili-
tary aircraft. The Langley laboratory had very little connection with universi-
ties. During World War II, some universities established very large and effec-
tive R&D programs. Examples include the Radiation Laboratory at MIT, which
played a major role in the development of radar in the United States, and the
nuclear laboratories of the University of California. It is important to realize
that these were essentially industry laboratories embedded in the academic
environment for the duration of the war. They did not pursue academic research
agendas as we think of them now.After World War II, all of the military services established laboratories towork on the technologies most important to them. These laboratories were
staffed by a mix of civil servants and military personnel. One of the functions
of the military-service laboratories was to maintain contact with universities
by providing financial support and encouraging faculty to address issues of
concern to the services. At about the same time, the services established
organizations devoted to funding basic research. The first of these, the Office
of Naval Research, was followed by the Air Force Office of Scientific Re-
search (AFOSR) and the Office of Army Research. In their heyday, these
offices commanded sizeable research budgets and funded much of the aca-
demic research in aerospace, a good deal of it only tenuously connected to the
needs of the services.In 1958, NASA was established with the U.S. commitment to the ApolloProgram; NASA followed a similar pattern and funded a great deal of academic
research. Whereas NACA had been almost entirely an in-house research organi-
zation devoted to aeronautical technology and facilities, NASA issued grants and
contracts to industry and universities, using its civil service workforce to manage
these activities. Of course, these research activities were subordinate to NASAÕsmain mission, which was to go to the Moon.Today, government agencies command far fewer resources for research andhave focused more tightly on their missions. Some are also reexamining their
relationships with academic researchers. For instance, in 1994 NASAÕs Office ofAeronautics appointed a University Strategy Task Force to review the agencyÕssupport of academic research and recommend policy and other changes to ensure
the long-term health of aerospace research in academia.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AEROSPACE INDUSTRY123Because of the combination of substantial government funding and the emer-gence of government laboratories dedicated to aerospace research, universities
assumed a role of supporting the R&D activities of the services and NASA by
addressing issues that emerged during the technology development process and
improving the base technologies for later applications. Universities also played a
large role in the development and improvement of techniques for analyzing fluid
flows and structures that were enabled by advances in digital computation. But
even in the area of computational fluid dynamics, much of the innovation origi-
nated in government laboratories and industry, with academic research playing a
supporting role.FINDINGSResponses to questionnaires and discussions at a workshop  convened as part
of this study revealed consistent concerns about the impact of academia on the
aerospace industry and the future of the university-industry relationship (see Ad-

dendum). These concerns can be divided into five subject areas: (1) the implica-
tions of changes in the federal research support structure; (2) the value placed on
academic research and education by industry and the implications for industry
support of academic research; (3) the impact of changes in the industry on the
research and educational capabilities of universities; (4) intellectual property rights
and how they affect university-industry collaborations; and (5) arrangements to
promote cooperative research between academia and industry.Changes in the Federal Research Support StructureFor three decades after World War II, the mission-oriented agencies of thefederal government had charters from Congress and successive administrations
to support a broad range of research without having to demonstrate the applica-
bility of the research to their missions. The first agency with this kind of flexibil-
ity was the Office of Naval Research, but eventually the Air Force, Army, NASA,
U.S. Department of Energy, and other smaller agencies were given the same
support and flexibility. Later, the National Science Foundation (NSF) and the
National Institutes of Health (NIH) were created with specific responsibilities for
funding so-called basic research (meaning research without specific, known ap-
plications). NSF has not played a very significant role in funding for aerospace-
oriented research, although some research on manufacturing funded through the
NSF Engineering Directorate may be applicable to aerospace.The strong support of the federal government for aerospace research hasdiminished significantly in the last decade. Federal funding has fallen dramati-
cally, and available funding is being managed much more carefully to achieve
specific results at lower cost. Mission-oriented agencies now insist on demon-
strated relevance to their missions as a precondition for funding research. ThisThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCErepresents a significant change from the earlier mind-set when ensuring the healthof academic research was considered an important part of an agencyÕs mission.Beginning in 1990, the AFOSR began to assess academic research in termsof improvements in the performance of military aircraft. Universities were no
longer considered AFOSR customers, but means to an end. AFOSR focused
particularly on how the results of academic research could be transitioned into
applications that would improve Air Force systems. For example, in fluid dynam-
ics, a mature technology, the transition has taken 20 or more years from basic
research to application. AFOSR is working toward shortening the transition time
using a new model of technological innovation based on a work published by
Stanford University, Conceptual Foundations of Multi-Disciplinary Thinking(Kline, 1995). Today, when the Air Force needs a new product, the reserve of
knowledge is first reviewed, and research is funded only if the necessary knowl-
edge is not available. AFOSR has found that the knowledge base created by years
of support for research is extensive and that the need for new basic research is not
as great as it once was. This reflects the maturity of the technology/product/
industry. Using this approach, AFOSR program managers have become brokers
between industry and academic researchers, facilitating networking in the re-
search community by communicating the needs of industry, the sources of knowl-
edge from past research results, and the creation of new knowledge through new
research, when necessary.These changes have been made in other agencies as well. NASA, for ex-ample, used to have a generic space technology research program. Today, re-
search decisions have been distributed to offices with mission responsibilities,
and only technologies with near-term mission applicability are supported.Because of these changes, significantly less advanced research in aerospaceis being done or even contemplated by the U.S. government, potentially shrink-
ing the future pool of technology available in the field. Arguably, this situation
may be a correct response to the maturing process; technological progress in the
industry is progressing slower than in the past; the development of new aerospace
systems is now measured in decades rather than years.Value Placed on Academic Research and EducationIndustryÕs ViewpointThe panelÕs research strongly suggests that mature sectors of the industryvalue academia principally for its graduates at all levels. Therefore, industry
places more value on researchers than on research itself. Masters-level students
are especially attractive to industry because they have a broad knowledge of their
fields and have not become specialized in a narrow area of interest required for a
doctoral thesis. Although numerous technical contributions from academia can
be identified (see Box 4-3), the research results per se are not highly valued,The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AEROSPACE INDUSTRY125partly because improvements in industry performance (defined as increasingshareholder value) can seldom be traced to them. The indirect benefits of aca-
demic research are often not recognized by industry, despite their contributions
to the knowledge base that may ultimately contribute to the development of
new technologies.The contribution of academic research to the development of very large-scale integration is one example. Academic research directly benefited chip
makers (e.g., Intel) and indirectly benefited aerospace companies by enabling the
development of enhanced avionics. However, research results become visible to
management only when they are applied directly to an aerospace system or im-
prove a companyÕs performance. Another example is the development of com-posite materials, the underpinnings for which were developed in academia and
the applications of which include turbine engines, solid rocket motors, and other
critical and noncritical engine and airframe components. The indirect benefits
may not be recognized, although they have tremendous value. In contrast, univer-
sity graduates are highly valued because they provide direct visible benefits.If academic research is considered in the broad context of innovation pro-cesses, it plays a very large role, along with government laboratories, in laying the
foundations of understanding that lead to the next wave of innovation. This role is
reflected in recent studies by Diana Hicks and Francis Narin (2001) of CHI Re-
search and others (e.g., Spencer, 2001) showing the predominance of academic
research papers cited in patent applications. Of the scientific papers cited on U.S.
industrial patents in 1993Ð1994, academic research was the source of 52.1 percent,roughly twice the number of industry research papers (Narin et al., 1997).In the current environment, future opportunities for academic research willbe much more focused on issues that contribute to market success and will
require much more flexibility on the part of academic researchers. For industry,
the focus of R&D will be success in the marketplace; R&D should generate
technological discriminators, improve affordability, and create new business op-
portunities. To receive industry support, academic researchers will have to meet
industryÕs needs for timely and usable results. To achieve these results, industrywill have to manage its relationships with universities more effectively.Typically, large aerospace companies define key corporate strategic oppor-tunities and fund them first. Subsequent R&D spending authority is dependent on
profit and loss. With a few exceptions, large aerospace companies no longer have
central R&D laboratories. Instead, they use contract research capabilities when
they are available, and they fund universities philanthropically to support centers
and institutes for research in specific areas. At this stage, aerospace companies
are especially keen on the development of better methodologies and tools, such as
tools in computational fluid dynamics and the research results of the Lean Aero-
space Initiative.Small companies maintain a very different relationship with universi-ties for a number of reasons. First, there is a significant state and federalThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.126THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEBOX 4-3Examples of Academic Contributions to AerospaceAlthough the consensus view of the respondents to the panelÕs questionnaireis that academic research has contributed mostly indirectly to the performance of
the U.S. aerospace industry, a wide array of technologies were identified to whichacademic researchers had contributed in meaningful ways. In some cases,the contributions were the development of tools, especially models of system
behavior; in other cases, specific technologies were cited.Tools¥radar cross-section modeling¥extrinsic Fabry-Perot interferometer (EFPI) applied to smart structures¥models of satellite communication systems¥performance of competing aircraft design tools¥modeling of electromechanical theory¥advanced nonintrusive instrumentation¥flow-visualization techniques¥computational fluid dynamics¥microelectrommechanical systems(MEMS)¥multidisciplinary optimization¥nonlinear, constrained optimization codes for designing control laws¥modeling of the mechanical properties of composites¥thermomechanical fatigue testing¥electron backscattering technique for fine-scale analysis of crystal orientation¥thermodynamic software for predicting phase equilibria (Thermocalc)infrastructure to support small business research, especially the Small Busi-ness Innovation Research (SBIR) Program and state programs that provide

loans and matching grants. Second, many states and universities have tech-
nical business ÒincubatorsÓ that provide technical and management exper-
tise for new technology companies until their ideas are commercially vi-
able. Once these firms graduate from the incubators, they have multiple
connections to the university for continued research. Third, small firms
typically have little or no research staff; contracts with universities, fac-
ulty consultants, student cooperatives, and other resources provide a cost-
effective mechanism for securing technical expertise. Fourth, maintaining
close relations with universities gives small businesses access to informa-
tion and cutting-edge technology that they often have little time to obtain
on their own.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AEROSPACE INDUSTRY127Finally, university research provides intellectual mixing that leads to con-stant discussions and debates, both formal and informal, about new ideas. Uni-
versities serve as brain trusts that provide a long-term perspective on ideas and
technology development that is difficult to find elsewhere and is exceedingly
valuable to small firms. Small manufacturers of UAVs illustrate many of these
points (see Box 4-4).However, industry must learn how to manage relationships with universi-ties. Small companies tend to want technical expertise from universities, while
larger firms tend to want system engineers (with technical expertise). Because of
academic schedules, universities are not well suited for research on the short-
term critical path. For longer term projects, however, academic research can
provide the foundation for new products and services that may be critical to a
companyÕs business.Applied Research¥heat transfer, combustor cooling, aeromechanics¥vane-blade interaction for transonic turbines to understand unsteady flow¥influence of clouds of volcanic ash on turbine engine performance¥low Reynolds number airfoil design¥Internet by satellite, including protocols and computational tools for dataintegration¥folding-wing design for small UAVs¥fracture and flaw sizes of critical brittle materials¥aluminum-lithium alloy applications in space systems¥amorphous alloys¥obstacle detection and avoidance, relative navigation, mapping¥differential absorption lidarBasic Research¥theoretical basis for UAV flight controls¥ShannonÕs information theory¥electromagnetic antenna theory¥linearized unsteady flow analysis¥composite laminate theory¥improved understanding of fiber-matrix interactions in composite materials¥superplasticity¥real-time decision systems using artificial intelligenceCenters¥Gas Turbine Laboratory (MIT)¥Turbomachinery Components Research Laboratory (Iowa State)¥Whittle Laboratory (Cambridge University)¥Lean Aircraft Initiative (MIT)¥Automation and Robotics Research Institute (University of Texas-Arlington)The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEBOX 4-4Unmanned Aerial Vehicles and Academic ResearchThe unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) sector is representative of the high-risk,still-emerging end of the aerospace industry. A brief description of three compa-
nies developing new aircraft in this sector illustrates the range of experiences com-panies can have with universities. These examples also demonstrate the dangersof making broad generalizations about relations between industry and universities
in the aerospace industry.The Cypher UAV, developed by Sikorsky to meet U.S. military and commercialneeds in ground and naval surveillance, relaying communications, forestry surveil-
lance, law enforcement, and search-and-rescue missions, recently became oper-ational with the U.S. Marine Corps. Cypher combines the efficiency of a ductedairstream with the attributes of a coaxial, advancing-blade rotor system. It can take
off and land vertically, carry a payload of about 50 pounds for several hours, andcruise at 80 knots. Academic involvement in the development of Cypher has beenintermittent (e.g., in the development of the panoramic view sensor). Because of
the small amount of government funding available to support R&D on rotary air-craft, work with universities has proven to be difficult, and most contacts with aca-demics has been initiated by universities rather than program managers. Man-
agers pursued ideas to see if a common interest could be identified, but oftenacademic interest was primarily a search for funding to support research and grad-uate students. Most companies believe they derive little benefit from working with
universities unless a common interest can be found because of problems in meet-ing deadlines, the frequent turnover of students working on projects, and a ten-dency for academics to promise more than they can deliver.Aurora Flight Systems was formed in the 1980s by an MIT graduate and aHarvard graduate to build robotic aircraft to study chemicals in the upper atmo-sphere. According to company president John Langford, Aurora depends on uni-
versities for its research and considers funding of academic research a wayof buying a time-share in the worldÕs best research laboratories. Aurora hasThe reexamination of university-industry relationships should not be con-fined to research. Engineering education must also be adapted to an environment
in which the context of engineering, the workplace, and the role of technology
have changed dramatically. For instance, the ethics of engineering are becoming
more complicated. Mission success may conflict with the emphasis on market
success, which demands sticking to business-determined costs and schedules.
The required capabilities of engineers, especially their ability to work in
multidisciplinary teams, are also changing. Many have argued that engineering
colleges have not responded well to these changes (see Box 4-5).Academic ViewpointThe principal measure of success for a research university is the quality of itsfaculty and student body. Faculty success is measured principally by standing inThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AEROSPACE INDUSTRY129partnerships with universities on Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)projects and has taken advantage of state programs to encourage cooperationwith state universities. The company considers academic research a way of lay-ing the foundations for new products and services, rather than a mechanism for
solving short-term critical problems.Aurora has contracts with universities in many key technical areas: computa-tional fluid dynamics and analysis codes; advanced propulsion concepts; differen-
tial absorption LIDAR; advanced navigation, guidance, and control algorithms; andcomposite material testing. The company works with MIT, West Virginia Univer-sity, University of Vermont, University of Virginia, University of Maryland, and Vir-
ginia Polytechnic Institute. Aurora worked with MIT, for example, to develop fault-tolerant controls to eliminate redundant flight control system hardware, which addsweight to the aircraft. Because fault-tolerant control systems have applications in
many industries, Aurora created a new business, Athena Technologies, to com-mercialize these technologies.Freewing Aerial Robotics Corporation was the direct result of the technologyincubator program at the University of Maryland. As a start-up in the incubator,Freewing had access to technical and business advice from the university, officespace, university facilities, especially the wind tunnel and computer equipment,
and work-study students. In return, the University of Maryland held a 3 percentshare in the company. FreewingÕs first product was the Scorpion 100-50, a tac-tical, low-altitude, subsonic UAV designed from the beginning for military and
civilian use. New products were planned based on a patented Òtilt-bodyÓ technol-
ogy that created a new class of aircraft applicable to any size and speed. Howev-er, inability to raise fresh capital forced Freewing to file for Chapter 7 bankruptcy
in October 2001.The University of Maryland and Texas A&M University contributed resourcesand research capabilities to the development of two critical technologies: (1) a
nonlinear mathematical model of the aerodynamics of a freewing aircraft and sub-sequent wind tunnel testing; and (2) avionics for an autopilot.research peer groups (in exceptional cases very innovative teaching can conveystar status). The most prestigious faculty members seem to attract the brightest
and most ambitious students. Thus, universities compete vigorously for the re-
search elite who are the recognized intellectual leaders in their fields and are
willing to expend significant discretionary resources to attract them for laborato-
ries, graduate student support, and faculty control of research funds. Thus, major
research universities do not depend entirely on external funding to support the
research programs that determine their standing in the academic hierarchy. One
measure of independence is that most leading research universities now pay their
faculty almost entirely from internal funds, rather than through research con-
tracts, even though faculty typically spend about half of their time working on
funded research projects. Other costs of research include matching-fund require-
ments, costs for bids and proposals, and other costs that are not fully reimbursedThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.130THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEBOX 4-5
Strengthening Academic SupportFor more than a decade, government agencies, the aerospace industry, anduniversities have expressed concerns about how well universities can meet theengineering needs of industry and, conversely, the willingness and ability of gov-ernment and industry to provide the funding necessary for universities to maintain
and enhance their research capability. Studies by the National Research Council(1995), the American Society for Engineering Education (1994), and others haveexplored the changing needs of industry and the ability of universities to meet
those needs. Based on these studies, government has undertaken a number ofinitiatives, such as a project in the mid-1990s by the National Science Foundationto form coalitions of universities to address systemic reforms in the engineering
curriculum and related issues. These activities reflect an awareness by all par-tiesÑindustry, universities, and governmentÑthat the needs of industry are notbeing met.In the aerospace industry, the need to improve relations with universities and toimprove the quality of graduates led to at least two major initiatives in the early tomid-1990s, one by industry and one by government. Based on attempts in the late
1980s to improve relations with universities historically important to Boeing, theBoeing Company initiated what has become the Industry University GovernmentRoundtable for Enhancing Engineering Education (IUGREEE) (McMasters, et
al.,1999). IUGREEE held its first meeting, with additional industry and universityparticipants, in 1995. The goal of IUGREEE was to catalyze actions, rather thanecho recommendations of other studies.IUGREEE now perceives itself as providing a broad-based industry voice forchanges in engineering education. IUGREEE has adopted the following objectives:¥to articulate and draw attention to critical issues that industry believes shouldaffect engineering educationby contracts. In the final analysis, universities contribute substantially to supportfor research rather than making money on research, as is often assumed.Some of the brightest and most innovative young faculty may find thatfurthering their careers in academia often conflicts with focusing on developing
strong cooperative relationships with industry. Indeed, too much emphasis on
developing industry ties can seriously retard their progress. These same young
faculty are often poorly informed about the needs of industry and the differences
between industry and academic work modes. Thus, they do not provide role
models for students, most of whom seek employment in industry after gradua-
tion. To address this problem, Boeing introduced an academic fellows program
that brings 10 to 15 academics to work in the company during the summer. The
goal of the program is to provide firsthand knowledge of how industry operates
and to expose academics to real-world technical problems. Leaders at Boeing
argue that the only way to overcome long-standing cultural differences betweenThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AEROSPACE INDUSTRY131industry and academia is to provide opportunities for interaction and to maintaina dialogue to identify differences and develop potential solutions.Much of the tension between the needs of the academic research system andindustryÕs needs for personnel and technology can be addressed by better man-agement of university-industry relationships. For example, academic involve-
ment in problem definition can help focus research on meeting the needs of both.
Industry must also recognize that universities cannot work to an industry sched-
ule and should choose research projects accordingly. Projects must be interesting
enough to attract graduate students and must be structured in a way that is com-
patible with the university reward system. A combination of long-term and short-
term funding can provide stability for academic programs that may then be in a
better position to address shorter term industry problems. Active industry advi-
sory boards can help overcome communication problems.¥to develop agendas to see that changes are made¥to facilitate the implementation of these agendas through existing organizationsand other mechanismsIn 1995, in response to similar concerns, NASAÕs Aeronautics Advisory Com-mittee appointed a Task Force on University Strategy to examine issues related tothe role of universities in NASAÕs Aeronautics Enterprise. The task force was askedto address criticisms of NASAÕs management of industry and university relationsand to recommend ways to improve collaborations between NASAÕs aeronauticsprogram and universities. The Task Force on University Strategy undertook the
following tasks:¥a review of NASAÕs Aeronautics Enterprise Mission Statement, Strategic Plan, and related documentation vis-a-vis U.S. universities
¥a review of NASAÕs policies and practices toward research grants for the aero-nautics program¥a comparison of university research strategies used by other government agen-cies and NASAÕs industry collaborators with the policies and practices ofNASAÕs Aeronautics Enterprise¥a review of the data collected by previous informal study groups and symposia¥the development of recommendations to improve how NASAÕs Aeronautics Pro-gram collaborates with universities, including a better definition of the role ofuniversity research in the Aeronautics Enterprise and methods of supporting,evaluating, and collaborating in that roleIn 1997, the task force issued recommendations on NASAÕs funding of basicresearch, the use of peer reviews, the protection of intellectual property, an in-crease in funding limits for multiyear grants, collaborative research with universi-ties and industry, and other aspects of relations with universities (NASA, 1997).The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEAcademia also has constraints that industry does not always comprehend.Universities have costs and business pressures just like corporations, although in
a different context. Because of reductions in government funding and more fre-
quent matching-fund requirements, the dollar amounts of individual government
research grants have been reduced. Industry grants also tend to be small, averag-
ing about $43,000 for one large aerospace firm. Chasing many small grants can
be expensive. Wealthier research universities can absorb these costs more readily
than most, but the costs are real. Universities may also face legal restrictions
imposed by many states on fee-for-service research contracts that might put the
university in direct competition with a private research firm. To industry, these
types of constraints can be frustrating and may make universities seem unrespon-
sive. Industry must recognize these constraints and modify its expectations.Foreign StudentsA large fraction of graduate students from around the world who attend U.S.universities remain in the United States, attracted to the innovative, dynamic,
research environment in this industry. In 2000, of the 215 doctorates awarded
nationwide in aeronautical and aerospace engineering, 85 were awarded to non-
U.S. citizens, only 10 of whom had permanent visas (NSF, 2001b). Export laws
and other restrictions, however, limit the involvement of foreign students in some
types of aerospace research. Typically, for companies that have a substantial
fraction of business with the DOD or NASA, employing noncitizens is difficult.
Even for purely commercial applications, companies are wary of funding aca-
demic research performed by foreign students who may take the results to foreign
competitors after they graduate. In some cases, firms are legally required to
restrict the involvement of foreign students on contracts with universities. Gener-
ally, universities find it difficult to accept these restrictions because they cannot
guarantee the future use of information generated in their laboratories. Some
universities have restricted some of their laboratories to graduate students who
are U.S. citizens, but these arrangements may become increasingly difficult to
maintain as the percentage of foreign students (and faculty) in science and engi-
neering school populations increases. Therefore, industry and government may
have to consider changing their policies to ease restrictions on foreign students
and faculty, many of whom opt to remain in this country and thus contribute to
U.S. competitiveness (NSF, 2001b).Intellectual Property RightsAnother key barrier to collaboration between universities and industry isintellectual property rights. Within universities, intellectual property is usually
shared by the faculty member and the university; although the professor may be
willing to negotiate ownership away, the institution tends to be very reluctant toThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AEROSPACE INDUSTRY133do so. For obvious commercial reasons, companies generally insist on propri-etary rights to research results produced by programs they fund. Universities, for
a variety of reasons, find it either not in their interest or impractical to grant such
rights and, perhaps more importantly, to protect them in the courts. As a result,
companies must cope with different policies at different universities and even
different projects at the same university. Pursuing the negotiating process on a
case-by-case basis can be costly.University faculty and administrators sometimes have inflated expectationsof the value of intellectual property, which must be considered in the context of
how its value can be realized. If the university and/or faculty member retains
ownership but cannot sell it or develop a product from it, the value is much lower
than if ownership is assigned to the company, and the proceeds are shared in
some negotiated way.Ownership of intellectual property is not the only issue that must be ad-dressed. Mechanisms are also needed to protect intellectual property, especially
in universities with a culture of disbursing knowledge. In Georgia, state laws
were changed to allow Georgia Tech to protect intellectual property for three
years, which is usually long enough to meet commercial needs. This arrangement
has the added advantage of teaching graduate students to respect intellectual
property as they will be expected to do in industry.Arrangements to Improve Research CollaborationsIn the course of committee and workshop discussions, a number of sugges-tions were made for improving research collaborations between universities and
industry. Representatives of large and small companies and academics had quite
different ideas. Generally, large companies called for changes in the structure of
academic research organizations to make them more compatible with industry
needs; universities called for more flexibility on the part of companies and a
recognition of the limitations under which they operate.Research Partnerships AbroadSome of the problems associated with industry-university collaboration mightbe solved by the formation of exclusive, one-on-one research partnerships; indus-
try partners would conduct research, in return for support from the single, indus-
trial partner, and universities would give up the right to accept support from other
companies. An example of this approach is Rolls-RoyceÕs university technologycenters (UTCs), a program established in 1990 to focus and coordinate Rolls-
Royce university research in the UK. The firm targeted university departments
with proven track records and expertise in technical areas of strategic importance
to Rolls-Royce. UTCs at 12 universities in the UK conduct about half of
the research funded by Rolls-Royce across a wide spectrum of short-term andThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.134THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCElong-term needs. The UTCs have quarterly management meetings and annualreviews with Rolls-Royce managers, and they compete for funding to ensure that
the company gets value for its money. UTCs are also part of the firmÕs recruit-ment and training strategy, ensuring access to the best people the UK with the
necessary technological training. University Technology Partnerships (UTPs),
intended to complement the UTCs, involve suppliers, customers, and other Euro-
pean universities. For example, the Rolls-Royce UTP in Engineering Design
Processes involves British Aerospace and the Universities of Sheffield, Cam-
bridge, and Southampton. It was launched in 1998 to conduct a joint program of
research into engineering design processes for the twenty-first century.U.S. Research PartnershipOne of the presentations at the workshop described the efforts of GE AircraftEngines (GEAE) to develop a new strategy for funding academic research, simi-
lar to the strategy used by Rolls-Royce but tailored to the issues specific to U.S.
universities. The strategy, called the University Strategic Alliance (USA), is
intended to shift the companyÕs current pattern of funding of 140 small contractsat many universities to funding of much larger contracts at a few universities that

could become long-term partners. The change was partly motivated by a
66 percent drop in the companyÕs internal engineering staff, which has made thecompany anxious to make more effective use of university capabilities.GEAEÕs idea behind USA is to integrate university research into the firmÕsbusiness strategy and technology road maps. The company would enter into a
guaranteed, performance-based, five-year contract with sufficient funding to en-
sure a critical mass of capability at each university. Contracts would be focused
on specific problems, such as film cooling issues on high-pressure turbine air-
foils, in real-world contexts. The companyÕs intent is to ensure reasonable aca-demic freedom, reasonable protection of intellectual property rights, and oppor-
tunities for publication (with some restrictions). The universities would have
access to company technology.  The company would share ownership of intellec-

tual property with the university but would generally not pay royalties.Because protecting intellectual property can be a difficult issue, terms wouldbe negotiated with each university. In some cases, the company might own the
intellectual property rights but allow publication; in other cases, it might share
patents. The same university could have different contracts for the treatment of
intellectual property for different projects. A person with technical knowledge on
each side would participate in the negotiations so that decisions would not be
made solely by legal departments.The companyÕs goal is to enlist academic research to solve problems, manyof which require fairly basic research. The company would allow university
researchers to identify ways the problems could be solved, as long as those
approaches could actually be implemented and would result in solutions in one toThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AEROSPACE INDUSTRY135three years. The company envisions that faculty and students will come to itsfacilities to learn about problems in a real-world context and will pursue solutions
in both company and university facilities.From the companyÕs point of view, this kind of company-university interac-tion would have significant benefits, particularly compared to the relatively little
value the company now receives from the academic research it funds. From the
university perspective, however, it may be difficult to participate despite assur-
ances of long-term funding. A particular concern is that the problems posed by
the company might not be attractive research subjects to faculty members be-
cause they would probably not involve problems at the intellectual frontier of the
field and, therefore, would not be supported by the academic reward system. The
arrangement might also be perceived as too restrictive in terms of publication and
the universityÕs freedom to work with other companies. Finally, the companymay not gain access to the best researchers, who can raise research funds from
other sources without the restrictions imposed by the company and so may not
perceive any benefit from participation.This example highlights some of the difficulties in improving university-industry research collaborations. The proposed strategy addresses the companyÕsdesires to have universities perform productive research and attempts to accom-
modate the universityÕs need for open publication, protection of intellectual prop-erty, and stable funding. Nevertheless, U.S. universities may not consider this
plan in a positive light.CONCLUSIONSConclusion 4-1. Academic research in aerospace is changing rapidly. The gov-
ernment policy change reducing government support for aerospace in general
means support for research in aerospace will also be reduced. Henceforth, market
forces will determine how things change, and industry and universities will have
to adjust accordingly.Conclusion 4-2. Although industry values academia for turning out educated
graduates and, to a lesser extent, for its research results, industry is not willing to
support generalized research programs. Industry will provide support for pro-
grams with clearly identifiable impacts on its performance.Conclusion 4-3. In the more mature parts of the aerospace industry (e.g., air-frame and engine manufacturing), better methodologies and tools are the most
valued research products. These include tools in computational fluid dynamics
and the results of the Lean Aerospace Initiative. In less mature industry sectors
(e.g., UAVs, MAVs, and satellite-information systems), new concepts and physi-
cal understanding will be most beneficial.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEConclusion 4-4. Industry considers academic research contributions most valu-
able (i.e., most relevant and easiest to transfer) when they result from cooperative
programs with industry.Conclusion 4-5. Issues concerning proprietary rights pose substantial barriers toimproving collaborations between academia and industry. Resolving these issues
will require compromises between industryÕs desire to protect intellectual prop-erty and academiaÕs desire to maintain a free and open intellectual community.Conclusion 4-6. Formal research partnerships between industry and academia
are evolving. For new approaches to succeed, however, the academic reward
system will have to find a way to recognize the value of close collaboration
with industry.NOTES1Many engineering colleges have merged aerospace engineering departments with other depart-ments, typically departments of mechanical engineering.2Because the five subsectors studied by the committee do not align with the industry subsectordefinitions used to report sales and shipments data, these numbers are rough estimates that drawupon data from the following sources: AIA, 2001; McGraw-Hill/DOC, 2000; and CRS, 2003.3In 1986, commercial launches accounted for only 13 percent of commercial and governmentlaunches (excluding space shuttle launches).  By 1996, commercial launches accounted for half of
the total (McGraw-Hill/U.S. Department of Commerce, 1998).4Researchers at the University of Pennsylvania developed the underpinnings of laminate theoryin the 1960s.  Since then, Michigan State University, Case Western University, Stanford University,
University of Connecticut, and University of Wyoming, among others, have contributed to the un-
derstanding of fiber-matrix interactions and to the modeling of mechanical analysis of compos-ite materials.5Satellite LLC purchased the assets of Iridium in late 2000 and relaunched operations of the73 LEO satellites previously launched by Iridium.  An additional five satellites were launched in
February 2002.  See 
Washington Post, February 12, 2002, p. E4.REFERENCESAIA (Aerospace Industries Association). 2001. Aerospace Facts and Figures. Washington, D.C.:Aerospace Industries Association.American Society for Engineering Education. 1994. Engineering Education for a Changing World.Washington, D.C.: American Society for Engineering Education.CRS (Congressional Research Service). 2003. Unmanned Aerial Vehicles: Background andIssues for Congress. Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress. Available online at: http://www.fas.org/irp/crs/RL31872.pdf. [August 21, 2003]Hicks, D., and F. Narin. 2001. Strategic Research Alliances and 360 Degree BibliometricIndicators. Pp. 133Ð145 in Strategic Research Partnerships: Proceedings from an NSFWorkshop. NSF 01-336. Arlington, Va.: National Science Foundation.IUGREEE. 2001. Vision 2010. Available online at: http://www1.eng.iastate.edu/iugreee/. [June 24,2003]Kline, S.J. 1995. Conceptual Foundations of Multi-Disciplinary Thinking. Palo Alto, Calif.: StanfordUniversity Press.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AEROSPACE INDUSTRY137McGraw-Hill/U.S. Department of Commerce. 2000. U. S. Industry and Trade Outlook Ô00. NewYork: McGraw-Hill.McMasters, J., B.J. White, and T. Okiishi. 1999. Industry-University-Government Roundtable forEnhancing Engineering Education. AIAA 99-0281. Reston, Va.: American Institute of Aero-nautics and Astronautics.Narin, F., K. Hamilton, and D. Olivastro. 1997. The increasing linkage between U.S. technology andpublic science. Research Policy (26)
3: 317Ð330.NASA (National Aeronautics and Space Administration). 1997. Report of the University StrategyTask Force. Washington, D.C.: Office of Aeronautics, NASA.NRC (National Research Council). 1995. Engineering Education: Designing an Adaptive System.Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.NSF (National Science Foundation). 2001a. Research and Development in Industry: 2000. NSF 03-318. Table A-3. Online at: http://www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/nsf03318/start.htm. [June 24, 2003]NSF. 2001b. Science and Engineering Doctorate Awards: 2000, S.T. Hill, author. NSF 02-305.Arlington, Va.: Division of Science Resources Statistics, National Science Foundation.Spencer, J. 2001. How relevant is university-based scientific research to private high-technologyfirms? A United States-Japan comparison. Academy of Management Journal 44(2): 432Ð440.Toon, J. 2001. Flying on Mars. Research Horizons 19(1): 19Ð23. Available online at: http://gtresearchnews.gatech.edu/reshor/rh-f01/mars.html. [June 24, 2003]U.S. Bureau of the Census. 2002. Statistical Abstract of the United StatesÑ2002. Washington, D.C.:U.S. Government Printing Office. Available online at: http://www.census.gov/prod/www/statistical-abstract-02.html. [June 24, 2003]
Womack, J.P., D.T. Jones, and D. Roos. 1991. The Machine That Changed the World. New York:Harper-Collins.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138ADDENDUMQuestionnaireThe following questionnaire was sent to selected individuals in various seg-ments of the aerospace industry, some of whom attended the December 1998
workshop. Included among the questionnaire respondents were senior executives
at Aerospace Corporation, Boeing, Draper Laboratories, GE Aircraft Engines,
Lincoln Laboratories, NASA Lewis Research Center, Northrop Grumman, Or-
bital Sciences Launch Systems, Orbital Space Systems, Rolls-Royce Allison,
SAIC, TRW, Inc., and professors with expertise in aerodynamcs, heat transfer,
high-speed instrumentation, and turbomachinery from Iowa State University,
Ohio State University, and Carnegie Mellon University.STUDY OF THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ONINDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCE1. Please identify the targeted sector or sectors of the aerospace industry withwhich you are most familiar.  Space-based information systems
  Launch vehicles
  Transport aircraft
  Unmanned aerial vehicles
  Gas turbine propulsion systems
2. Please describe any cases you are aware of in which the contributions andimpact of academic research to sector(s) have been clearly evident. What were
the circumstances that led to the favorable outcome? (If possible, please supply
references to published information.) Please use additional pages, as necessary.3. Overall, would you describe the impact of academic research on industrial
performance in your sector(s) of the aerospace industry as (please put an X in one box):  1.  very large
  2.  large
  3.  medium
  4.  small
  5.  very small/nonexistent
4. The Panel has identified a number of mechanisms (listed below) by whichit believes academic research has an impact on performance in the aerospaceThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AEROSPACE INDUSTRY139industry. Please rate the importance of each mechanism using the same 1Ð5 scaleused above [where 1 is Òvery largeÓ and 5 is 
Òvery small/nonexistent.Ó Where
possible, please write down under each item some specific contributions you are
aware of that have been made by academic research to industry via the mecha-
nism. Please use additional pages, as necessary.(   )A.Research-related Education and Training (of graduate students)
(   )i.at the M.S. level

(   )ii.at the Ph.D. level
(   )B.Invention and Innovation
For example, please consider any specific patents owned by a uni-versity or specific innovations resulting from university research
that have been of benefit to your business or industry.(   )C.Consulting
This refers to faculty providing expert advice to the industry.(   )D.Technology Filtering
This refers to the role of academic research in helping compa-
nies identify research/technological opportunities and research/
technological Òdead ends.Ó(   )E.Tools and Productivity
This includes the development of analytical, computational, and
experimental tools and methods that are adopted by industry.(   )F.Pontification, Professionalism, Foundations
This refers to the function of faculty in documenting and presenting
information critical to aerospace; in conveying relevant informa-
tion to others in the profession, investors, and legislators; and
to service to the profession, for instance, in organizing and sustain-
ing professional societies, industry associations, and other
trade groups.5. Are there systematic trends that will either increase or decrease the impactof academic research in the future? For example, the Panel perceives that indus-
trial in-house research is being de-emphasized as a result of downward pressure
on engineering staff sizes. Is this a trend you perceive also? If so, will this result
in more or less opportunity for productive research partnerships between industry
and academe? Are there other trends of importance? Please use additional pages,as necessary.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.140THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCE6. What changes are required, if any, in academic research if it is to beresponsive to trends and emerging challenges in the industry? Please use addi-tional pages, as necessary.7.To what extent is academic research relevant to aerospace justified for the
research results it produces versus the academic infrastructure (faculty, post-
docs, other research personnel, facilities) it supports, which enables the other
contributions outlined above in question #4? Please use additional pages,as necessary.8. Do you see any downside to enhancing university-industry research col-laboration? Things to be avoided? Please use additional pages, as necessary.9. Other comments? Please use additional pages, as necessary.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AEROSPACE INDUSTRY141Workshop AgendaWORKSHOP ON ENHANCING ACADEMIC RESEARCHCONTRIBUTIONS TO THE AEROSPACE INDUSTRYDecember 4, 1998National Academies Building2101 Constitution Avenue, N.W.Washington, D.C.9:00 a.m.Introduction to Study and Summary of StatusJ. Kerrebrock9:20 a.m.Summary of Findings from QuestionnaireT. Mahoney9:30 a.m.Session I: General DiscussionHow have changes in the aerospace industry, as well as changes inacademia, especially engineering, affected university-industry re-
search cooperation?How might the future of research cooperation be different from the past?
What role does academic research play in the total research enter-prise (industry, university, government) in this industry?10:15 a.m.Break

10:30 a.m.Session II: Discussion of Specific University-industryInteractions:  Presentations by Industry Participants¥criteria to determine what types of research universities do best¥managing the research interaction: definition of deliverables,monitoring progress¥long-term vs. short-term collaborations¥single firm vs. consortia-based collaborations¥stellar examples of success and failure12:00 p.m.Working Lunch
The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.142THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCE12:30 p.m.Session II Continued: Presentations by Academic Participants:¥sources of research funding¥preferred research for industry and expectations of industry¥managing interaction with industry, both for specific researchprojects and overall¥long-term vs. short-term collaborations¥single firm vs. consortia-based collaborations¥stellar examples of success and failure1:30 p.m.Session III: Detailed Discussions (in breakout groups, if desired)
2:30 p.m.Presentation and Discussion of Findings1.Can best practices be identified? Do they correlate to research
with significant impact? Can the impact from academic research
be clearly differentiated from the impact of internal and govern-
ment research?2.How might university-industry research collaboration be man-
aged better to meet the needs of both?3.How essential is industry participation in academic research, as a
funder, definer, and active participant, both from the industry
viewpoint and to meet the academic mission of research and edu-
cation?4.Is it possible to maintain the desired educational role of academia,
in the absence of traditional academic research programs? If not,
then how do we motivate and justify academic research, espe-
cially at the Ph.D. level, in the absence of a strong need for its
research output?3:30 p.m.Formulation of Findings, Conclusions, and Recommendations4:30 p.m.Adjourn
The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AEROSPACE INDUSTRY143Workshop AttendeesJack L. Kerrebrock, chair*Professor of Aeronautics andAstronauticsMassachusetts Institute of TechnologyWilliam F. Ballhaus, Jr.Corporate Vice President
Science and Engineering
Lockheed Martin CorporationJohn S. BarasDirector, Center for Satellite and
Hybrid Communication Networks
University of MarylandJewel B. BarlowDirector, Glenn L. Martin WindTunnelUniversity of MarylandRobert A. DelaneyChief, Design Technology
Rolls-Royce AllisonRobert M. EhrenreichSenior Program Officer
National Materials Advisory Board
National Research CouncilAntonio L. Elias*Senior Vice President, AdvancedProgramsOrbital Sciences CorporationKenneth C. Hall*Associate Professor
Department of Mechanical Engineer-ing and Materials ScienceDuke UniversityDavid Heebner (retired)SAICRobert J. Hermann*Senior Partner
Global Technology Partners, LLCWei H. KaoDirector, MMTC Structural MaterialsDepartmentThe Aerospace CorporationKent Kresa*Chairman, President, and CEO
Northrop Grumman CorporationJohn S. LangfordChairman
Aurora Flight Sciences Corp.James McMichaelProgram Manager
DARPA/TTOArt RochDirector, Advanced Technology
Commercial Aircraft Division
Northrop Grumman Corporation*Panel memberThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.144THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEArun K. SehraDeputy, Aeronautics Directorate
NASA Lewis Research CenterS.K. VarmaAerospace Consultant
Bethesda, MarylandDavid C. WislerManager, University Programs andAero Technology LabsGE Aircraft EnginesConsultant to the AerospaceIndustry PanelThomas C. MahoneyDirector, WV-MEP
West Virginia UniversityNAE Program Office StaffTom Weimer, DirectorProctor Reid, Associate Director
Robert Morgan, NAE Fellow and Senior Analyst
Penny Gibbs, Administrative AssistantThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5Report of the Panel on the
Transportation, Distribution, and
Logistics Services IndustryThe Panel on Transportation, Distribution, and Logistics Services Industry
was made up of six members, including three members from NAE (two from
academia and one from industry), two other members from academia, and one from
industry. Three of the panel members were also members of the parent committee.
The panel was asked to assess the contributions of academic research to integrated
logistics services and associated activities, technologies, and methodologies that
cut across the many components of the transportation, distribution, and logistics
(TDL) services industries. The panel reviewed the literature, developed several
case studies, and sent a questionnaire to selected individuals, primarily university-
based researchers, with special knowledge of the TDL industry (Addendum). The
questionnaire was followed by two roundtables attended by panel members and
12 senior individuals in the TDL services industries (see Addendum).During the past two decades, deregulation of transportation and rapid advancesin computing and communications technologies have resulted in a surge of innova-
tion in logistics and accelerated the pace of change in the broader TDL industries.
In manufacturing, reducing inventories and work-in-process through just-in-time
deliveries, ÒpullÓ systems of supply-chain management, and other technologies and
management practices depend on integrated-logistics services, which combine
materials management and physical distribution. Logistics has emerged as a dis-
tinct function in many companies and as a distinct service performed by integrated-
logistics service providers. Over time, the users of integrated-logistics services
have become more demanding, and, in response, providers have become more
sophisticated. Their use of technology and their need for knowledgeable workers
have created interest in and opportunities for academic research.145The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.146THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEDEFINITION OF THE INDUSTRYTransportation, distribution, and logistics services affect every facet of economiclife in the United States. In 2000, the United States spent about $1.006 trillion to move
freight. Trucking accounted for $481 billion, or about 48 percent of the total. Rail-
roads came in second, accounting for $36 billion, and international, inland, and
coastal water transportation was next at $26 billion (Delaney and Wilson, 2001).As a percentage of gross domestic product (GDP), transportation and inventorycosts have been declining since 1981, when total logistics costs in the United States,
including inventory carrying costs, transportation, and administrative costs, totaled
almost 17 percent of GDP. In 2000, the total was 10.1 percent (Delaney and Wilson,
2001). By far the most important reason for the decline has been deregulation in the
rail and trucking industries, but other factors such as de-unionization, advances in
technology, and improved management practices have also contributed (Belman and
Monaco, 2001). Competition in transportation has not only created new incentives for
service providers to reduce costs and improve the quality of service, but has also
stimulated innovation in the types of services they provide. At the same time, compe-
tition in the retail and manufacturing sectors has forced service providers to reduce
costs, ensure faster inventory turns, reduce the amount of work-in-process to a mini-

mum, and operate in close coordination with suppliers. All of these measures have
been enabled by improvements in integrated logistics. Figure 5-1 shows the changes
in inventory, transportation, 
and administrative 
costs in the last 20 years.012345
67891002468101214161820GDP $ trillion (left scale)Total U.S. logistics costs$ trillion (left scale)Logistics percentage of GDP 
(right scale)19761977197819791980198119821983198419851986198719881989199019911992199319941995199619971998FIGURE 5-1  The cost of logistics in relation to GDP. Source: Cass Information Sys-
tems, 1999.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRANSPORTATION, DISTRIBUTION, AND LOGISTICS SERVICES INDUSTRY147INTEGRATED LOGISTICS: A COMPETITIVE DIFFERENTIATORBecause of the many changes in technology and management practices in theTDL services industry, especially since deregulation, the panel decided to focus
on integrated logistics (also known as supply-chain management) and associated
activities, technologies, and methodologies that cut across the TDL services in-
dustry. Integrated logistics is becoming an increasingly important source of com-
petition in all parts of the TDL services sector, as well as in other sectors of the
economy and the national security establishment.Two big changes laid the foundation for integrated-logistics services: (1) theautomation of transactions enabled by advances in information technology; and
(2) the deregulation of transportation. Deregulation has led to dramatically more
complex logistics decisions in many industries and a proliferation of transporta-
tion service providers, which has encouraged innovation in service delivery and
provided businesses with many more choices. Advances in information technol-
ogy have enabled businesses to accumulate vast amounts of data on every aspect
of their supply chains, from production to delivery. Efficient integration of sup-
ply, production, and delivery schedules with suppliers and customers requires the
effective management of these data.Supply-chain activities can be categorized into three major areas: (1) theacquisition of materials and supplies; (2) the manufacturing process; and (3) the
distribution of products. Supply-chain management is the integration of the flow
of materials, documents, information, and finances to optimize individual ship-
ments. Managing the supply chain requires the integration of some parts of the
supply chain that were previously regarded as separate.Integrated logistics includes the planning, implementation, and control of theflow and storage of raw materials, in-process inventory, finished goods, services,
related information, and payments among suppliers and consumers from the
production of raw materials to the final recycling or disposal of finished goods.
The logistics value chain has three major elements:¥the supply chain (the physical components, including manufacturingplants, warehouses, vehicles, and transportation infrastructure)¥logistics business practices (practices and processes associated with theflow of goods, information, and payments through supply chains)¥information and decision technologies (computer-related technologiesused to design, plan, and operate supply chains, including the monitoring
of the status of materials, parts, and finished products in the supply chain
and communications among supply-chain elements)In a well integrated logistics value chain, all supply-chain elements areoptimized with regard to both service and cost. Integrated-logistics technologies
can change a Òproducer-pushÓ system to a 
Òcustomer-pullÓ system, in which
inventory decisions are based on what customers are actually buying. InThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.148THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEmanufacturing, this change has been driven by intense competition and thenecessity of eliminating waste in the production process in the form of raw
materials, work in process, and inventories of finished goods. In retailing, simi-
lar pressures to reduce costs, coupled with the growing purchasing power of
large retail chains, have led to new ways of doing business. Today, large retail
chains choose suppliers based on how well they can match product flow to
actual customer demand.In a survey of major global corporations in 1999, more than 90 percent ratedeffective supply-chain management as a critical success factor, up from 25 percent
in the early 1990s (Deloitte Consulting, 1999a). This change reflects the continuing
concentration by businesses on core competencies; increased outsourcing of
noncore production, distribution, and other functions; continued emphasis on cost
reduction; and product proliferation in the consumer products, food, electronics,
and other industries. Integrated-logistics services enable companies to manage the
supply chain to meet their cost and flexibility goals.In the past 15 years, integrated logistics has evolved into a new discipline.Most competitive manufacturing and service companies have installed informa-
tion systems capable of acquiring large quantities of timely, accurate data regard-
ing major business functions throughout their internal and external supply chains.
Advanced planning and optimization (APO) software can respond to the needs of
a range of manufacturing systems (Thomas, 1998). Enterprise resource planning
(ERP) software, which automates transactions and connects vital business sys-
tems (e.g., manufacturing, human resources, financial, and other information/
data systems), is also widely used. Industries are attempting to develop optimiza-
tion and decision-making capabilities that can translate the information generated
by these systems into higher productivity and profits. The fruits of academic
research have already had a large impact in this area, and they are expected to
have a significant impact on the development and application of new decision
technologies in support of integrated logistics.Technology DriversTechnological, organizational, and contextual changes have significantly in-fluenced performance in integrated-logistics services in the past 10 to 15 years.
Significant technological innovations have been focused on applications of infor-
mation technology:¥hardware that automatically captures data, satellite tracking systems, andnavigation systems¥information systems, such as manufacturing resource planning and ERPsoftware, electronic data interchange between firms in the value chain,
and database management software¥decision technologyThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRANSPORTATION, DISTRIBUTION, AND LOGISTICS SERVICES INDUSTRY149Other innovations include improved transportation, container, and warehouseequipment and improved human-machine interfaces. Contextual changes, which
have been both drivers and enablers of change, include: deregulation; the global-
ization of markets; the emergence of integrated supply chains, just-in-time deliv-
ery, and reductions in lot sizes in manufacturing; satellite communication sys-
tems; electronic commerce; increased competition; and other general
technological advances. The technological foundations of integrated logistics rest
primarily on operations research, automated data-capture technologies, and com-
munications/networking technologies. Software providers and third-party logis-
tics providers have been the main drivers of advanced technology development,
diffusion, and use in integrated logistics.Software ProvidersSoftware companies have performed most logistics-related research and de-velopment (R&D) (mostly development) in the past 10 years. In manufacturing
and logistics, companies such as SAP, PeopleSoft, and Baan have developed a
suite of ERP modules for planning production, taking orders, and delivering
products. The modules address the following functions:¥production planning (performs capacity planning and creates a daily pro-duction schedule for a companyÕs manufacturing plants)¥materials management (controls purchasing of the raw materials neededto build products and manages inventory stocks)¥order entry and processing (automates the data entry process of customerorders and keeps track of the status of orders)¥warehouse management (maintains records of warehoused goods and pro-cesses the movement of products through warehouses)¥transportation management (arranges, schedules, and monitors thedelivery of products to customers via trucks, trains, and other modes
of transportation)¥project management (monitors costs and work schedules on a project-by-project basis)After nearly a decade of rapid growth and continuous expansion and inno-vation in product offerings, the ERP market has begun to weaken. The cost and
complexity of ERP have created opportunities for other vendors to emerge. By
focusing on narrower functionality than ERP and solutions customized by in-
dustry, firms such as i2 Technologies and Siebel Systems have rapidly in-

creased their presence in supply-chain and customer management systems (also
known as APO solutions systems). For instance, total revenue for Siebel Sys-

tems grew from $391.5 million in 1998 to more than $2 billion in 2001(Siebel

Systems, 2002).The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.150THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEThe emergence of the Internet as a business communication tool has at-tracted the interest of leading manufacturing, retail, consumer products, and other
firms. Despite the benefits of ERP in generating operational improvements, com-
panies continue to feel that their procurement systems face serious challenges and
are looking for improvements through business-to-business electronic commerce.
In a 1998 survey by Deloitte Consulting, companies reported that 80 percent of
their strategic objectives for electronic commerce centered on supply chain and
procurement processes. Early on, Ariba and CommerceOne were leaders in elec-
tronic procurement, but the large ERP vendors have invested heavily in adding
electronic commerce functionality that can be integrated with ERP systems. Al-
though it is still too early to determine which approach or which vendors will
succeed, it is clear that large, global firms will invest heavily in online procure-
ment systems (Deloitte Consulting, 1999b).Third-Party Logistics ProvidersThe number of third-party logistics providers has increased significantly inthe past decade. Third-party providers are companies hired to perform logistics
tasks that were previously performed in house. There are several reasons compa-
nies decide to outsource planning-intensive functions:¥the explosion of new services in the deregulated transportation pro-vider network¥opportunities provided by new information systems with increasingly so-phisticated procedures and automation systems¥the availability of more alternatives¥the volatility of demand¥the rationalization of assets to minimize required investment and maxi-mize return¥the focus on core competenciesMost frequently cited benefits of outsourcing logistics services include(Logistics Best Practices Group, 1997):¥lower costs¥the ability to focus on core businesses¥greater flexibility¥improved expertise/marketing knowledge¥improved customer serviceThe third-party provider industry has grown significantly in size and scopein the past decade. Revenues grew from $10 billion in 1992 to $56.4 billion in
2000 and were projected to grow 15 percent annually through 2003 (Delaney andThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRANSPORTATION, DISTRIBUTION, AND LOGISTICS SERVICES INDUSTRY151Wilson, 2001). A survey in 1991 of the use of third-party provider services bymanufacturers showed that 31 percent of respondents used them; by 1996,
58 percent used them, including about half of the Fortune 500 companies (Logis-
tics Best Practices Group, 1997). Another survey of corporate logistics managers
revealed that the outsourcing of the total supply chain to a third-party provider
cut logistics costs by more than 20 percent in the first year (Masters and La
Londe, 1998). The most frequently used services are warehouse management,
logistics information services, shipment consolidation, rate negotiation, fleet
management/operations, carrier selection, and product returns (Lieb and Randall,
1996). Information technology, sensor technologies, and communication tech-
nologies are essential to all of them.The hardware and communications technologies that capture the data neededto implement sophisticated ERP and APO software are still relatively new re-
sources among integrated-logistics providers. Despite rapid growth in the indus-
try, a significant learning process is under way as industry leaders learn how to
use these tools for competitive advantage, and laggards recognize the inevitabil-
ity of more technology-intensive business. Among industry leaders, the focus is
on the acquisition of information and the effective use of data. Bar coding pro-
vides specific identifiers for items being shipped; wireless communications and,
increasingly, global positioning systems provide real-time data on vehicle loca-
tions. Effective management of these data provides timely information on the
location and progress of shipments, which has greatly improved customer ser-
vice. Perhaps more important, the data can greatly improve efficiency by en-
abling shippers to match vehicles with excess capacity to nearby shipments
headed in the same direction. In the trucking industry, advances in route-planning
software have enabled companies to maximize load levels and meet customer
expectations (Nagarajan et al., 1999).The Internet is providing a medium for accelerating and increasing the extentof these changes. In business-to-business electronic commerce, the Internet could
lead to even tighter integration of supply chains, and all of the logistics software
companies are making their products Internet enabled. As the volume of elec-
tronic commerce increases, there is general agreement in the industry that logis-
tics could mean the difference between success and failure. Some of the leading
users of integrated logistics (e.g., Cisco Systems and Dell Computer) use the
Internet to share information on production schedules, sales, customer orders,
stocks, and other critical production data with their suppliers. For instance, as
soon as a customer places an order on DellÕs web site identifying the specificfeatures being purchased, the order is placed on DellÕs production schedule wheresuppliers can see it and produce the necessary parts. Integrated logistics ensure
that the parts arrive at the production line and that inventory for both Dell and its
suppliers is at a minimum. The savings have been so large that manufacturers in
other industries, from consumer products to automobiles, are exploring ways to
apply the Dell model to their supply-chain management.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.152THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEAs Dell has shown, logistics has become a key determinant of success inbusiness-to-consumer electronic commerce. Even if Internet-based retail has little
effect on the volume of goods shipped, it will vastly multiply destinations (e.g.,
individual residences) and raise customer expectations. The result is much more
complex logistical systems and an urgency to use technology to manage this
complexity profitably. The full implications of the Internet for supply-chain man-
agement and the business-to-customer interface are just emerging. Information
shared among suppliers is replacing physical inventories as the need for produc-
tion buffers diminishes. However, different industries will embrace this change at
different rates based on a number of factors, such as the number of suppliers and
historic relationships in the production chain (Cairncross, 2000).INNOVATION SYSTEMExcept for software companies and some airlines, very few logistics compa-nies conduct R&D. A few of the leading integrated-logistics service providers
conduct a limited amount of internal research and sponsor research at universi-
ties. These firms include Schneider National (trucking), United Parcel Service
and Federal Express (delivery services), CSX and Union Pacific (railroads), and
Sabre/AMR (until 2000) and several major airlines, such as United and USAir
(air transport). A few major industrial firms (e.g., Ford, Raytheon, Lucent Tech-
nologies, and Procter & Gamble) sponsor research at universities. General Mo-
tors, through its Enterprise Laboratory, also supports logistics research. As lead-
ers in their fields, these and other firms play a critical role in the diffusion of
advanced logistics technologies.Most innovations in integrated logistics have come from academic research intransportation/logistics research centers affiliated with university engineering and
business schools and from applied research and product development by software
companies. Relevant research has also been conducted at national laboratories and
transportation centers associated with state departments of transportation.The academic disciplines involved in research on integrated logistics includeapplied mathematics, computer science and engineering, industrial engineering,
operations research, software engineering, materials science, social and behav-
ioral sciences (human factors), and business and management sciences. Aca-
demic research on large-scale optimization models, decomposition methods, in-
teger programming, and network optimization has been extremely valuable to the
integrated-logistics industry. Academic research on the phenomenon of elec-
tronic commerce, in terms of business models and pricing models, has been
crucial to the growth and success of electronic commerce. Economics research on
the structure of the industry and its economies of scale were crucial to the debates
about deregulation. Business schools involved in logistics research and training
tend to focus on the ÒsofterÓ side of logistics (e.g., management and organization)
in contrast to research on software, which is associated with engineering schools.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRANSPORTATION, DISTRIBUTION, AND LOGISTICS SERVICES INDUSTRY153Transportation research institutes with federal, state, and industry supporthave been established at some universities to serve as intermediaries between
academia and industry and to translate research results to industry. These insti-
tutes function primarily as conduits between the academic community and trans-
portation practitioners, adapting technology and research results to meet practi-
tionersÕ needs and giving them a voice in setting research agendas. Most
transportation research centers focus almost exclusively on the movement of
people; only a few (e.g., Logistics Institute at the Georgia Institute of Technol-
ogy, the Center for Transportation Studies at the Massachusetts Institute of Tech-
nology [MIT], Stanford UniversityÕs Global Supply Chain Management Forum,and Princeton UniversityÕs Computational and Stochastic Transportation Logis-tics Engineering [CASTLE] Laboratory) are doing a significant volume of work
related to moving freight (see Box 5-1).BOX 5-1CASTLE Laboratory at Princeton UniversityCASTLE Laboratory develops and directly implements tactical and real-timeoptimization models for freight transportation and logistics. Research focuses onthe development of general tools for dynamic resource transformation and their
adaptation to problems that arise in trucking (truckload [TL] and less-than-truckload [LTL]), rail, and chemical distribution. Tools range from routing andscheduling to fleet management and the forecasting of demand.CASTLE Laboratory was established formally in 1992 to handle a rapidly grow-ing research program with industry. Annual funding of approximately $750,000 isprovided by industry (80 percent) and government (20 percent). Most of the gov-
ernment funds are currently provided by the Air Force Office of Scientific Re-search. Five corporate partners fund research on optimization models and algo-rithms for a class of problems called dynamic resource-transformation problems.
The techniques are then applied by the sponsoring companies.Examples of successful techniques developed by CASTLE Laboratory include:¥A network optimization model developed for Yellow Freight and now used by
most of the LTL industry has been documented to save $17 million annually(widely believed to be a gross underestimate). This model was instrumental in
reducing the number of end of lines in Yellow FreightÕs network from more than650 to fewer than 400 with the same geographic coverage.¥A load-matching system developed for TL motor carriers produced a 10 per-
cent reduction in empties when it was first installed.¥A network model for load profitability reduced the operating ratio at Burlington
Motor Carriers by 10 percent, restoring the company to profitability.¥A major drayage company with more than 400 trucks uses a real-time schedul-
ing system for routing drivers. Savings are estimated to be more than$10 million annually.Source: Warren B. Powell, director, CASTLE Laboratory.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.154THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEA unique academic transportation research center is the Trucking IndustryProgram (TIP), first established in 1995 at the University of Michigan by a major
grant from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation; the center was relocated to the Geor-
gia Institute of Technology in 2002.1 TIP contributes to the understanding of thetrucking industry through a multidisciplinary approach involving faculty and
students from several U.S. universities, including Georgia Tech, the University
of Michigan, Michigan State University, Wayne State University, and Duke Uni-
versity. TIP is the only academic program in the United States engaged in com-prehensive research on issues associated with labor, the firm, and operations and
technology in the trucking industry. TIP is widely known for conducting the most
comprehensive survey ever undertaken of truckers at truck stops across the United
States. The driver survey, which was conducted between August 1997 and Janu-
ary 1999, has substantially improved our understanding of driversÕ work hours
and is often cited for presenting the first accurate portrait of truck drivers, their
quality of life, and their views of the industry.Many academic centers require that member companies fund relevant re-search, provide access to real-world data, and provide sites for implementation.
In some cases, access to research results is restricted to member companies,
which tend to be the leaders among integrated-logistics service providers and
users. At Georgia Tech, member firms pay $50,000 annually to participate, and
individual companies are actively involved in research with academic faculty and
students. Student/faculty teams work on problems defined by one or more com-
panies, and research results are disseminated actively among members. At
Stanford, member firms pay $25,000 to support academic research as part of an
industrial consortium. Members benefit from networking and from student/
faculty teams working on problems of interest to all participants. At MIT, firms
pay $20,000 to share research findings and network but are not directly involved
in research.In addition to research, university transportation research centers also pro-vide executive courses, seminars, and symposia to inform industry of state-of-
the-art academic research and new logistics technologies and to inform faculty
members of the real problems in industries. For example, affiliate companies of
the MIT Center for Transportation Studies come to MIT seven or eight times a
year to review the status of academic research.CONTRIBUTIONS AND IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCHBasic research, some of it done in the 1950s with no logistics applications inmind, has had the greatest impact on integrated logistics. Linear programming
and integer programming have both made major contributions to methodology
(see Box 5-2). Major technological contributions emerged from research on com-
puter science/artificial intelligence, specifically constraint-directed search and
its relatives.2The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRANSPORTATION, DISTRIBUTION, AND LOGISTICS SERVICES INDUSTRY155Applied research has also been important to integrated logistics, especially inthe areas of large-scale optimization modeling, decomposition methods, network
optimization, and other areas of operations research. For example, research at
MIT on models for shippers in the logistics industry includes transportation/
inventory trade-offs and motor-carrier bidding optimization. Software for rout-
ing, production scheduling, and distribution management are examples of high-BOX 5-2CPLEX Optimization, Inc.CPLEX Optimization, Inc., founded in 1987, released its first product, CPLEX1.0, in 1988. (The company was sold to ILOG in 1997.) CPLEX products are basesystems of ÒsimplexÓ optimizers for linear programming, including a special-
purpose network-simplex optimizer. The following add-ons are available:¥mixed integer programming (MIP)¥barrier solver for linear programming¥quadratic solver for convex, quadratic programs¥parallel MIP solver¥parallel barrier solverAll of these optimizers can be considered computational engines that are typ-ically built into other vertical applications.The company emerged from research on integer programming and combinato-rial optimization by Robert Bixby at Rice University. Dr. Bixby wrote the initial
versions of what became CPLEX code as a classroom tool in the mid-1980s. Theinitial impetus for commercialization came shortly thereafter from Tom Baker ofChesapeake Decision Sciences, who began including BixbyÕs code in his MIMI/LPproduct as early as 1985.1 By the time CPLEX Optimization was founded, the
code had undergone steady improvements, mainly in response to increasinglydifficult, real-world problems.Simultaneously but separately, fundamental developments were made in thetheory of integer programming and combinatorial optimization, motivated by thework of Manfred Padberg (New York University), Ellis Johnson (Georgia Tech),
Karla Hoffman (George Mason University), Martin Groetschel (Konrad Zuse Zen-trum, Berlin, Germany), and others. As a result, Dr. Bixby recognized a need for afundamental computational tool that could facilitate the current research in integer
programming and its application. The new tool would be a numerically stable, fast,callable, linear programming solver. Subsequent research led to the developmentof the CPLEX Callable Library, which addressed the so-called traveling salesman
problem. Even though the problem itself was the subject of purely academic re-search with little direct practical applicability, it turned out to be an excellent modelfor the broad range of functionalities that made CPLEX a successful tool for busi-
ness applications.1MIMI is a sophisticated commercial system for expressing mathematical models in oper-ations research.Source: Robert Bixby, professor of computational and applied mathematics, Rice University.
The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.156THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEimpact technologies adopted by industry that were developed by university re-search teams.Academic research on the development of decision support tools, whichrequire a thorough knowledge of available tools and a thorough knowledge of the
industry, has been less transferable. On the one hand, most practitioners cannot
explain problems or devise innovative solutions because they are not aware of the
available technologies. On the other hand, most researchers are not sufficiently
aware of the subtleties of real-world industry problems.University-Industry InteractionModes of interaction between universities and private firms are not industry-specific. Academic research in the TDL industry is disseminated to industry
primarily through graduating students entering the workforce who apply what
they have learned at the university. Most successful employers recognize this
vector of knowledge transfer and try to maximize the expertise of new hires by
providing opportunities for them to contribute to changes in company practices.Other modes of interaction are also important. Member firms in universityresearch centers have a financial stake in the research and an effective interface
with researchers. Industry-sponsored research, the commitment by one or a
small number of companies to support a specific project, is also an effective
method of generating research that benefits industry. Companies are likely to
adopt the research results of projects they have helped develop and funded (or
partly funded).Consulting arrangements for faculty are another method of moving researchresults into the field. Although the relationship between consulting and technol-
ogy transfer is not well documented, faculty consulting provides an obvious
mechanism for generating new practices in industry. It also provides faculty with
much needed exposure to industry problems, which has enormous benefits in
shifting research from interesting but theoretical subjects to useful and applicable
subjects. In logistics, academic consulting has often been a precursor, as well as
a complement, to academically originated software start-up companies. For in-
stance, start-up companies (predominantly software companies) in decision tech-
nology, founded by professors and based on their academic research and consult-
ing, have made significant contributions to innovation in integrated logistics. The
special role of spin-off companies is described below, and an example is given
in Box 5-3.Presentations at conferences with extensive industry participation, such
as the conferences sponsored by the major operations-research/logistics-
management professional societies (e.g., Institute for Operations Research and
Management Science, the Council on Logistics Management, the International
Society of Logistics), and other organizations are also an important vector for
communicating academic research results to industry.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRANSPORTATION, DISTRIBUTION, AND LOGISTICS SERVICES INDUSTRY157As professional education in logistics management, in the form of shortcourses, increases, it could encourage the use of, and demand for, new logistics
tools. The technology transfer via these courses is generally minimal. They ex-
pose practitioners to new technologies and ideas but generally provide little
information on how to use them effectively.All of these mechanisms of knowledge transfer show that closer ties betweencompanies and universities are necessary for industry to reap the maximum ben-
efit from academic research. Programs like MITÕs Corporate Affiliates Programand Georgia TechÕs Leaders in Logistics are reasonably good avenues of knowl-edge transfer because they provide for continuity of participation and a long-term
learning process for faculty as well as industry. The panel believes that many
faculty members focus on solving nonexistent problems, not because they are
poor researchers, but because they do not understand the real-world problems
faced by industry. This problem can usually be overcome if faculty members are
given sufficient opportunities to interact with industry.Spin-off CompaniesThe creation of new companies based on research results is an importantmechanism for commercializing academic research results and increasing theirBOX 5-3Princeton Transportation Consulting GroupPrinceton Transportation Consulting Group (PTCG) was founded in 1987 byDrs. Cape, Powell, and Sheffi, faculty members at Princeton University and theMassachusetts Institue of Technology.1 PTCG was started by implementing Drs.
Powell and SheffiÕs consulting practice, which was based on their university re-search. The company, which provides decision support systems for truckload (TL)and less-than-truckload (LTL) carriers, is the leading provider of real-time TL dis-
patching software and LTL load-planning software to the motor carrier industry. Italso provides systems to the logistics industry for inbound transportation withmultiple plants and distribution centers and optimization-based bidding software.
This software was developed from Dr. SheffiÕs research at MIT and was inspiredby his experience with bidding transportation services through LogiCorp. Basedon experience, he was able to identify a new category of optimization software and
develop a new approach. The solution was later developed into an application byPTCG and is now used by dozens of large manufacturers and retailers throughoutthe United States, Europe, and the Far East.1In 1996, the company was acquired by Sabre (at the time a subsidiary of AMR, owner ofAmerican Airlines) and became its Boston office. In 2000, Dr. Sheffi bought SabreÕs logisticsassets to form Logistics.com.Source: Yossi Sheffi, codirector, Center for Transportation and Logistics, Massachusetts Insti-tute of TechnologyThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.158THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEimpact on industry. The case studies prepared for this report describe companiesstarted by university professors; these are primarily software companies for imple-
menting products or services developed through research and consulting.3 One of
the case histories is summarized in Box 5-4.In the field of integrated logistics, most start-up companies involve deci-sion support systems (routing and scheduling), optimization software, traffic
network analysis, third-party logistics companies, and consulting services.
Georgia TechÕs Logistics Institute, MITÕs Center for Transportation Studies,BOX 5-4AD OPT Technologies, Inc.Headquartered in Montr”al, Canada, AD OPT Technologies was founded in1987 by professor Fran“ois Soumis (…cole Polytechnique de Montr”al) and fourprogrammers from two university research centers in Montr”al: Groupe dÕ”tudeset de recherche en analyse des decisions (GERAD) and Centre de recherche surle transport (CRT). AD OPT currently employs 100 people and had revenues of
$15 million in 2001.As a spin-off of GERAD and CRT, AD OPT is an example of the commercial-ization of university research results. The company continues to maintain close
ties with universities in Montr”al through personnel, sponsored research, andgraduate hirings. Fran“ois Soumis of …cole Polytechnique de Montr”al, acofounder of AD OPT, and Jacques Desrosiers of …cole des Hautes …tudesCommerciales, who joined AD OPT in 1992, supervise the GENCOL team atGERAD. GENCOL, an acronym for G…N”ration de COLonnes, embodies theprinciples of the column-generation solution method that was developed to solve
large-scale complex problems. The system can be modeled so that solutionscorrespond to the set of paths found in vehicle routing and crew scheduling.Since GENCOLÕs conception in 1981, it has evolved continually through the re-search of many graduate students and computer analysts. This program is theresult of an enormous amount of work funded largely by grants and industrycontracts. The sale of products based on the GENCOL optimizer represent more
than 60 percent of AD OPTÕs turnover. The present and future growth of thecompany are directly related to research at GERAD.Initially AD OPT Technologies provided consulting services to optimize opera-tions of open-pit mines and the routing of propane delivery trucks. In the early1990s, the company began to focus on product development and scheduling ofairline crews. The ALTITUDE Crew Pairing system was the first product devel-
oped and marketed by AD OPT. Crew rostering (Preferential Bidding and Bidline)systems followed. ShiftLogic, a shift scheduling and management tool, resultedfrom work done for NavCanada on a tool for scheduling air traffic controllers
throughout Canada. Today, AD OPT continues to invest heavily in research anddevelopment to maintain its leadership and technological advantage in airline andpersonnel scheduling systems for air traffic control and other vertical markets,
such as ambulance, police, firemen, 911, nurses, and doctors.Source: Jacques Desrosiers, professor, Department of Management Sciences, and memberof the Group for Research on Decision Analysis, Ecole des HEC Montr”al.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRANSPORTATION, DISTRIBUTION, AND LOGISTICS SERVICES INDUSTRY159and PrincetonÕs CASTLE Laboratory have served as incubators/support net-works for start-up founders, who received feedback from other university re-
searchers and/or companies working on real-world logistics issues and prob-
lems (see Box 5-5). Once a new company is created, graduate students are
usually hired to pursue further development of software products. Based on the
accumulated knowledge, problem-solving skills, and expertise of professors
and students, the software is tailored to solve a customerÕs problems. Consider-ing the success of many of these start-up companies, the impact on industry of
academic research commercialized in this manner has been substantial. In many
cases, larger companies eventually acquire the start-up companies, thus provid-
ing more resources for continued product development and more exten-

sive marketing.BOX 5-5CAPS LogisticsCAPS Logistics was founded in 1979 by Don Ratliff and John Jarvis, profes-sors of industrial and systems engineering at Georgia Institute of Technology. The
company provides three families of decision-support software for supply-chain lo-gistics: supply-chain design and coordination, shipment planning, and dedicatedfleet management. CAPS has 120 full-time employees; revenue totaled more than
$15 million in 1998, when the company was sold to Dutch-based enterprise soft-ware giant Baan.Much of the methodology implemented in CAPS software was developedthrough academic research. Many of the concepts for integrating interactive map-based graphics with network optimization emerged from research at Georgia Tech.The network optimization concepts were developed at a variety of universities,
including Georgia Tech and MIT. The research at Georgia Tech was funded by acombination of military funding agencies, NSF, and private companies participat-ing in the Leaders in Logistics Program. CAPS software would not have been
possible without this research.CAPS also has benefited directly from federal support for logistics research. In1985, CAPS received a Phase 1, and later a Phase 2, Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) grant from the Office of Naval Research to develop concepts fora Òlogistics tool kitÓ that could be used to develop flexible logistics software. This
became the CAPS Logistics Toolkit, which evolved into the foundation for CAPS
software. CAPS received six other SBIR Phase 1 grants but, because of matchingrequirements, particularly from NSF, was not able to obtain Phase 2 funding forany of them. Therefore, additional development and transfer of the technology had
to be funded internally. This research was focused primarily on making the tech-nology easy to use by nontechnical people. CAPS currently has more than1,000 software installations. The users are primarily Fortune 200 companies.Source: Donald Ratliff, RegentsÕ Professor and UPS Professor of Logistics, and director,
Logistics Institute, Georgia Institute of Technology.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.160THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCESources of FundingBoth industry and government provide funding for academic research inlogistics, although federal funding for basic research has decreased recently. The
U.S. Department of Defense has historically supported most of the basic research
relevant to integrated logistics; as defense budgets have decreased, these funds
have become increasingly difficult to obtain. The Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA), which funds a considerable amount of applied re-
search in logistics, directs most of its funding to consulting firms and very little to
academia. The Defense Logistics Agency (DLA), which is a member organiza-
tion of university logistics centers, such as the Logistics Institute at the Univer-
sity of Arkansas, provides limited funding for academic research, as does the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). For example, the FAA funds the Na-
tional Center of Excellence for Aviation Operations Research at the University of
California at Berkeley and MIT.Historically, the National Science Foundation (NSF) has funded researchrelevant to logistics in mathematics and industrial engineering, but logistics-
related research has not been a priority. In 2001, however, NSF created the
Center for Engineering Logistics and Distribution (CELDi), a multiuniversity,
multidisciplinary industry/university cooperative research center based at the
University of Arkansas, University of Oklahoma, University of Louisville, and
Oklahoma State University. Research is driven by, and sponsored by, member
organizations, which include manufacturing, maintenance, distribution, transpor-
tation, information technology, and consulting companies. CELDi emerged in
2001 from the Material Handling Research Center (founded in 1982) and the
Logistics Institute at the University of Arkansas (established in 1994) to provide
integrated solutions to logistics problems through research using modeling, analy-
sis, and intelligent systems technologies.Perhaps the most significant source of federal funding in TDL research comesfrom the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) through its University Trans-
portation Centers (UTC) Program. The Transportation Equity Act for the 21st
Century (P.L. 105-178) of 1998 authorized up to $194.8 million for grants to
establish and operate as many as 33 UTCs throughout the United States. In addition
to emphasizing the educational role of universities, the program funds basic and
applied research to advance the body of knowledge in transportation. All UTCs are
required to match federal funds dollar for dollar; state departments of transportation
typically provide the match. Some UTC focus areas are listed below:¥intelligent transportation systems¥advanced technologies in transportation operations and management¥advanced infrastructure and transportation¥advanced transportation simulation¥advanced transportation technologyThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRANSPORTATION, DISTRIBUTION, AND LOGISTICS SERVICES INDUSTRY161Industry funding of TDL research is limited and concentrated in a handful ofthe biggest logistics research centers. Projects funded by industry, which can be
either proprietary or generic (i.e., results can be published), cover a wide range of
topics, from the movement and tracking of material in a factory to the distribution
of finished goods to global markets to the scheduling of aircraft and crews for
airlines. (The case studies provide some insight into the commercial applications
of logistics technologies and research conducted to refine solutions to commer-
cial problems.)ImpedimentsAlthough the contribution of academic research to the emergence of sophis-ticated integrated logistics management and optimization tools has been signifi-
cant, and the resulting decreases in operating costs and improvements in effi-
ciency have been high, very little public or private funding is available for
fundamental research in logistics. A critical mass of funding tends to be concen-
trated in academic logistics institutes where member companies help to define
and then participate in research projects. However, industry participation some-
times creates tensions between academic researchers and industry managers who
may have conflicting objectives for collaborative projects. Industry wants timely
solutions to practical problems, while academics want to conduct valid, prefer-
ably Ònovel,Ó research with publishable results. For instance, stable, easy-to-use
logistics software tools may be a high priority for industry sponsors but may be
less appealing to researchers than refining and perfecting existing tools or devel-
oping new tools.An infrastructure for logistics research has not been fully developed. Diag-nostic tools for the complex software used in logistics applications have only
recently emerged. Because there are no common data sets, data must be gathered
from industry for each project. If the data are considered proprietary, a company
may refuse to provide them. Libraries of test data sets on small mathematical
problems have been developed, but not on large problems of logistics. As a result,
researchers often do not have access to data, and certainly not consistent data, on
which to base experiments.Areas for Future ResearchIn general, the TDL industry is becoming more sophisticated. Continuedprogress in the implementation of ERP and related software tools and the devel-
opment of a stronger information technology infrastructure will result in the
accumulation of better and more extensive data, which, in turn, will enable the
development and implementation of more sophisticated decision-support tools,
which are likely to be developed through academic research. Universities might
also assume a larger role in the training/retraining of technically sophisticated
logistics managers in the use of new tools.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.162THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEAcademic research might have a larger impact in the area of linkages be-tween manufacturing and transportation, especially as companies continue to try
to reduce inventories, transport costs, and time through integrated supply-chain
management. Another fruitful area for research would be the development and
use of optimization procedures for the macrolevel coordination of the supply
chain, such as the allocation and scheduling of activities among plants, ware-
houses, and transportation channels. For example, a production schedule that
would mean low manufacturing costs might increase transportation costs. Be-
cause these costs are incurred (and measured) by different departments, manufac-
turers may not take transport costs into consideration in their planning. As long as
companies had buffers (time and/or inventory) to decouple these processes, this
was not much of a problem, but it will certainly become a major problem soon.
Forecasting transportation demand is becoming increasingly important, and ca-
pacity planning by carriers will have to be even more rigorous to account for
uncertainties/variabilities in demand.University research could play a larger role in other areas, such as the inte-gration of planning and operations, the development of information technology to
support order placement, the development of information technology to support
the coordination and scheduling of the movement of goods, and consumer re-
search. For instance, with the availability of real-time information (e.g., current
inventory levels at retail stores; current traffic information), models of sequential
decision making under uncertainty may become a basis for logistics tools in the
future. Research in these areas would be Òengineering researchÓ (i.e., research
focused on bringing technologies to bear on industry problems for which few
principles or laws exist). Transportation and logistics security has become a
critical issue that will also pose important research questions in the future: for
example, how to improve the security of systems while continuing to improve, or
at least maintain, their efficiency.FINDINGSFinding 5-1.  The contributions of academic research to integrated logistics have
been significant in areas of basic research as well as in the development and
application of specific software technologies. However, academic research on
logistics and technologies has had a moderate impact on the transportation, distri-
bution, and logistics industry overall.Except for the involvement of member companies in academic logistics-research institutes, no institutionalized methods of technology transfer from uni-
versities to the TDL industry have been established. Most high-impact academic
research in operations and decision-support sciences can be attributed to faculty
members who either translated their research findings into software commercial-
ized through a start-up company or who were closely involved with a specificThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRANSPORTATION, DISTRIBUTION, AND LOGISTICS SERVICES INDUSTRY163company in the industry. For the latter route to be effective, the host companymust be sophisticated enough to be receptive to innovative research, and the
researcher must be familiar with the specific needs of the company. Industries
that have been most influenced by academic research are airlines, manufacturers
that operate private truck fleets, less-than-truckload and truckload motor carriers,
and software companies.Without a strong tie to industry, academic research tends to be disconnectedto the needs of industry. The academic imperative that researchers publish their
work often creates barriers to their addressing real industrial needs using real
industrial data. Research problems that could lead to publishable results may be
far too complex for companies to benefit from the results. For these reasons, the
commercialization of results through start-up companies may continue to be the
most effective pathway for academic research to affect industry performance.Finding 5-2.  Federal funding agencies have not recognized logistics as a sepa-
rate intellectual discipline and thus have not funded long-range, potentially high-
impact academic research in the field.The DOT, primarily through the University Transportation Centers Program,funds some research relevant to logistics. NSF provides some funds for programs
that bring industry and academia together in the logistics area (e.g., CELDi, the
multiuniversity industry-university cooperative research center formed in 2001).
In addition, NSF has launched a modest initiative, Exploratory Research on Engi-
neering in the Transport Industries, that specifically addresses logistics and
supply-chain management. Although some NSF-funded research has benefited
airlines that contributed matching funds, NSFÕs funding for research in logisticshas been minimal. In the past DOD (particularly the Office of Naval Research
and the Air Force Office of Scientific Research) funded logistics as a discipline,
but the funds are now focused more on mathematics research. DARPA has an
extensive applied research program in logistics, but funding has been directed
mostly toward consulting companies rather than universities.Finding 5-3.  The two most influential factors on the industry are (1) the explo-
sive growth of information technology and complementary disciplines and
(2) deregulation of the freight industries.Finding 5-4.  Most companies are still in the process of adopting and implement-
ing information systems and acquiring data from the new systems. The next wave
of innovation will be to apply the data to optimization models to support
decision-making capabilities.Decision-support software can be divided into two categories: (1) theautomation of transactions to increase productivity and improve quality,
and, in the process, create and collect data; and (2) the optimization of
management decisions based on these data. Most companies have been in theThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.164THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEinformation-acquisition stage for some time and have accumulated largequantities of accurate, real-time data. Optimization and decision-making sup-
port tools could be used to translate these data into information that could
lead to higher profits and competitive advantage.Finding 5-5.  Except for airlines, few companies in the TDL industry conduct
their own research, and those that do are primarily interested in development
rather than research.Airlines have not only invested in their own research, but have also demon-strated their support for academic research by funding research projects and
participating in logistics-research institutes. Most other TDL firms have not
yet realized the value of R&D for increasing efficiency and establishing a com-
petitive advantage. These companies have a long history of adopting low-
technology, manual-intensive business models. Even the competitive demands
of the industry have not yet created a significant demand for research. Most
research, therefore, has influenced them through software developments, either
by existing software firms or new start-up companies.Finding 5-6.  Providers of logistics software are undergoing rapid consolidation.
Consolidation in the logistics software industry has narrowed the range ofindustry-research interfaces resulting in fewer spin-off companies. Consolida-
tions may eventually create economic units large enough to support more
basic research.Finding 5-7.  The lack of industry demand for research and research-based
innovations has made it difficult for academic researchers to identify useful,
high-priority problems.The absence of organized interactions between academia and industry re-flects the general lack of an organized innovation system in the logistics industry.
Most academic researchers have little incentive to work with industry or to un-
derstand industry issues. Because NSF and other funding agencies do not recog-
nize logistics as a discipline, academics are reluctant to go into the field. The lack
of interest on the part of industry, particularly the lack of corporate R&D depart-
ments to provide an interface with researchers, reinforces this reluctance.Finding 5-8.  Research important to industry requires researchers who under-
stand the industry and the subtleties of the problems industry faces.The experience of company-supported logistics institutes has demonstratedthe importance of having a critical mass of academic researchers who thoroughly
understand both the problems industry faces and the academic methodologies
needed to solve them. Although these research subjects meet rigorous academic
criteria and address the real needs of industry, much more work will have to be
done to encourage industry interest in academic research.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRANSPORTATION, DISTRIBUTION, AND LOGISTICS SERVICES INDUSTRY165Finding 5-9.  Transportation-research institutes have the potential to improve
industry-university interaction significantly. MITÕs Center for TransportationResearch, Georgia TechÕs Logistics Institute, StanfordÕs Global Supply ChainManagement Forum, and PrincetonÕs CASTLE Laboratory have shown that theycan improve the transfer of information between academia and industry.Historically, these four centers have accounted for most industry-relatedlogistics research in academia; all four rely on industry participation and funding.
With NSF support, CELDi continues this model, requiring industry participation
but in a multiuniversity context. The effectiveness of these institutes is a function
of their critical mass of academic researchers who can interact effectively with
industry. The continuity of industry participation in research, outreach, network-
ing, and continuing education has initiated a two-way learning process.RECOMMENDATIONSThe flow of people between academic research and industry must be greatlyincreased. The panel recommends that the following steps be taken to further
this end.Recommendation 5-1.  Academia should develop better curricula and programs
in logistics to attract student, faculty, and industry interest. This will require
changes in the incentive and reward systems to encourage qualified researchers to
work in the field.Recommendation 5-2.  Industry should establish sabbaticals in industry, full-
time or part-time teaching by industry practitioners in universities, and other
programs that would promote university-industry interactions.NOTES1TIP moved in 2002 when the director, Dr. Chelsea C. White, joined the faculty of the School ofIndustrial and Systems Engineering (ISyE) at the Georgia Institute of Technology.2Constraint-directed search is one of a class of constraint-satisfaction problems in artificial intel-ligence in which knowledge is expressed declaratively as a collection of explicit, categorical con-straints over a set of possibilities.3Companies profiled include LogiCorp, Inc., PTCG, Inc., CAPS Logistics, CPLEXOptimization, Inc., AD OPT Technologies, Inc., Transport Dynamics, Inc., STS, and CambridgeSystematics, Inc.REFERENCESBelman, D., and K. Monaco. 2001. The effects of deregulation, de-unionization, technology andhuman capital on the work and work lives of truck drivers. Industrial and Labor RelationsReview 54(2A): 502Ð524.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.166THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCECairncross, F. 2000. Inside the machine: a survey of e-management. The Economist, Supplement357(8196): 5Ð40.Cass Information Systems. 1999. Wall StreetÕs View of Logistics. Annual Session of the Council ofLogistics Management, Toronto, Ontario, October 18, 1999.Delaney, R., and R. Wilson. 2001. Managing Logistics in a Perfect Storm. 12th Annual State ofLogistics Report. Washington, D.C.: Cass Information Systems.Deloitte Consulting. 1999a. Energizing the Supply Chain: Trends and Issues in Supply Chain Man-agement. New York: Deloitte Consulting.Deloitte Consulting. 1999b. Leveraging the e-Business Marketplace. New York: Deloitte Con-sulting.Lieb, R.C., and H. Randall. 1996. A Comparison of the Use of Third-Party Logistics Services byLarge American Manufacturers, 1991, 1994, 1995, and 1996. Lexington, Mass.: Mercer Man-agement Consulting.Logistics Best Practices Group. 1997. Survey on Logistics Outsourcing Practices. College Park, Md.:University of Maryland Press.Masters, J., and B. La Londe. 1998. The 1997 Ohio State University Survey of Career Patterns inLogistics. Columbus, Ohio: Ohio State University Press.Nagarajan, A., J.L. Bander, and C.C. White III. 1999. Trucking. Pp. 123Ð153 in U.S. Industry in2000: Studies in Competitive Performance. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.Siebel Systems, Inc. 2002. Annual Report 2002. Available online at: http://www.siebel.com/common/includes/pdf_frame.shtm?pdfurl=/downloads/about/pdf/siebel_2002_annualrpt.pdf.Thomas, J. 1998. The Quest Continues. Logistics Management and Distribution Report 37(8): 39Ð41.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.167ADDENDUMQuestionnaireThe following questionnaire was sent to selected individuals, primarily uni-versity-based researchers, with special knowledge of the transportation, distribu-
tion, and logistics industry. Included among the questionnaire respondents were a
senior executive at the Sabre Group and professors with expertise in operations
research, applied mathematics, industrial engineering, transportation research,
and integrated logistics from Georgia Institute of Technology, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Northwestern University, Princeton University, Univer-
sity of Maryland, and Universite de Montr”al.IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIALPERFORMANCE1. Briefly describe research carried out in your university that has had animpact on integrated chain logistics within the transportation, distribution, and
logistics services (TDL) industry.1  If possible, please provide information aboutthe nature of specific research contributions; the level of faculty, student, and
industrial researcher involvement; the research time frame; sources and level of
funding; how research results were transferred (specific steps) to the industry,
and whether the research had implications for companies and industries beyond
the specific company or industry involved.2. Please describe briefly any other academic research they you believe hashad a notable impact on the TDLS industry. (See suggested issues/items in subtext
to question #1.)3. Overall, would you describe the impact of academic research on industrialperformance in the TDLS industry as (circle one):1.  very large

2.  large

3.  medium

4.  small

5.  very small/non-existent
1The NAE panel defines the TDLS industry as encompassing all businesses involved in thetransportation and storage of goods and the movement of people. Its constituent parts include: carri-ers, third party logistics firms, management consulting firms, terminal and distribution firms, ware-housing companies, shipping companies, software providers, and major customers/retailers. The
focus of the NAE panel study, however, is on the contributions of academic research to integratedchain logistics and associated activities, technologies, and methodologies that cut across the TDLSindustryÕs many constituent parts.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.168THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCE4. Briefly describe significant emerging trends or developments inthe TDLS industry in which university research could or should play a larger role.5. What are the most important actions universities could taketo enhance the contributions of academic research to performance in
the industry?6. What are the most important actions companies could taketo enhance the contributions of academic research to performance in
the industry?7. What are the most important actions government could taketo enhance the contributions of academic research to performance in
the industry?8. What is your estimate of total annual research dollars spent at yourinstitution on academic research related to the TDLS industry?  What shares of

the total would you estimate are funded by government, industry, or
other sources?9. Other comments?The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRANSPORTATION, DISTRIBUTION, AND LOGISTICS SERVICES INDUSTRY169Industrial Roundtable Agendas and Participant ListsINFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN THE LOGISTICS,TRANSPORTATION, AND DISTRIBUTION INDUSTRYA ROUNDTABLE DISCUSSIONOctober 12, 1998Radisson Hotel, Maingate AnaheimAnaheim, CaliforniaRoundtable Agenda6:00WelcomeChris Lofgren, Schneider National, Inc.IntroductionDon Ratliff, Georgia Institute of Technology6:10Roundtable ParticipantsSelf-introduction; major technology needs and trends
in the workplace7:10Group DiscussionDecision Support Systems: current and future trends and needs8:00Session Wrap-Up and AdjournChris LofgrenParticipants
Industry ExpertsChair: Chris Lofgren, Chief Technical Officer, Schneider National, Inc.
Christopher Caplice, Senior Consultant, The Sabre Group
Virginia Carmon, Senior Manager, KPMG Peat Marwick LLP
Bernard Hale, Senior Vice President Customer Support, DSC Logistics
Thomas Sanderson, President, Sabre Decision Technologies
Jay Mabe, Associate Partner, Andersen Consulting
John Coyle, Kimberly Clark CorporationNAE Panel Members:H. Donald Ratliff, Regents Professor and UPS Professor of Logistics andDirector, Logistics Institute, Georgia Institute of TechnologyThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.170THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCECynthia Barnhart, Associate Professor, Civil and Environmental EngineeringDepartment, Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyRobert E. Bixby, Professor, Department of Computational and AppliedMathematics, Rice UniversityNAE StaffDiane Alberts, NAE Fellow, Program Office
Proctor Reid, Associate Director, Program Office
Nathan Kahl, Project Assistant, Program OfficeCHALLENGES AND TRENDS IN THE LOGISTICS,TRANSPORTATION AND DISTRIBUTION INDUSTRYA ROUNDTABLE DISCUSSIONOctober 13, 1998Radisson Hotel, Maingate AnaheimAnaheim, CaliforniaRoundtable AgendaWelcome and Opening RemarksProfessor H. Don Ratliff (Georgia Institute of Technology) and
Professor Cynthia Barnhart (Massachusetts Institute of Technology)Self-introduction of Roundtable Participants:Describe your job and three major challenges that you currently face.
Specific questions to focus your thoughts:1.What are your thoughts on the changing nature of the logistics business?
2.What are the current and future technology needs of your business?

3.Name the most important technological innovation in your business in the
recent past?4.Do you interact with / turn to colleagues at universities to help meet your
business challenges? If so, how? If not, why not?5.What is an important emerging trend in the LTD industry?

6.What are your human capital needs? What are challenges?
List of ParticipantsIndustry Experts:Don Schneider (chair), President, Schneider National, Inc.
Doug Duszynski, Director of Transportation, The Quaker Oats CompanyThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRANSPORTATION, DISTRIBUTION, AND LOGISTICS SERVICES INDUSTRY171Wayne Power, Director, Global Logistics, Owens CorningVince Chiodo, Director of Supply Chain Management, CHEP USA
Hank Dehne, Manager of Logistics Distribution & Planning, General MillsNAE Panel Members:H. Donald Ratliff, Regents Professor and UPS Professor of Logistics andDirector, Logistics Institute, Georgia Institute of TechnologyCynthia Barnhart, Associate Professor, Civil and Environmental EngineeringDepartment, Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyRobert E. Bixby, Professor, Department of Computational and AppliedMathematics, Rice UniversityNAE Program Office Staff:Proctor Reid, Associate Director
Diane Alberts, NAE J. Herbert Holloman Fellow
Nathan Kahl, Project AssistantThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6Report of the Panel on the
Financial Services IndustryThe Panel on the Financial Services Industry comprised six members, in-cluding one NAE member from industry, two other members from industry, and
three members from academia. Three of the panel members were also members
of the parent committee. The panel reviewed the literature and sent a question-
naire to experts in academia, the financial services industry, and government. The
questionnaire was followed by a workshop attended by 21 senior individuals in
the financial services sector (see Addendum).Financial services are the foundation of a modern economy. They providemechanisms for assigning value, exchanging payment, and determining and dis-
tributing risk, and they provide the essential underpinnings of global economic
activity. The financial services industry encompasses banking, insurance, equity
markets and brokerage houses, leasing, venture capital, and personal and com-
mercial credit. The industry provides the wherewithal for the capital investment
that drives innovation and productivity growth throughout the economy. As the
economy has become larger, more global, and more complex, the industry has
become increasingly innovative in delivering products and services.The scope of the financial services industry is enormous:¥U.S. financial institutions process more than $9 trillion per day, approxi-
mately equivalent to the U.S. gross domestic product (GDP) in 2001.¥Daily average trading volume on the New York Stock Exchange was
more than one billion shares in 2000.¥Commercial banks in the United States hold more than $6 trillion in assets
(Federal Reserve, 2002).173The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.174THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCE¥The annual global life insurance market is more than $1.2 trillion inwritten annual premiums; the United States accounts for 24 percent of this
total. Other kinds of insurance total more than $900 billion in annual
policies; the United States accounts for 40 percent.¥The U.S. savings and loan industry holds more than $1 trillion in assets.¥The industry employed nearly 6 million people in 2000 (U.S. Bureau ofthe Census, 2002).Financial services has long been perceived as a staid, conservative industry.However, the growth of information technology and global competition has driven
the industry to embrace rapid technological advances and innovation. Informa-
tion technologies, the Internet, risk modeling, and the creation of new markets in
derivatives and other financial instruments have accelerated the pace and volume
and increased the efficiency of financial transactions, at the same time driving the
industry to make significant investments in new technologies. For instance, fi-
nancial services firms account for more than 60 percent of investments in infor-
mation technology in the United States. Hence, highly technically trained experts
have become increasingly important to the industry.These trends have also led to an increase in competition and a blurring of thedefinition of financial institutions. Financial services firms are involved in leasing (GE
Capital Corporation is perhaps the leading example), personal credit (e.g., AT&TÕsentry into and subsequent exit from the credit card business)1 and other activities that
were once the preserve of commercial banks. With the virtual elimination of interstate
banking restrictions and mergers of firms from disparate parts of the industry, consoli-
dations have proliferated in the banking industry. The end of the Glass-Steagall Act of
1933, which prohibited banks from accepting deposits and underwriting securities and
established the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the constant entry of new
domestic and global competitors, have created an industry subject to continuous redefi-
nition and restructuring. Technologies and services for institutions and individual inves-
tors on a national and global scale are now widely available.The consequences of rapid innovation, continuous restructuring, and on-going regulatory changes have been largely beneficial to the U.S. economy and
society. However, these trends have also had some negative consequences. Some
innovations have been credited with having a destabilizing effect on financial
markets leading to ÒfailuresÓ that have been very costly to the industry in both
dollars and public trust. For example, the application of derivative pricing for-
mulas (developed by academics) in the large global hedge fund, Long Term
Capital Management, was implicated in the fundÕs near collapse in 1998.DEFINITION OF THE INDUSTRYBecause new players have entered the field from areas not traditionallyassociated with the industry, and firms already in the industry are expandingThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINANCIAL SERVICES INDUSTRY175their services to encompass different parts of the business, a narrow definitionwould not be useful. The adoption of new technologies to provide new services
and existing services in innovative, more convenient ways further complicates
efforts to define the boundaries of the industry. Defining the industry using
specific companies or current participants as examples may also be some-

what misleading.Therefore, the panel decided to approach a definition from two directions.The first is based on a functional view of financial services, which is perhaps
the most useful way to examine how and why the industry is changing. In the
functional view, most financial services or processes can be divided into two
broad categories: (1) the packaging and description of securities; and (2) the
facilitation of trade. Each function poses very different questions for aca-

demic researchers.The second approach is to examine changes in the industry over time sinceabout 1980, when it still resembled the traditional industry, which was dominated
by commercial and investment banks, insurance companies, and brokerage
houses. Transitions in the industry can then be assessed by comparing the indus-
try in 2002 with the 1980 version. The characteristics of the industry in the near
future can be suggested based on current trends. This approach provides a sense
of the changes taking place in the industry over time.Functional ViewThe first function of the financial services industry is the packaging anddescription of securities for consumers and businesses. This function spans a
wide range of core services, from the mundane, such as providing savings
accounts, certificates of deposit, and insurance for consumers, to the esoteric
repackaging of risk for large corporations, such as security bundling, (e.g.,
mutual funds and mortgages). Recently, repackaging services have been mar-
keted like real goods that are manufactured by a factory and brought to the
attention of consumers by a marketer. In the complex world of finance, the
industry must also play an advisory role. In fact, many firms focus more on
advising investors than on selling securities, although the recent weakness in
the stock markets and the wave of auditing scandals have made this function
more difficult.The second major function of financial services is facilitating trades, orhelping implement transactions. Financial service firms have always played a key
role in moving trades involving actual goods and services or financial products
through the economy. A simple example of this type of activity is the interest-free
checking account: the bank provides standard check-clearing functions to help
consumers and businesses make trades but does modify the securities that are
traded. Other examples of transactional services are automated teller machines
(ATMs), foreign exchange, and debit cards.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.176THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEChanging Nature of Financial ServicesUntil 1980, the financial services industry could be divided into four distinctcategories: commercial banking, investment banking, insurance, and investment
management. Applying the functional definitions to these categories is relatively
easy. Commercial banking served both functions, but the other three primarily
packaged securities and advised customers. Full-service brokerage houses per-
formed advisory and transactional roles.The financial services industry in 2002 is in a state of continuous change, andpinning down exactly what is happening is very difficult. Many outside forces are
at work, including macroeconomic changes and globalization, technological in-
novation, competitive pressures, evolving regulatory climates, and specific events
in the market. Given that financial services are really almost entirely information,
the most powerful force for change is in information technology, especially the
emergence of networks, such as proprietary information networks that deliver up-
to-the-minute financial information, greatly facilitating financial transactions.
The astounding impact of advances in information technology is immediately
apparent when the amount of money moved, the number of shares traded, or the
speed of transactions are compared with the same figures for the early 1980s.Technological changes are intertwined with other forces, especially changesin domestic and international regulation, which are transforming many parts of
the industry. The number of traditional companies is decreasing because of con-
solidations, which are also bringing firms together from disparate parts of the
industry to form new entities. The increase in global linkages means that few
financial service firms are immune to macroeconomic events that spill over na-
tional borders. Both of these trendsÑconsolidation and globalizationÑhaveraised questions about the stability and safety of traditional financial services
firms and the ability of regulators to oversee them.Because of changes in industry structure, regulatory environments, the scopeof services, and technological capabilities, the boundaries of the current financial
services industry are very difficult to define, and may be even more difficult to
define in the future. New firms that are not in the conventional circle of financial
services are providing traditional functions. Examples can be found in
e-commerce, where new entrants include firms that heretofore were associated
with computer software and hardware and entirely new web-based start-up com-
panies. Both of these transaction and information service providers are outside
the traditional realm of commercial banking but provide many of the same ser-
vices. Note, however, that by regulation, commercial banks are the ultimate
providers of money in all forms. A similar situation has arisen with new and
potential providers of electronic money.Electronic commerce is not the only area pushing the boundaries of financialservices. The bundling and repackaging of securities is more extensive than ever
before in areas that are not obviously related to financial products. For instance,The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINANCIAL SERVICES INDUSTRY177new musical recordings are ÒsecuritizedÓ to spread the risk if sales of a recording
are poor and the rewards if the recording is a hit. Other kinds of securities also
blur the boundaries. An investment bank might issue options on physical events,
such as earthquakes, which have been the province of insurance companies. The
growing areas of equipment leasing and risk management are also difficult to
classify; they include many services provided by actuaries, accountants, and
other consultants whose activities are difficult to classify along traditional lines.The industry today includes many nontraditional functions, such as retailersales, software development, network management, and key functions in the
consumer industry. In general, these innovations have radically changed the key
financial players. Many firms whose primary line of business is unrelated to
financial services are integrating financial capabilities into their traditional busi-
ness offerings to provide innovative business approaches. This trend is especially
prevalent in the world of e-commerce and Internet business. Also, core parts of
the industry, such as consumer banking, are now facing competition from compa-
nies that historically had nothing to do with financial services.As consumers are increasingly able to make investment decisions them-selves, the industry is being forced to adapt. The government and others have
been encouraging people to take more control of their long-term financial needs,
and consumers are now more active in their long-range investment planning. The
Internet has enabled firms to deliver detailed financial information and advice
directly to consumersÕ homes. Indeed, unlike the old 
Òtransaction-basedÓ rela-
tionships, financial advice has become a key factor in the establishment of endur-
ing relationships with clients. This combination has opened new areas of invest-
ment advising, and new players have entered the field, ranging from simple web
sites that provide stock quotes to complete data and software services provided
by firms like Quicken and Microsoft.2The shape of the industry in 5 to 10 years is difficult to predict. Change islikely to continue, and the industry is likely to become increasingly commodity
oriented with an emphasis on the development of relationship-based interactions
with customers. Future participants are likely to have more direct contact with
consumers, who, in turn, will have more choices to make. To meet the needs of
consumers, the industry is likely to be under great pressure to use more sophisti-
cated marketing approaches. Financial services are likely to be provided in chunks
corresponding to certain functions, and overlaps with other services are likely to
decrease. Crucial people in the industry are likely to have technological back-
grounds rather than traditional commercial or investment banking backgrounds.
Future industry extensions will be difficult to classify along conventional busi-
ness lines. Some will fit into the category of bundling of securities, while others
will be more transaction oriented. However, in a few areas, even functional
definitions will not apply.Nevertheless, the function-based definitions should be retained for threeimportant reasons. First, the traditional breakdown of the industry (commercialThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.178THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEand investment banking, insurance, mutual funds) is no longer satisfactory. Sec-ond, the functional breakdown may be important for future academic research,
because some areas, such as encryption for electronic transactions, clearly have
very large engineering components. Other areas, such as the pricing and packag-
ing of new types of securities, have more of a finance/economics/financial engi-
neering component. Third, government regulation will be promulgated according
to where the boundaries are drawn.INNOVATION SYSTEMChanges in the past 20 years have fundamentally changed the markets, theway customers interact with service providers, and the range of products in the
financial services industry. These changes have taken place in a relatively short
period of time and with no organized innovation process or formal organizational
units devoted to research like the ones in most science- and engineering-based
industries. Historically, however, many science- and engineering-based indus-
tries did not have structured innovation systems in the early stages of their devel-
opment. If the history of these industries is any guide, developments of the last
several decades in financial services, in which technology has become critical to
success in the industry, could represent the beginning of a shift to an organized
research base. In the meantime, the absence of an organized research base has not
hindered rapid innovation.Industry DriversThere are three primary drivers of innovation in financial services: marketforces; tax and regulatory policy; and technology, particularly data processing,
communications, and software. Often, these drivers interact. For example, the
spread of the Bloomberg and other reporting services were made possible by
technology, but were driven by market demand, which was reinforced because
the availability of this information made the markets work better.A second pathway for innovation is regulatory reform, usually triggered by alarge loss or failure. Pension plans, for example, are highly regulated to avoid
repetition of earlier mismanagement of pension assets. The Employee Retirement
Income Security Act (ERISA) requires that actuaries conduct independent evalua-
tions of all defined pension plans each year and estimate the planÕs surplus ordeficit, based on a careful analysis of assets and liabilities over a long time horizon.
Meeting this requirement provides employment for tens of thousands of actuaries.Insurance companies must perform similar studies. The insurance industry iseven more complicated because all 50 states have insurance commissions with
separate requirements. Insurance companies must report their statutory surplus/
deficits (STATs), their surplus/deficit according to generally accepted account-
ing principles (GAAPs), and sometimes their economic surplus/deficits. Tens ofThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINANCIAL SERVICES INDUSTRY179thousands of accountants, tax advisors, and related professionals are employed inthese studies.Periodically, new regulatory requirements are added. According to the Finan-cial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) and its standards, such as FASB 87,
pension plans in the United States must use a close-to-market discount factor when
computing the market value of liabilities, rather than a fixed or arbitrary discount
rate. This change is consistent with market-driven reporting but can cause large
swings in surplus/deficits because of changes in long-term interest rates. As a
consequence, pension plans must be more careful in allocating their assets and may
purchase new financial products, such as complex options, to help them achieve
their goals. As a rule, when regulators impose new burdens on investors, the finan-
cial services industry responds by offering new products and services.Another example of regulation-driven innovation is the ever-changing taxcode. Tax-advantaged investing is possible through a myriad of optionsÑtradi-tional individual retirement accounts (IRAs), Roth IRAs, Keogh plans, state col-
lege tuition plans, variable annuities, other insurance-related investment vehicles,
and many others. University researchers sometimes play a key role in these
innovations. The U.S. Treasury DepartmentÕs Office of Tax Analysis (OTA)routinely hires university faculty members for one- to three-year assignments.
During a major study on tax reform, for example, David Bradford (of PrincetonÕsWoodrow Wilson School) was head of OTA. Faculty advisors are also shaping
the current debate on social security reform. New financial products will cer-
tainly emerge as the government provides new avenues for deferring taxes or
shifting ordinary income into capital gains.Although regulatory constraints can accelerate innovation by creating incen-tives to meet them (or work around them), regulations per se are not the principal
drivers of innovation. Competitive pressures and innovations enabled by ad-
vances in computing and communications technology and the modeling and simu-
lation of financial markets are much stronger drivers.Institutional DriversAcademic research has played an important role in innovation in the finan-cial services industry, but a number of other players and factors have also contrib-
uted significantly. The players are (in no particular order) financial services
companies, universities/academic institutions, government agencies (oversight
regulations and taxation), software developers, hardware manufacturers, spin-off
companies, and consulting companies.Financial InstitutionsInnovation in investment banking has generally been initiated at major com-panies and has then been diffused to smaller companies and individuals. LargeThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.180THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEbanks with large budgets for new or improved technology are able to support bothinternal and external research. The results then trickle down to the overall market
and smaller competitors. Much of the research is performed at various levels
within the banks. Some of the work is undertaken in response to a central corpo-
rate directive, but most of it is done in the operating units with no particular
coordination. In general, the most productive R&D in the industry has taken
place in a few pockets in larger firms and has been loosely organized. The
disciplined ethos of R&D that can be found in high-technology manufacturing
industries is totally lacking in financial services.Consultants and Consulting FirmsConsultants and consulting firms have contributed significantly to innova-tion in financial services, sometimes based on academic research. More and more
of these firms are developing internal quantitative-research capabilities. Manage-
ment consulting firms, for instance, have developed the following innovative
frameworks for measuring a companyÕs economic performance:¥activity-based costing (a refinement of standard accounting practice thatallocates costs to specific business activities)¥economic value added (EVA¨) (an approach used by Stern Stewart &Co. to measure the economic profit of an enterprise by calculating net-
operating profit minus an appropriate charge for the opportunity cost of
all capital invested in the enterprise)¥cash-flow return on investment (CFROI) (an approach used by BostonConsulting Group to compare a firmÕs cash flows with the inflation-adjusted capital used to produce them)¥balanced scorecards (developed by David Norton, a consultant, andRobert Kaplan, a professor at Harvard Business School) to combine fi-
nancial scores with measures of less tangible assets, such as customer
satisfaction and loyalty, and a firmÕs ability to nurture the skills ofits employees)GovernmentGovernment has played a limited role in funding and using research in finan-cial services. Government has, however, funded the development of some crucial
infrastructure technologies, such as check imaging. In addition, government re-
sponsibility for the safety and soundness of the financial system has been a driver
of economic and mathematical research in risk measurement and risk manage-
ment. The resulting improvements in risk measurement and modeling technolo-
gies played a significant role in the decision to repeal the Glass-Steagall Act of
1933. In the 1970s, government-funded research developed models for analyzingThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINANCIAL SERVICES INDUSTRY181tax policy, which provided systems for analyzing the impact of changes in the taxcode on different groups in the United States. Today, these models are used by
every government agency.Although government funds only a small amount of academic researchrelevant to financial services, it does support research in economics and math-
ematics ($89 million and $229 million respectively in federal funding in 2000).
Total funding for academic research from federal and nonfederal sources was
$255 million in economics and $341 million in mathematics (NSF, 2003).Software Developers and Hardware ManufacturersThe financial services industry relies heavily on technology developed inother industries, especially information technology, computers, communications
equipment, and software. In a compilation of R&D spending on information
technology in 500 end-user organizations, banking and financial services had the
largest budget (9 percent) as a share of projected revenues and were estimated to
have spent the largest percentage (0.45 percent) of projected sales revenues on
information technologies R&D (NRC, 2000).Investment in information technology has resulted in software developmentthat has enabled much of the innovation in financial services. For example,
Algorithmics is a growing software firm specializing in risk measurement and
management software. Dr. Ron Dembo, the founder and CEO of Algorithmics,
was formerly on the faculties of several universities including Yale, MIT, and the
University of Toronto.Industry Consortia and CooperationFinancial services have traditionally worked together in moving funds, set-ting standards, facilitating cooperation, and sharing risk. However, sharing infor-
mation in financial services is not easy. Because of competitive secrecy and the
lack of protections for intellectual property, cooperation has not been focused on
innovation. Because of competitive secrecy, it is difficult to get a sense of how
much interesting and valuable research is being performed within the industry.The threat of competition from companies that have access to new innova-tive technologies has encouraged some attempts at cooperation in precompetitive
research. The Financial Services Technology Consortia (FSTC) was established
in 1993 to undertake precompetitive, collaborative R&D in electronic commerce,
cryptography, education, and other areas. This initiative marked a first attempt at
collaboration in R&D by the industry and mirrored the same trend in technology
industries. The American Bankers Association followed with its own technology
initiative, the Banking Industry Technology Secretariat (BITS), a division of the
Bankers Roundtable. Another example is the Smart Card Alliance, in which more
than 185 companies participate. The Smart Card Alliance was formed by theThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.182THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCE2001 merger of the Smart Card Forum, comprising primarily financial servicesfirms, and the Smart Card Industry Association, whose members include a vari-
ety of industries and government agencies.In 1999, a risk management initiative was launched by 12 of the worldÕsleading banks, 11 of which had been part of the consortium that provided Long-
Term Capital Management with $3.5 billion following its near collapse in the fall
of 1998. The risk-management group, called the Counterparty Risk Management
Policy Group, included Barclays Bank PLC, Bear Stearns & Company, Chase
Manhattan Corporation, Citigroup, Inc., Credit Suisse First Boston, Deutsche
Bank, Lehman Brothers, Inc., Merrill Lynch and Company, Inc., Morgan Stanley
Dean Witter, and Warburg Dillon Read, a unit of UBS AG. The stated purpose of
the group is to enhance existing risk-management practices and to compile infor-
mation that could be reported to Òregulators and supervisors, all with a view toenhancing the discipline, efficiency and liquidity of financial markets.Ó(Bloomberg Information, 1999). The group issued a report in June 1999 that
included more than 20 recommendations to improve risk management
(Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group, 1999).3Intellectual PropertyHistorically, protecting intellectual property was not an issue in financialservices because there was little opportunity to create it and, therefore, little need
to protect it. When new financial instruments were created, they often had very
short half-lives, so the emphasis was on being first to market with innovations
and capturing market share before competing products were introduced. Trading
systems and databases are considered highly proprietary and are regarded as trade
secrets. This industry posture vis-‹-vis intellectual property (e.g., the need forsecrecy, tight controls) has probably been an impediment to collaborations with
academic researchers.The potential to create competitive advantage through patenting was suc-cessfully demonstrated when, in 1980, Merrill Lynch filed for and was issued
U.S. Patent No. 4,376,978. The patent relates to the Merrill Lynch Cash Manage-
ment Account program (CMA) and, specifically, the data processing methodol-
ogy and programs for effecting the CMA. The CMA consolidated checking,
savings, investments, and borrowing into an all-in-one account, which is invested
in a money market fund. The patent allowed Merrill Lynch to exclusively offer
the CMA; later the company gained substantial revenues by licensing the same
technology to other securities firms.Recently, banks and other traditional and aspiring financial institutions havebecome interested in patenting in the area of financial services, due in part to the
1998 ÒState StreetÓ decision by the Patent Court, which broadened patent protec-
tion to include Òbusiness methods,Ó including financial services. Although muchof the patent activity is by technology companies outside financial services, theThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINANCIAL SERVICES INDUSTRY183top two assignees for patents are Merrill Lynch and Citicorp (Lerner, 2000).Today, many new patents are being issued, some involving systems and techno-
logically based financial innovations, but only one of the top five companies with
patents in the area of electronic commerce is a financial services company. It
remains to be seen if these patents are enforceable.Human CapitalTraditionally, bankers were regarded as predominantly Òrelationship peopleÓwho were not mathematically oriented or analytical. Bankers today, however, use
financial applications based on the Black/Scholes model for pricing financial
options (Black and Scholes, 1973). Because of regulatory changes, technological
innovations, globalization, and other factors, bankers must now understand and
react to events in financial markets. This has resulted in a significant increase in
the demand for scientists and engineers. For example, in 1997 when the Federal
Reserve imposed new capital/reserve requirements based on a value-at-risk sys-
tem, it created a demand for people who could calculate these requirements on an
integrated basis. At the same time, science and engineering graduates with new
knowledge and new skills enabled the Federal Reserve to develop these new
reserve-requirement formulas.Scientists and engineers are generally not hired to perform research in finan-cial services companies. They are usually scattered throughout the organization,
including the small business units, where they are often indistinguishable from
traders and other personnel.CONTRIBUTIONS OF ACADEMIC RESEARCHThe links between academic research and the financial services industry arenot nearly as well established as they are in many other industries. Nevertheless,
academic research has made very important contributions to the industry. There
is a tendency to overstate the importance of breakthrough innovations in financial
services and to understate the importance of a long list of small but significant
incremental innovations. The aggregate consequences of academic research for
the financial services sector cannot be quantified, but examples can be cited to
illustrate their impact.Academic research on financial engineering4 has been especially useful to
the industry. Because underlying theory and actual practices are well aligned in
this area, a steady stream of academic contributions has flowed to the industry
(Heath et al., 1992). Related academic research has also contributed to other
kinds of modeling (e.g., volatility skew), binomial methods and their extension,
and partial differential equation methods. Monte Carlo methods, originally devel-
oped in the national laboratory system for weapon design, have been advanced
through excellent cross-fertilization between industrial and academic research.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.184THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEAt the same time, research in the traditional disciplines of finance andeconomics has also made substantial contributions to financial services. Ex-
amples include conceptual breakthroughs such as portfolio diversification and
Òtwo-fund separationÓ theory, which helped lay the foundation for modern
index funds; the development of optimal capital-structure theory; contributions
from behavioral finance on decision making under uncertainty; as well as such

widely used tools in econometric and economic modeling as the generalized
method of moments estimation. The financial services industry can be widely
defined to include just about all business applications dealing with financial
information. Our focus on the narrow area of financial engineering illustrates
the relationship of academic research and subsequent applications in industry.
Additional linkages could be cited, depending on the definition of financial
economics and financial engineering.The nature of academic contributions to the financial services sector islikely to change in the future. As the industry evolves, new areas of academic
research are likely to become useful. For example, academic research in con-
sumer behavior that sheds light on how individuals make decisions regarding
financial products and services has become extremely important. As large
amounts of data derived from networks, databases, and transaction systems
become available, the industry is likely to use more advanced, nonlinear math-
ematical analyses and other methods to predict consumer behavior.Areas and Types of ContributionsMajor contributions of academic research to financial services can be tracedback to five areas: conceptual breakthroughs; financial products and tools; con-
sumer research; research on legal, regulatory, and institutional issues; and re-
search on industry infrastructure.Conceptual BreakthroughsFundamental research in portfolio theory, linear programming, derivativepricing theory, and prospect theory laid the foundation for entirely new families
of financial products and services. At least nine Nobel prizes in economics have
been awarded to researchers associated with universities for major conceptual
breakthroughs important to financial services:¥Daniel Kahneman (Princeton) in 2002 for integrating insights from psy-chological research into economic science, especially concerning human
judgment and decision making under uncertainty. Along with Amos
Tversky (Stanford), this work created the field of behavioral finance.¥Myron Scholes (Stanford) and Robert Merton (Harvard) (with FisherBlack of Goldman Sachs) in 1997 for a new method of determining theThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINANCIAL SERVICES INDUSTRY185value of derivative securities. The breakthrough idea was that derivativescan be priced without estimating the future direction of the underlying
security. This concept spawned a new industryÑthe development, pric-ing, and trading of derivative securities.¥John Harsanyi (University of California, Berkeley), John Nash(Princeton), and Richard Selten (Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-
Universit−t Bonn) in 1994 for pioneering analysis of equilibria in thetheory of non-cooperative games. Non-cooperative game theory excludes
binding agreements while making predictions about the outcome of stra-
tegic interactions. It has become a standard tool in the analysis of oli-
gopoly and the study of competition between firms in the theory of indus-
trial organization. But the concept has also been used in macroeconomic
theory (e.g., for economic policy, environmental and resource economics,
foreign trade theory, the economics of information) to make complex
strategic interactions more understandable.¥Harry Markowitz, Merton Miller (University of Chicago), and WilliamSharpe (Stanford) in 1990 for their work on portfolio theory using qua-
dratic programs to explore diversification strategies to reduce risks. Con-
cepts based on efficient frontiers and mean-variance are used to find a
mix of assets that simultaneously maximizes the investorÕs return andminimizes risks. This theory provides the basis for a large number of
financial planning packages.¥Merton Miller (University of Chicago) in 1990 and Franco Modigliani(MIT) in 1985 for their seminal contributions to the development of optimal
capital-structure theory, specifically for positing the theory for the capital-
market relationship between the capital-asset structure and dividend policy
of production firms, and firmsÕ market value and costs of capital. This work
provides a basis for structuring corporations in highly competitive markets.¥James Tobin (Yale) in 1981 for his work on portfolio diversification andÒtwo-fund separation theory,Ó which along with the Capital Asset Pricing
Model, developed by William Sharpe, provided the conceptual founda-
tions for index funds.¥Tjalling Koopmans (Yale) and Leonid Kantorovich (Moscow Academyof Sciences) in 1975 for optimum resource allocation theory, which pro-
vides a practical approach for managing large, complex organizations and
is used by many financial companies for managing assets and liabilities.5¥Kenneth Arrow (Harvard/Stanford) in 1972 for foundational work oneconomic equilibrium and state-spaces models of uncertainty.¥Paul Samuelson (MIT) in 1970 for his role in bringing quantitative rea-soning to economics and for his work on the implications of optimization
for understanding the qualitative behavior of models.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.186THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEFinancial Products and ToolsAcademics have been involved in applied research to develop specific prod-ucts in financial engineering and optimization, such as pricing models and port-
folio methods. Although relatively few financial services firms have specialized
personnel capable of incorporating the results of academic research, a growing
number of firms are convinced of their value for real-world business. Some of the
most important products and tools are listed below:¥foundations of option pricing (Black and Scholes, 1973; Merton, 1973)¥numerical methods of pricing and hedging, including discrete approxima-tions of diffusion processes, partial differential equation methods, and
Monte Carlo survey methods¥arbitrage restrictions on the term structure of interest rates, especially thestandard interest rate model developed by David Heath, Robert Jarrow,
and Andrew Morton (1992) at Cornell University, and earlier work by
Oldrich Vasicek (1977), Thomas Ho and Sang-Bin Lee (1986), and others¥formulation and solution to problems of portfolio optimization begun byHarry Markowitz when he was a doctoral student at University of Chi-
cago and continued by many others, such as Michael Dempster at Cam-
bridge, John Mulvey at Princeton, Stavros Zenios at the University of
Cyprus, and William Ziemba at the University of British Columbia¥methods of analyzing financial time series, especially models that incor-porate autocorrelation and varying volatility (e.g., autoregressive condi-
tional heteroskedasticity [ARCH] models, introduced by Robert Engle,
New York University, in 1982, and their variants)¥generalized method of moments estimation tools that are widely appliedto a large number of econometric and economic models (although the
method of moments has been known for more than 100 years, L.P. Hansen
[University of Chicago] extended the concepts in what became known as
the generalized method of moments) (Hansen, 2001)¥use of mechanism design theory, which studies the design of institutionsor mechanisms implementing collective decisions under different circum-
stances, for contractual design¥incorporation of credit risk into pricing models (e.g., Jarrow and Turnbull,1995; Duffie and Singleton, 1997)Consumer ResearchConsumer research began about 25 years ago and is now very common.Academic research has contributed to an understanding of large data sets, con-
sumer behavior, and so on. The closest academic counterpart to industry research
on consumer financial behavior is in the social sciences, which tend to focus onThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINANCIAL SERVICES INDUSTRY187aggregate human behavior, but rarely cover financial behavior. Although market-ing is taught as an academic subject, there are few, if any, programs on consumer
(credit) finance. The University of Michigan Panel Study of Income Dynamics
covers some financial behavior, and the Credit Research Institute also does some
work in this area.6 But little academic research focuses directly on how financialinstitutions can influence customer behavior (business strategies), how technical
tools can be used, or the best strategies for affecting consumer portfolio behavior.Academic research has contributed to the development of data and technicaltools for personal financial management but has had little influence on teaching
people how to analyze data or use the tools effectively. Unlike investment bank-
ing, there seems to be little underlying social theory in this area. The trend in
consumer financial institutions is to hire scientists (e.g., physicists and mathema-
ticians) and other highly trained technical people who often have little experience
in dealing with consumer behavior and the fuzziness of action/reaction patterns.
Research in this area could be very helpful to policy makers, who know very little
about this area of social behavior or have ideas based on outdated studies. Re-
search could improve their understanding of which segments of the population
are able to manage their own financial portfolios to maintain adequate income
through retirement, which segments require public management through Social
Security and Medicare, how public programs can be made more efficient, and
how changes in public programs can be made.In 1996, the Employee Benefit Research Institute (EBRI) arranged a review ofpublic-sector and private-sector dialogues to call attention to the lack of good research
on retirement issues. EBRI and the Investment Counselors Institute managed to
create a shared database on 401(k) participants to inform more effective policies.Legal, Regulatory, and Institutional IssuesAcademic researchers have been instrumental in analyzing legal and regula-tory constraints on the industry and in reforming the regulatory environment.
Academia-developed models of asset and arbitrage pricing and risk management
have been extremely influential. Rules for trading activity are based on value-at-
risk models. Because of the complexity of many global markets, such as energy,
securities, and foreign exchange, regulators and economic policy makers now
depend on models as a basis for decisions, which provide an objective basis for
making decisions in real-world markets that are too diverse or take too long to
provide feedback. In these cases, the models do not simply represent reality; they
become reality.Infrastructure of the IndustryAcademic research has contributed to the infrastructure of the modern fi-nancial services sector, particularly in the area of encryption technology andThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.188THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEnetworking. The technological infrastructure of the financial services industry isprobably the most extensive and complex of any service sector in the U.S.
economy. Academic contributions to networking technology have had a funda-
mental impact, enabling electronic payment systems, automated teller machines,
and the growth of credit and debit cards in the 1970s and the emergence of
electronic commerce via the Internet in the 1990s. (For more about networking
technology, see discussion in Chapter 2.)TRANSFER MECHANISMSA pattern has developed for transferring the results of academic research tothe financial services industry. First, academic researchers publish a series of
papers on a topic in the field of financial economics. The papers set the stage for
a few innovative firms to test products based on the idea; faculty members are
often involved as consultants to these firms. In some cases, junior and senior
faculty resign from academia to work on these projects full time. If the product
proves to be effective, the financial industry invests in further development. At
this point, many firms attempt to duplicate the product or service. Controversies
about the protection of intellectual property via trademarks, copywriting, trade
secrets, and patents are addressed in the courts as they arise.An excellent example of this pattern involves index funds. During the 1970sand 1980s, there was considerable debate among academics about the efficiency
of financial markets and the ability of portfolio managers to succeed over long
periods of time. Some argued that a market fund could outperform the majority of
active portfolio managers. Wells Fargo and several other innovative banks set up
mutual funds with the sole aim of mimicking the return of the S&P 500 stock
index. (Often the banks would purchase the stock in all 500 companies). At the
urging of Professor Burt Malkiel at Princeton University, the Vanguard Company
established the first index fund for individual investors. Since then, index funds
have become enormously popular because of their low cost structure, their avail-
ability, and their historical performance. For example, VanguardÕs Total StockMarket Index Fund had a net asset value of $15.8 billion on January 31, 2002.
FidelityÕs S&P 500 index fund had a net asset value of $8.6 billion at the end ofJanuary 2002.  These funds are directly attributable to the early research

of academics.A significant portion of current activities in the financial services sectorwould not be possible without fundamental mathematical tools that were devel-
oped or adapted to financial problems by academics. Beginning with the Black-
Scholes option-pricing formula now applied in a myriad of ways, these math-
ematical techniques enable the industry to price an almost unlimited variety of
financial instruments. Markets as diverse as options, futures, other derivatives,
securitization, and reinsurance could not exist in their current forms without these
tools. Today, these techniques are widely known and understood, and newThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINANCIAL SERVICES INDUSTRY189products and applications are being developed without further interaction withthe academic sector (although the work is done by individuals trained in
academia). Table 6-1 shows innovations in financial services that were generated
at least partly by academic research.Flow of IdeasAdvice and ideas from academia to the private sector continue to flow.Commercial and investment banks rely heavily on academic economists, who
have a substantial influence on risk management because they are instrumental in
the development of techniques and modeling tools and have insights into the
macroeconomic developments that are inputs to the models. A mutually reinforc-
ing dynamic is at work among the diffusion of human capital into the financial
services firms, the development of increasingly powerful computer hardware,
and the insights of academics into financial theory. For example, the combined
capabilities of technology and academic research were involved in the develop-
ment of the structure of large-scale auctions, such as the auctioning of the radio-
frequency spectrum.TABLE 6-1  Innovations in Financial Services Resulting from Academic
ResearchNew financial instruments/securities/products¥index funds¥financial derivatives¥securitization (risk neutral valuations)¥credit derivatives (emerging)/credit management (modification of models developed forscience and engineering)Analytical and Modeling Tools¥option pricing (black-scholes and successors)¥portfolio theory¥market microstructuresFinancial Information and Research Tools¥online information services (mixed academic-industry heritage)¥online investment services¥off-the-shelf risk-management software¥risk metrics/credit metricsTransactions¥cryptography¥electronic commerce/world wide web (mixed academic-industry heritage)Consumer Research¥scoring models¥panel studiesThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.190THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEFlow of Human CapitalThe flow of human capital into financial services firms has been crucial tothe evolution of the industry, which draws on people from a wide variety of
disciplines who have mathematical and modeling skills. It is not clear whether
this diversity is a plus or a minus for innovation. On the one hand, considerable
Òon-the-job trainingÓ is necessary before a physicist or nuclear engineer can
apply his or her modeling skills to the analysis of financial problems. On the
other hand, people with diverse backgrounds who have been encouraged to think
creatively by graduate research may be a source of creativity and may come up
with new approaches to problems.It is probably inevitable that training for employment in the financial ser-vices industry will gradually become more traditional. As finance and financial
engineering programs become more widespread and more firmly established,
they will probably provide a steady flow of people with postgraduate degrees
targeted specifically to the financial sector.In general, although academic research is stimulating to some, it can seemesoteric and confusing to others. Although much of the academic literature is all
but incomprehensible to nonacademics, the dissemination of research results is
essential for continued innovation. So-called ÒquantsÓ (scientific quantitative
people) working in the derivatives industry are most likely to try to keep abreast
of academic research by reading preprints and attending conferences.To bridge the academia-industry gap and to meet the need for more avenuesof transfer, some have argued that applied research should be done in individual
companies (loosely linked to a university) or through university think tanks.Impact of Academic ResearchLinks between academia and the financial services industry are less formal,less structured, and more amorphous than the links in science-based industries.
This may be because innovation in financial services is inherently less amenable
to structured, scientific investigation. It could also be that this is a natural stage
in the evolution of the industry and that, as academic disciplines such as finan-
cial engineering evolve, the structure of the innovation system will evolve with
them. If so, the current transitional relationships between academia and the
financial services sector will be replaced by a more structured innovation system
in the future.The financial services industry can be divided into two fundamental areas:(1) securitization, or the packaging and bundling of financial products or services
for consumers or businesses (security bundling); and (2) the facilitation of trades,
or helping to implement transactions (transactional). Academic research has had
a more direct impact on securitization (i.e., with development of novel financial
products and services). Clearly, financial instruments, investment management,The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINANCIAL SERVICES INDUSTRY191and decision support tools created in academia or through public-private-sectorpartnerships have been critical to the success of the financial services industry.Quantitative measures of the impact of academic research are difficult todetermine. The entire industry is characterized by phenomenal increases in the
amount of quantitative data concerning transaction volumes, flow rates, asset
bases, customer activity, product ranges, and other activities, but assigning spe-
cific increases to academic research is difficult. Certainly the number of new
securities introduced each year based on academic research is large and growing,
and the number of institutions and people who use these products for managing
their financial affairs can be estimated. For example, the dramatic increase in
option trading in the past decade is largely attributable to the efforts of academic
researchers. Another measure is the increase in the number of people who are
working on the development of financial products and in related areas. Finally, it
may be possible to measure improvements in economic efficiency. Although the
task is complicated by the heterogeneous nature of the industry, an informed,
intuitive review suggests that much of the recent growth in the industry can be
traced to academic research.Some have argued that academic research can also be considered to have hada negative impact on the industry. Some have argued that a number of recent
financial disasters, such as the near demise in 1998 of Long Term Capital Man-
agement, a very large, global hedge fund that was heavily influenced by aca-
demic research, can be attributed to the results of research in financial engineer-
ing. This experience demonstrated that the pricing formulas used in many
financial models do not account for periods of economic turmoil and alerted the
financial community to these pitfalls and limitations.OPPORTUNITIES FOR FUTURE ACADEMIC RESEARCHA broad range of academic research in engineering, natural sciences, eco-nomics, mathematics, social sciences, and public policy will continue to contrib-
ute to the success of the financial services industry:¥identification of rogue traders¥allocations of capital to various activities¥the dynamics of markets (stochastic models) and market microstructures¥evaluation of mergers of financial services providers¥issues of globalization, such as diverse regulation, capital flight drivingcountries to near bankruptcy, tax havens, and money laundering¥investigations of legal, sociological, and technological issues related toprivacy, trust, security, contract law, etc.¥assessments of the impact of technology¥risk audits¥ethical dimensions of financeThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.192THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEFINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONSThe results of academic research in economics, information systems, andother areas have had a substantial, direct impact on the structure and performance
of the financial services industry in the past 20 years, especially in the areas of
risk management and new financial instruments, such as derivatives. The panel
has attempted to distinguish between the direct contributions of research (e.g.,
modeling and risk management) and indirect contributions (e.g., contributions of
people educated and trained at universities and research results embodied in
software and hardware used by the industry). Indirect contributions, such as
research on cryptographic algorithms that now play a critical role in financial
services, have been significant. Both fundamental and applied research have
affected the industry. In some areas, such as the pricing of securities, academic
research has played a major role. In other domains, such as the identification of
arbitrage opportunities, economic incentives are more than adequate to keep
researchers busy. These are important distinctions, because funding for academic
research should be focused on the exploration of basic concepts that will not be
undertaken under the current incentive system. A natural tendency has been to
look for specific engineering or applied research influences in financial services.
However, a considerable body of academic research, including fundamental re-
search in economics and finance, has been applicable to financial services. Con-
necting the academic research base with the financial services industry remains
an ongoing challenge as well as an important opportunity.Although it is difficult to predict the future significance of academic re-search, the increasing innovation and complexity of financial services will prob-
ably prove to be a rich and fertile area for future academic research. For example,
the emergence of global consumer markets for financial services could create
research opportunities in consumer research and behavioral sciences. Overall, it
is difficult to compare the importance of academic research to the importance of
other sources of new knowledge and innovation. It is evident, however, that the
contributions of academic research have been fundamental and consequential.Finding 6-1. Technology derived from academic research in economics, infor-
mation systems, engineering, and other areas has been fundamental to innovation
in financial services in the last 20 years.Technology can be defined broadly to include pricing securities and risk-management systems. In the past, academic research relevant to financial ser-
vices was concentrated on fundamental concepts in finance, economics, and tech-
nology. Now, academic research on applications from engineering disciplines
and the physical sciences has become more important, and the number of joint
university-industry activities in these areas has increased significantly.Opportunities for the application of engineering methods and processes inthe financial services industry are expanding rapidly. With the advent of mass-The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINANCIAL SERVICES INDUSTRY193scale consumer marketing involving tens of millions of transactions, financialservices are becoming similar in some ways to manufacturing and process indus-
tries. The advent of the Internet and its potential transformation of financial
services has underscored the role of engineers and technology to the future of
financial services. At the same time, engineers can also learn from engaging with
the financial services industry, particularly in the areas of stochastic and model-
based approaches to problem definition and solution.Recommendation 6-1. The National Academy of Engineering together with
other agencies or private foundations should examine how engineering methods
and processes practiced in advanced manufacturing industries can be applied in
financial services.Finding 6-2. Because financial services firms traditionally have had no formalresearch function or culture (in contrast to science-based industries), no formal
organizational structure has been established for technical personnel to keep
track of academic research or to communicate industry research needs to
academia. At the same time, academia has also failed to establish an organized
way of mapping the needs of the industry and relating them to academic research.Recommendation 6-2. The management of financial services companies shouldbecome more familiar with the ways academic research affects their businesses.
Managers should review the processes they have (or need) to ensure that they can
take advantage of the results of academic research. The creation of an engineer-
ing research center for financial services, similar to the research centers sup-
ported by the National Science Foundation for engineering, could provide a
nexus for industry-academic activities.Finding 6-3. A convergence of events, including deregulation, globalization,
increasing competition, and the information revolution, has made financial ser-
vices more technically intense and accelerated innovation in the industry. The
panel expects innovation to remain very rapid, driven mainly by developments in
engineering and technology.Recommendation 6-3. Professional societies, policy research organizations, and
federal agencies associated with science, engineering, and technology, including
the National Academy of Engineering and the National Science Foundation, must
recognize the importance of research and technology to financial services and
include financial services in their mainstream activities. Accordingly, federal
funding for long-term, potentially high-impact research relevant to financial ser-
vices, which is currently very limited, should be expanded.Finding 6-4. Regulation has been a major factor shaping the financial services
industry, both as a boundary condition and as a stimulus to innovation. The
impact of academic research on regulation has been relatively small historically
(and usually in response to a crisis); however, the impact of academic research onThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.194THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEregulation, particularly on risk management, is growing. In general, the regula-tory community lags behind the industry proper in the application of new knowl-
edge and tools in the area of risk management.Recommendation 6-4. Regulators should be encouraged to support more aca-
demic research in their areas of concern and to become more knowledgeable in
modern risk-management methods.Finding 6-5. The responsibility for financial decisions is being shifted to indi-
vidual consumers of financial products, and individual responsibility for financ-
ing retirement is becoming increasingly likely. The current administrationÕs pro-posal for partially privatizing Social Security is a move in this direction. The
knowledge and tool base available to help individuals make good financial deci-
sions is in its infancy. Most marketing research is descriptive and is performed
for the benefit of financial service providers; very little normative research is
aimed at helping individual consumers make better financial decisions.Recommendation 6-5. The National Science Foundation and other federal agen-
cies should fund normative research to help consumers make better financial
decisions to complement anticipated legislative action that would shift financial
responsibilities to individuals.Finding 6-6. Individuals play an important role in transferring the results of
research from academia to the financial services industry. As the field of finance
becomes more quantitative and analytical, the training of engineers and financial
analysts is becoming increasingly similar. The migration of academically trained
people to the industry has apparently had a significant impact on successful
innovation. Unlike more science-based industries, financial services companies
have only recently begun to hire technically trained people who can interact
profitably with academic researchers and translate industry needs to academia
and academic research results to industry.Today, academia provides much of the human capital for the financial ser-vices industry. Business schools, for instance, train large numbers of practitioners
for the industry, including many who advance to senior management levels.
Engineering departments train many of the analysts, but there is very little sup-
port or guidance for this training from the financial industry. Although the indus-
try benefits greatly for very little investment, the benefits could be even greater if
the industry provided more support and was more closely involved.Recommendation 6-6. The financial services industry should encourage re-
search exchanges, sabbaticals in industry, industry practitioners teaching in uni-
versities, and other industry-academic interactions. The industry would benefit
greatly from the establishment of mechanisms to facilitate the flow of people
between academic research and the financial services industry. Mechanisms
could include more targeted curricula and programs in computational finance,The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINANCIAL SERVICES INDUSTRY195financial engineering, and other areas; revised incentive and reward systems;and protections of intellectual property.Finding 6-7. Historically, intellectual property in financial services has not en-
joyed the same level of protection as intellectual property in science-based indus-
tries. Instead, the industry has focused on keeping trade secrets and speed to
market. Although patenting has increased greatly, it is too soon to tell if this will
have a positive or negative effect on innovation and growth. Because technology
is essential to many innovations, more patents are sure to be granted.Recommendation 6-7. The panel calls upon the U.S. Patent Office, Federal
Reserve, U.S. Department of the Treasury, National Science Foundation, and
other affected federal agencies to support research on the impact of changes in the
treatment of intellectual property in the financial services industry, specifically
the impact of the recent flurry of patent activity.Finding 6-8. The relationship between innovation and economic performance is
poorly understood. This problem is not specific to the financial services industry.Recommendation 6-8. Given the sheer size and importance of the financial
services sector to the nationÕs economy, measures of innovation and of the rela-tionship between innovation and economic performance should be developed for
the financial services industry. Although defining the end product of financial
services will be difficult, focused research on this problem could reveal suit-
able measurements.Finding 6-9. The deregulation of markets has created many opportunities for
businesses and individuals but has also increased risks. For a variety of reasons,
including technological advances, esoteric financial instruments and structures,
globalization, the speed and magnitude of money/asset movement, and mass
communications, risk management is more important for financial services now
than it was in the past. Risks, ranging from operational risks to credit and cur-
rency risks, are more numerous and less understood than ever before. Each risk
has the potential of endangering not only financial institutions but also sovereign
nations and, ultimately, the global economic system.Recommendation 6-9. Management in financial services should review how
leading engineering-intensive industries have integrated risk management and
quality improvement into all aspects of the design, production, and delivery of
their products and should apply the principles to financial services. The National
Academy of Engineering should convene a meeting to develop a suitable re-
search agenda.Finding 6-10. A research gap has become apparent between basic research and
applied research, particularly in the areas of financial models and market reality,
and the financial infrastructure and its behavior under various conditions. ToThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.196THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEbridge the gap between theory and practice in experimental economics, economictheories should be tested in real markets and the structures analyzed before new
(potentially destabilizing) products are introduced. Although regulators have tried
to anticipate problems by using models and other tests, their efforts have been
hampered by inadequate data and a lack of established processes. In general, the
industry does not have a solid theoretical foundation to mount an institutional
response to problems. The lack of data is largely the result of companies being
unwilling to share data on credit risk, operational risk, corporate defaults, and
other aspects of their businesses.Recommendation 6-10a. To make data more widely available to academia, data
from competing financial institutions should be collected by third parties and
Òsanitized.Ó One simple idea would be for the industry to fund a web service that
would help individual researchers find the sources of data in financial services.
Users of this data could include off-Wall Street firms and, of course, individuals,
who are increasingly being urged to manage their own financial futures.Recommendation 6-10b. Financial services companies should establish consortia/
cooperative research to define and build a technological infrastructure and knowl-
edge base for various sectors of the financial services industry. Cooperative
activities could be based on insights from Bankers Roundtable Information Tech-
nology Secretariat (BITS), Financial Services Technology Consortium (FSTC),
Smart Card Forum, and Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group.NOTES1AT&T sold its Universal Card business to Citicorp in December 1997.2It is not at all clear that available financial advice, tools, and data are sufficient for individuals totake control of their financial future.  Should investment management by professionals, always
controversial in terms of performance, be replaced by investment management by individual con-sumers?  Can an individual consumer exposed to information from many sources understand 
Òreal-time riskÓ as financial and economic events unfold almost in real time on television or the Internet?
In the wake of stock market declines in 2000 and 2001 and the Enron debacle in 2002, the answers tothese questions have assumed real policy implications.3In June 1999, representatives of the Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group presentedpolicy recommendations to the Subcommittee on Capital Markets, Securities and Government Spon-sored Enterprises of the House Committee on Banking and Financial Services.4Financial engineering, the quantitative analysis of financial markets, complex securities, andrisk management, using mathematical, statistical, and computational models, is now included in thecurriculum at many universities.5George DantzigÕs development of the simplex method should also be noted.6The Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) at the University of Michigan is a longitudinalsurvey of a representative sample of individuals and their families.  The study has been ongoing

since 1968.  The data were collected annually through 1997, and biennially since 1999.  The data
files contain the full span of information collected over the course of the study.  PSID data can be
used for cross-sectional, longitudinal, and intergenerational analysis and for studies of individuals
and families.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINANCIAL SERVICES INDUSTRY197REFERENCESBlack, F., and M. Scholes. 1973. The pricing of options and corporate liabilities. Journal of PoliticalEconomy 81(3): 637Ð654.Bloomberg Information. 1999. Securities Firms and Banks Form Risk Management Group. Jan-uary 7. Available online at : http://www.bloomberg.com/.Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group. 1999. Improving Counterparty Risk ManagementPractices. New York: Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group.Duffie, D., and K. Singleton. 1997. An economic model of the term structure of interest rate swapyields. Journal of Finance 52(4): 1287Ð1321.Federal Reserve. 2002. Assets and Liabilities of Commercial Banks in the United States. FederalReserve Statistical Release. Washington, D.C.: The Federal Reserve Board.Hansen, L.P. 2001. Method of Moments. In International Encyclopedia of the Social and BehaviorSciences, N.J. Smelser and P.B. Bates, eds. Amsterdam and New York.: Elsevier.Heath, D., R. Jarrow, and A. Morton. 1992. Bond pricing and term structure of interest rates: a newmethodology for contingent claims valuation. Econometrica 60: 77Ð105.Ho, T.S.Y., and S-B. Lee. 1986. Term structure movements and pricing interest rate contingentclaims. Journal of Finance 41: 1011Ð1029.Jarrow, R., and S. Turnbull. 1995. Derivative Securities. Cincinnati, Ohio: South-Western CollegePublishing.Lerner, J. 2000. Where Does State Street Lead? A First Look at Finance Patents, 1971Ð2000. Work-ing Paper No. w7918. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research.Merton, R. 1973. Theory of rational option pricing. Bell Journal of Economics and ManagementScience 41: 141Ð183.NRC (National Research Council). 2000. Making IT Better: Expanding Information TechnologyResearch to Meet SocietyÕs Need. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.NSF (National Science Foundation). 2003. Academic Research and Development Expenditures: Fis-cal Year 2001. NSF 03-316.  Arlington, Va.: National Science Foundation.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. 2002. Statistical Abstract of the United StatesÐ2002. Washington, D.C.:U.S. Government Printing Office. Available online at: http://www.census.gov/prod/www/statistical-abstract-02.html. [June 24, 2003]Vasicek, O. 1977. An equilibrium characterization of the term structure. Journal of Financial Eco-nomics 5: 177Ð188.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.198ADDENDUMQuestionnaireThe following questionnaire was sent to selected individuals from variousparts of the financial services industry, some of whom attended the October 1998
workshop. Included among the questionnaire respondents were senior executives
at Falcon Asset Management, the Center for Adaptive Systems Applications, and
State Street Bank; professors with expertise in finance, operations research, ap-
plied mathematics, and financial engineering from Columbia University, Cornell
University, Princeton University, and University of Pennsylvania; and a repre-
sentative of the U.S. Department of the Treasury.IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ONINDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEWe invite your responses to these questions, either in the form of generalcomments or as responses to the more specific questions below. Your responses
will be used by our Panel as background information for our report but will not be
quoted verbatim without seeking your explicit permission.1.Briefly describe fundamental or significant academic research contribu-
tions to the financial services industry as defined by the panel? (If possible,
please supply references to published information that outlines the contribu-
tions.) Use additional sheets, as necessary.2.Overall, would you describe the impact of academic research on indus-
trial performance in the financial services industry over the past 20 years as
(Please put an X in one box):1.  very large
2.  large
3.  medium
4.  small
5.  very small/nonexistent
If your response is Òvery large,Ó could you please identify the specific areas
of research you consider has had such a big impact.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINANCIAL SERVICES INDUSTRY1993.What is the role of academic 
research in educating people who work in
your industry? (Please focus on university research  activities, rather than univer-
sity education generally.) Use additional sheets, as necessary.4.What structural forms of university-industry collaboration lead to good
results in your industry? An example of such a structure might be a discipline- or
industry-oriented ÒcenterÓ that solicits industry sponsors for a collection of
projects that span a varied research program. What seem to be the essential
determinants of success of such structures? Use additional sheets, as necessary.5.What are significant emerging trends or problems that the financial ser-
vices industry will face in the future that could benefit from academic research?
Use additional sheets, as necessary.6.What changes are required, if any, in academic research if it is to be
responsive to these industrial trends and problems? Use additional sheets,as necessary.7.What single step could be taken by universities to enhance the impact of
academic research on the industry? Use additional sheets, as necessary.8.What single step could be taken by companies to enhance the impact of
academic research on industry? Use additional sheets, as necessary.9.What single step could be taken by government to enhance the impact of
academic research on industry? Use additional sheets, as necessary.10.Do you see any downside to enhanced university-industry research col-
laboration? Things to be avoided? Use additional sheets, as necessary.11.Other comments? Any comments, pointers to other studies, or sugges-
tions would be appreciated. Use additional sheets, as necessary.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.200THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEWorshop AgendaENHANCING ACADEMIC RESEARCH CONTRIBUTIONSTO THE FINANCIAL SERVICES INDUSTRYOctober 15, 1998National Academies Building2101 Constitution Avenue, N.W.Washington, D.C.9:00 a.m.ChairmanÕs Opening Remarks and Self-IntroductionsColin Crook, Former Chief Information Officer, Citicorp9:15 a.m.Introduction to the Task of the Financial Services Paneland Description of the Wider NAE EffortColin Crook10:00 a.m.Break

10:15 a.m.Panel Discussion of the Financial Services Innovation System:Understanding the Process, Players, and Trends
Chester Spatt, Mellon Bank Professor of Finance, and Director,Center for Financial Markets, Carnegie Mellon UniversityWilliam W. Lang, Deputy Director for Special Studies, Office of the
Comptroller of the CurrencyJoe Dauber, Vice President, Customer Management, NovusServices, Inc.12:00 p.m.Lunch in Meeting Room

12:30 p.m.Panel Discussion of the Contributions of Academic Researchto Financial Services: Past, Present, and Future
Martin Holmer, The Policy Simulation Group
Paul Glasserman, Professor, Graduate School of Business,Columbia UniversitySholom Rosen, Vice President, Citicorp2:00 p.m.Break
The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINANCIAL SERVICES INDUSTRY2012:15 p.m.Panel Discussion on Assessing the Impact of AcademicResearchJack Triplett, Brookings Institution
Patrick T. Harker, Department of Operations and InformationManagement, The Wharton School, University ofPennsylvaniaColin Carlton, Chief Investment Officer, Canada TrustInvestment Management Group3:45 p.m.Academic Research and Financial Services: Where AreWe Going?Colin Crook, Chairman5:00 p.m.AdjournThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.202THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEWorkshop AttendeesColin Crook, Chair*Chief Information Officer (retired)
CiticorpJohn AlicLecturer in Energy, Environment,Science, and TechnologyWashington, D.C.Colin G. CarltonChief Investment Officer
Canada Trust InvestmentManagement GroupJoe DauberVice President, CustomerManagementNovus Services, Inc.John R. DaviesChairman
Center for Adaptive SystemsApplicationsJudith M. FarvoldenDirector, Research Communications
Algorithmics, Inc.Paul GlassermanProfessor
Columbia UniversityPatrick T. HarkerUPS Professor and Chairman, Opera-tions and Information Management
DepartmentThe Wharton School
University of PennsylvaniaMartin HolmerPresident
Policy Simulation GroupWilliam W. LangDeputy Director for Special Studies
Office of the Comptroller of theCurrencyBlake D. LeBaron*Center for Biological and Computa-tional LearningMassachusetts Institute of TechnologyDeborah MalinsSenior Vice President
Product Development and Informa-tion ResearchState Street CorporationAlex MeerausPresident
GAMS Development*Panel memberThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINANCIAL SERVICES INDUSTRY203John M. Mulvey*Department of Civil Engineeringand Operations ResearchPrinceton UniversityMitchell RachlisSenior Economist
General Accounting OfficeSholom RosenVice President
CitibankChester S. SpattMellon Bank Professor of Financeand Director, Center for Financial
MarketsCarnegie Mellon UniversityMorris Tanenbaum*Retired Vice Chairman and CFOAT&TEric ThorlaciusVice President
Falcon Asset ManagementJack E. TriplettBrookings InstitutionAndrew B. WhinstonProfessor and Director of the CREC
College of Business Administration
University of Texas at Austin*Panel memberNational Research Council StaffStephen A. Merrill, Director, Board on Science, Technology, and EconomicPolicyThomas S. Arrison, Senior Staff Officer, Government-University-IndustryResearch RoundtableNAE Program Office StaffTom Weimer, DirectorProctor Reid, Associate Director
Robert Morgan, NAE Fellow and Senior Analyst
Penelope Gibbs, Administrative AssistantThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.7The Contributions and Impact of
Academic ResearchSignificant contributions have been made by academic researchers in all fiveof the industries examined in this study. Each industry illustrates a unique pattern
of industry-university research collaboration and different ways academic contri-
butions are used. The study also reveals some crosscutting areas of academic
research that are important to overall industrial performance. In addition, the
mechanisms by which academia contributes have changed as traditional patterns
of industry-university interactionÑsuch as contract research, cooperative re-
search, and personnel exchangesÑhave been augmented by new modes of inter-
action. Industry provides more than financial support for academic research, and
academic research contributes more than technological advances to industry,
although some contributions are difficult to measure in dollars. A comparison of
patterns of interaction reveals a number of ways industry, academia, and govern-
ment could realize even greater benefits through university-industry interaction.PATTERNS OF UNIVERSITY-INDUSTRY INTERACTIONFinding 7-1.  The nature of university-industry interactions varies from industryto industry as well as among companies within a given industry and individual
academic institutions.Each of the industries studied has a distinctive environment and poses differ-ent challenges for university researchers. In building infrastructure for network
systems, universities have historically been test beds for new concepts and capa-
bilities. For the medical devices and equipment industry, fundamental205The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.206THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEmultidisciplinary research involving physical sciences and engineering, com-bined with academic medical centers, provides a critical environment for re-
searching, developing, testing, and improving devices and for conducting the
clinical trials necessary to obtaining regulatory approval, all in an atmosphere of
close industry-university collaboration. In the aerospace industry, the mature,
highly concentrated airframe, propulsion, and launch-vehicle sectors have a fairly
narrow range of interactions with academic research, often using consulting agree-
ments and contract research to develop better process methodologies and tools.
By contrast, the less mature unmanned aerial vehicles sector of the industry looks
to academic research for technical support, as well as for new concepts and
understanding. In the transportation, distribution, and logistics services industry
and the financial services industry, a sizeable cultural gap remains between in-
dustry and R&D in general, and academic research in particular. As a result,
although academic research has had a significant impact on both, neither industry
has developed interfaces with academic research comparable to those of
the medical devices and equipment industry or the network systems and commu-
nications industry.The wide variety of university-industry research interactions in these fiveindustries makes it difficult to make generalizations. With the notable exception
of multicompany research centers at universities, most financial support by
industry is negotiated company by company. Companies have different needs
and abilities to interact with academic researchers, and universities have differ-
ent resources to devote to research of value to industry. Generalizations about
what works best for all industries and universities should, therefore, be made
very cautiously.THE NATIONAL INNOVATION SYSTEMFinding 7-2.  The academic research enterprise is a major component of the
national innovation system in the United States. The core competencies of aca-
demic research help sustain and leverage innovation to the benefit of industry.Box 7-1 summarizes the innovation systems1 for the five industries, which
are innovative to varying degrees and in different ways that tend to change over
time. R&D is only one element of their innovation systems but can be very
important. Overall, the U.S. innovation system has many strengths:¥Open labor markets allow technically trained and educated people tomove relatively freely between and among universities and industry.¥Reasonably robust review processes, coupled with a variety of supportmechanisms ranging from peer-reviewed government grants to venture
capital decisions, help to maintain high-quality research.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE CONTRIBUTIONS AND IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH207¥A large number of research structures and mechanisms, both internal andexternal to the university (e.g., academic departments, research centers,
industry laboratories, start-up companies), provide multiple pathways for
the commercialization of new ideas.¥A strong market and consumer demand for new technologies providesstrong commercial incentives for introducing new technologies and, there-
fore, strong incentives for funding research to create them.The research culture in the United States fosters innovation by supportingthe movement of ideas and people among a broad range of diverse researchBOX 7-1Industry Innovation SystemsNetwork Systems and Communications. This sector has a well developed inno-vation system that fosters the rapid creation and implementation of innovations, astrong research culture, and an industry structure that promotes innovation. Major
growth segments are not impeded by excessive regulation, but allocation of radio-frequency spectrum may become increasingly contentious. The industry is heavilymarket and technology driven. Government and industry invest substantial funds
in R&D relevant to the industry.Medical Devices and Equipment. This industry has a well developed innovationsystem that benefits from broad public interest and support, including support fromnonprofit organizations. It is probably the most tightly regulated of the five indus-
tries and the most affected by government policies related to safety, efficacy, andpayments. Government and industry invest substantial funds in R&D relevant tothe industry.Aerospace. Most innovation in the larger, mature sectors is directed toward incre-mental improvements and cost reductions. Government support for R&D has beenreduced in recent years, and the industry has undergone significant consolidation.The smaller, less mature sectors (unmanned aerial vehicles and space-based in-
formation services) are characterized by rapid innovation.Transportation, Distribution, and Logistics Services. The innovation system isnot as well established as in the network services and communications and themedical devices and equipment industries. Although historically this industry has
not focused on R&D or technology-driven innovation, developments in integratedlogistics are creating new opportunities for R&D. However, government and indus-try support for R&D in integrated logistics is modest.Financial Services. An organized innovation system is slowly emerging as theresult of rapid improvements and changes in information systems and technolo-gy. Overall, R&D is rudimentary and not broadly supported. Research opportuni-ties in financial services underscore the need for a broad research portfolio that
addresses both business and technological aspects of the industry drawing onsocial and behavioral sciences as well as engineering and applied mathematics.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.208THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEsectors and structures. Even though research is often essential to innovation, thereis rarely a linear progression from a research result to advanced development to
product development to economic return. Ideas and people tend to bounce around,
and new ideas are sometimes stymied by political or business impediments and
forced to find alternative routes to implementation.CONTRIBUTIONS OF ACADEMIC RESEARCHContributions of academic research to the five industries studied include:graduates trained in modern research techniques; fundamental concepts and ÒkeyideasÓ resulting from basic and applied research; and the development and testing
of tools, prototypes, and marketable products, processes, and services. The
sources of these contributions include engineering, the natural sciences, com-
puter sciences, mathematics, social sciences, behavioral sciences, management
studies, and policy sciences.Graduates Trained in ResearchFinding 7-3.  University-based research provides an education/training ground
for entrants into the industrial workforce. Integrated research and education helps
maintain the flow of human resources from universities that contributes to an
educated, trained industrial workforce. University graduates and faculty are also
involved in many technology-based, start-up companies.Students trained in research are a major component of academiaÕs contribu-tion to industrial performance. U.S. universities are the primary source of people
with research training and experience, including undergraduates, graduate stu-
dents, postdoctoral researchers, and faculty. Individuals with research training
are highly valued by industry, whether or not they are involved in research for the
companies that hire them. In addition to the specific body of knowledge acquired
through academic research, industry values research experience because it re-
quires abilities that are prized in any technical endeavor: self-motivation, prob-
lem solving, teamwork, an understanding of related research, contacts with other
researchers and colleagues, the ability to organize material, and the ability to
overcome setbacks. Research-trained industry employees also enhance a
companyÕs capacity to absorb new ideas, including the results of research, even ifthe company does not conduct its own research.Academic researchers also participate in new companies. Many technology-based start-up companies emerge from academic research and continue to attract
research graduates as they grow. Many high-technology clusters around the coun-
try have developed around one or more research university.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE CONTRIBUTIONS AND IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH209Contributions from Basic, Long-Term ResearchFinding 7-4.  Contributions from basic, long-term academic research in a broad
spectrum of disciplines have figured prominently in industry performance.Portfolio theory, linear programming, derivative-pricing theory, and pros-pect theory, all of academic origin, have laid the foundation for whole new
families of financial products and services. Academic contributions to linear
and integer programming and queue theory are the building blocks of the
information-management and decision-support technologies at the heart of the
integrated-logistics revolution.  Medical devices, such as magnetic resonance

imaging machines and pacemakers, are based on the contributions of fundamen-
tal research from multiple disciplines in the natural sciences and engineering. In
the network systems and communications industry, universities have made im-
portant research contributions to the development of digital subscriber-line tech-
nology, third-generation wireless communication, computer graphics, databases,
search engines, generalized processor sharing, parallel processing, traffic man-
agement, and stable broadcast networking. In aerospace, contributions of basic
research include: the theoretical basis for flight controls for unmanned aerial
vehicles; ShannonÕs information theory (e.g., as applies to communication withaircraft, spacecraft, and satellites); electromagnetic antenna theory; linearized
unsteady-flow analysis; composite-laminate theory; improved understanding of
fiber-matrix interactions in composite materials; superplasticity; and real-time
decision systems using artificial intelligence.Basic, long-term research is essential to the universityÕs role as creator ofnew knowledge and understanding. The committeeÕs review of these five indus-tries confirms that the results of basic research in a wide range of disciplines
eventually find their way by diverse paths into many aspects of commercial life.Contributions from Applied ResearchFinding 7-5.  Academic researchers in applied research and the academic re-
search infrastructure are directly involved in the development of industrial tools,
prototypes, products, and production processes, as well as the delivery of prod-
ucts and services.The five industries in this study provide a variety of examples of the contribu-tions of applied research (see Box 7-2). Sometimes applied research is protracted
and has cumulative, incremental results. An example might be continued improve-
ments in computational fluid dynamics as a tool for modeling airflow. Another
would be the long-term contributions of academic researchers to improved produc-
tion processes and product performance in electronic storage devices.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.210THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEThe ability to solve discrete practical problems is also valuable in countlessprojects performed for individual companies. Short-term research projects, stu-
dent projects, and consulting projects to solve specific, important problems in
industry are based on formal and informal relationships between companies and
faculty. Many companies nurture relationships with multiple universities, often
relying on local institutions to solve technical problems or to advise the company
Õsengineering staff on potential solutions. Examples include assistance in produc-
tion scheduling in logistics, simulations of airflow and nondestructive evaluation
of materials in aerospace, and models for pricing derivatives and securities inBOX 7-2Contributions of Applied University ResearchNetwork Systems and Communications. Contributions include packet switch-
ing and the Internet TCP/IP protocol, both key elements in the development ofthe Internet. The Mosaic web browser interface was an important step in the
rapid evolution of the World Wide Web. University researchers and other univer-sity personnel have contributed in significant ways to routers, the developmentof ATM switches, digital subscriber-line technology (DSL), third-generation wire-
less transmission, computer graphics, search engines, traffic management,stable broadcast networking, the evolution of new networks, and the develop-ment of standards.Medical Devices and Equipment. The development of a wide range of thera-
peutic and diagnostic devices has resulted from the involvement of academic re-searchers and academic medical centers in R&D, prototype testing, evaluation,and clinical trials. Devices and equipment include magnetic resonance imaging
equipment; whole-body CAT scanners; flexible endoscopy; lasers for a broadrange of medical applications, ranging from gastrointestinal surgery to eye sur-gery; cardiac-assist devices; organ and joint replacements; ultrasound and mini-
mally invasive surgical techniques; and developments in tissue engineering.Aerospace. Contributions to the development of tools include advanced nonintru-
sive instrumentation, flow-visualization techniques, and computational fluid dy-
namics. Contributions to specific technologies have been made in the areas of
heat transfer, combustion cooling, and aeromechanics; low-Reynolds-number air-foil design; Internet by satellite, including protocols and computational tools fordata integration; and folding-wing design for small unmanned aerial vehicles.Transportation, Distribution, and Logistics Services. Contributions include op-
timization modeling for shippers, software applications/decision-support systemsfor routing, production scheduling, logistics, and distribution management. Muchof this software was commercialized by academic spin-off companies.Financial Services. Contributions include new financial instruments (including in-
dex funds and derivatives); financial information and research tools, including risk/credit metrics and financial risk-management software; models for pricing deriva-tives and securities; and advances in cryptography for specific financial services.
These contributions have come from engineering and business schools, as well asfrom mathematics research.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE CONTRIBUTIONS AND IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH211financial services. Most universities consider this an important aspect of theservice role of the university and encourage these interactions.Research centers, especially those with industrial participation, are anotheravenue by which universities perform both ÒdirectedÓ basic research and applied
research that helps industry. In 1993, almost 70 percent of industryÕs financialsupport for university research flowed through some 1,100 university-industry
research centers, which have become the dominant form of industry support for
academic R&D (Cohen et al., 1998). The best known examples are the engineer-ing research centers (ERCs) funded by the National Science Foundation (NSF)
since the mid-1980s. NSF currently funds 20 ERCs in four broad categories:
bioengineering; design, manufacturing, and product development systems; earth-
quake engineering; and microelectronic systems and information technology
(NSF, 2001). Industry participation and industryÕs help in defining problems thatare of interest to many companies, have greatly increased the impact of academic
research centers.2Key IdeasFinding 7-6.  Sustained interactions between academic research and industry
have been a source of Òkey ideasÓ that have generated significant technological
opportunities through a fusion of knowledge of the possible and knowledge of
what needs to be done.Specific contributions of academic researchÑbasic and appliedÑrepresentkey ideas derived from sustained interaction between academic research and
industry. Key ideas and the major technological opportunities or breakthroughs
that result from key ideas are often the product of cumulative research inter-
actions and advances involving the flow of ideas and people back and forth across
the boundaries between universities and industry. Examples of key ideas include:
the TCP/IP Internet protocol, the web browser, routers, index funds and deriva-
tives, decision-support technologies, pacemakers, and magnetic-resonance imag-
ing. (For a graphic illustration of the interaction between academic and industry
research on key ideas leading to major technological advances in information
technology see Figure 2-1.)Contributions from Multi-industry, Indirect, andComplementary ResearchFinding 7-7.  Academic research in a given field or discipline may contribute
directly or indirectly to more than one industry; and many innovations result from
complementary advances in more than one field of research.Many contributions of academic research to an industry are mediated throughother disciplines or embedded in technologies, products, and services derivedThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.212THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEfrom other industries. Basic research in physics, biology, and chemistry has led tonew knowledge and capabilities in microelectronics, genetic engineering, and
other fields that have directly contributed to the creation of high-value, high-
technology products and services. Contributions from academic research to
major cross-sector technologies, such as information technology, have directly
benefited many industries. For example, information technology is critical to the
technical and market performance of aircraft and has profoundly changed the
structure and performance of the financial services, as well as the transportation,
distribution, and logistics services industries. Similarly, intelligent sensors,
computer-aided diagnosis, and robotics are the basis for many new medical de-
vices. Research in materials science and bioengineering has enabled advances in
products and processes in many industries.The five industry studies have also underscored the multidisciplinary char-acter of many innovations in products and services. For example, the develop-
ment of new medical devices relies heavily on advances not only in the life
sciences, but also in the physical sciences and engineering. Many service inno-
vations in the network systems and communications industry have depended on
complementary progress in engineering and physical, social, and behav-
ioral sciences.Contributions from the Social SciencesFinding 7-8.  Many valuable contributions to industry have resulted from aca-
demic research in the social, behavioral, management, and policy sciences.Network Systems and Communications IndustryAcademic business schools have long been concerned with making the ben-efits of information technology available to businesses. Through research, a num-
ber of approaches and techniques have been developed, including decision-
support systems, the implementation of information technology for strategic ad-
vantage, computer-supported cooperation, productivity research, and software
development methodologies. Deregulation, partly a response to academic re-
search in economics, has affected all five of the industries in this study to varying
degrees. Economics research on network externalities and Internet economics has
helped to define business strategies for electronic businesses and Internet service
providers. Organizational aspects of communications service companies are the
focus of attention in new information-management schools and programs. Re-
search by psychologists and social scientists has explored how people use com-
puter and communication systems and the effects of these systems on people and
organizations. An excellent example is a classic study by Card et al. (1983)
showing how cognitive psychology can be used to estimate human performance
when interacting with a computer.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE CONTRIBUTIONS AND IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH213Medical Devices and Equipment IndustryResearch in engineering, the natural sciences, the social sciences, risk analysis,and business are likely to be of increasing importance to medical information systems.
In addition, clinical research studies that help determine the acceptance or rejection of
new medical devices require a broad-based approach that incorporates a variety
of disciplines.Aerospace IndustryIn a broad sense, academic research on production and management systems,typically performed by business faculty, has had an enormous impact on all
manufacturing industries. Concepts that have contributed to recent increases in
productivity in manufacturing, such as total quality management, workforce em-
powerment, supply-chain integration, and just-in-time production, were identi-
fied and disseminated by academic researchers. The Lean Aerospace Initiative
(LAI) at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology is an example of
multidisciplinary research with strong industry participation. Focused on strate-
gies for applying lean manufacturing and management concepts to aerospace,
LAI includes research in several engineering disciplines, economics, behavioral
science, computer science, marketing, management, and other disciplines.Transportation, Distribution, and Logistics Services IndustryThe research most relevant to integrated logistics is in operations research,an area associated with engineering schools, applied mathematics departments,
and business or management programs. Human factors research and consumer
research are also important to the industry.Financial Services IndustryThe financial services industry has a history of benefiting from economicsand business research rather than research in natural sciences and engineering.
Leading examples are the Nobel prize-winning work in economics by Markowitz
and Sharpe on portfolio theory, by Scholes and Merton on pricing derivative
securities, and by Koopmans and Kantrovich on linear pricing models. Academic
research in the social sciences has contributed to an understanding of large data
sets and consumer behavior. In addition, academic researchers have been instru-
mental in analyzing legal and regulatory restraints on financial services.VECTORS OF CONTRIBUTIONFinding 7-9.  Numerous diverse, robust, and often mutually reinforcing vectors
link academic research to the five industries.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.214THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEThe traditional idea of universities as places that educate students and con-duct basic research is, at best, incomplete. Ideas and people are carried by mul-
tiple vectors between academia and industry. These vectors include the direct
hiring of students, graduates, and faculty by industry; temporary exchanges of
researchers; faculty consulting arrangements; sabbaticals; research grants and
contracts; institutional mechanisms at universities (e.g., research centers, consor-
tia, industrial liaison programs); technology licensing; spin-off companies; publi-
cations; conferences; and short courses. The modes or pathways are summarized
in Box 7-3.IMPACT OF CONTRIBUTIONSMeasuring the quantitative impact of specific innovations on the perfor-mance of a firm or an industry is extremely difficult because performance in the
market is determined by synergies between multiple innovations and other fac-
tors, both internal and external. Isolating the contribution of academic research
is at best an inexact science. Therefore, this study was designed from the outset
to provide a qualitative assessment. Panels for each industry relied on informed
opinion, informal surveys of industry and academic leaders, workshop discus-
sions, and expert judgment to assess the impact of academic research on in-
dustry performance.Network Systems and Communications IndustryAcademic research has had a substantial impact on this industry. The flow ofresearchers, ideas, and entrepreneurial activity between universities and industry,
coupled with government support for research and test beds for infrastructure
development, have been instrumental in the creation of new companies, services,
and modes of business. As emphasis shifts to the deployment and maintenance of
large-scale systems and the economical provision of services, the impact of uni-
versity research may be moderated somewhat because research relevant to opera-
tional networks is expensive and often proprietary. Many firms opt to hire ca-
pable university researchers, rather than fund research at universities. However,
the federal government continues to invest heavily in academic research on infor-
mation technology, which is expected to generate results with long-term com-
mercial impacts.Medical Devices and Equipment IndustryAcademic research has had a substantial impact on performance in this in-dustry. In addition to science- and technology-based research and innovation in
universities, academic medical centers (AMCs) play a unique role. Industry and
academia depend on each other for product development, testing, introduction,The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE CONTRIBUTIONS AND IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH215BOX 7-3Vectors of Technology Transfer from Universities to Industry
Trained Graduates. The direct employment of graduates and faculty, whether aspermanent or temporary hires, by manufacturing companies and by the intermedi-ate product and service vendors that support them is an important vector of
knowledge/technology transfer from academic research to industry.Consultancies. Faculty consultancies are not well documented but represent animportant means of exchanging knowledge. Data on the amount of time facultyspend consulting with industry are not available. Most engineering schools, how-
ever, allow faculty to spend up to 20 percent of their time as consultants.Sponsored and Collaborative Research. Research grants, primarily from thefederal government but also from other nonindustry sources, can lead to resultsthat find their way to industry. Research funded directly by industry accounts for
roughly 8 percent of total academic research activity; industry support is some-times a requirement for federal funding.Spin-off Companies. Companies started by academic researchers have becomean increasingly important mechanism of knowledge/technology transfer in the last
two decades.1 CISCO Systems, Amati Communications, and Growth Networks in
the network systems industry and CPLEX Optimization and CAPS Logistics in thetransportation, distribution, and logistics industry are examples of the successful
commercialization of the results of academic research by start-up companies.Licensing. Technology licensing directly from the university or through spin-offcompanies increased rapidly during the 1990s. University gross revenues fromlicensing increased from $130 million in 1990 to a total of $1.1 billion in 2001
(AUTM, 2002; NSB, 2000).2 Patent ownership by universities rose sharply, from
about 250 annually in the early 1970s to more than 3,700 in 2001 (AUTM, 2002;NSB, 2000). However, royalties from university patents represent only about
2 percent of R&D expenditures and generally come from a few blockbuster pat-ents (Nelson, 2000). Patenting and licensing by universities have been mostly inthe biotechnology sector (NSB, 2000).Research Centers. The number and importance of university-industry research
centers has increased substantially in the last two decades. In general, these rela-tionships appear to play a useful facilitating role in university-industry interactionand knowledge transfer.Publications, Conferences, Workshops, and Short Courses.  Research publi-cations and the presentation of research results at conferences, workshops, andother forums that bring together academic and industrial researchers remain im-portant vectors for the exchange of knowledge between academia and industry.1More than 3,870 new companies were formed based on licenses from academic institu-tions between 1980 and 2001, 494 of them in 2001. In that year, universities held an

equity interest in 70 percent of these start-up companies. Many more companies based on
university-generated ideas, science, and technology did not involve university licensing
(AUTM, 2002).2These figures were self-reported by respondents to the AUTM Licensing Survey and donot necessarily include all universities (AUTM, 2002).The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.216THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEand modification of medical devices at AMCs. Nevertheless, the impact could beeven greater if there were a more systematic approach to educational partnerships
between industry and universities. These partnerships might include the sharing
of large, expensive medical research facilities and joint research and train-
ing activities.Aerospace IndustryAlthough many basic concepts and a good deal of the fundamental knowl-edge of aerodynamics were developed by academics, the impact of academic
research on performance in the mature sectors of the aerospace industry has been
relatively modest in recent years. The combination of aerospace corporationsÕstrong research capabilities, concerns about intellectual property rights, an em-
phasis on incremental improvements in products with long life cycles, and com-
petitive pressures that demand improvements in production processes has limited
the current value of academic research. However, industry and government labo-
ratories that support the mature aspects of the industry continue to depend on
graduates educated and trained at universities, and aerospace continues to be one
of the most research-intensive industries. Less mature sectors, such as unmanned
aerial vehicles and space-based information systems, where innovation is pro-
ceeding rapidly, depend heavily on universities for research and innovation.Transportation, Distribution, and Logistics Services IndustryThe impact of academic research on performance in transportation, distribu-tion, and logistics services as a whole has been relatively modest. Basic re-
search, some of it done in the 1950s with no logistics applications in mind, has
had the greatest impact on the industry. Linear and integer programming and
queueing theory are the building blocks of the information-management and
decision-support technologies at the heart of the integrated-logistics revolution.
Applied research in these fields has also made important contributions, such as
large-scale optimization modeling, decomposition methods, network optimiza-
tion, and advances in other areas of operations research. These successes not-
withstanding, a large gap remains between technologies that could have a tre-
mendous impact and technologies that actually have had an impact. Overall,
there is not enough demand from the industry or capacity in the industry to take
advantage of research results.Financial Services IndustryAcademic research has had a substantial impact on certain aspects of thefinancial services industry, especially on novel financial products and services.
The financial instruments, investment management, and decision-support toolsThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE CONTRIBUTIONS AND IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH217created in academia or through public-private partnerships have been critical tonew products, business lines, and more efficient transactions, and hence to the
success of the industry. Furthermore, a significant component of modern finan-
cial services would not be possible without the fundamental mathematical tools
developed for or adapted to financial problems by academia. Research has fo-
cused on linear programming models in economics, portfolio theory, and pricing
derivative securities. University research has greatly impacted financial services
despite the lack of a well developed, organized R&D system focused directly on
problems and issues related to financial services.NOTES1Drawing on LundvallÕs (1992) definition of national innovation systems, the committee definesan industryÕs system of innovation as Òconstituted by elements (people, capital, organizations, et al.)and relationships that interact in the production, diffusion and use of new, and economically useful,knowledgeÓ within a given industry.
2At the end of the funding period for NSF-supported engineering research centers, most ERCswill become self-sustaining.  Currently there are 16 self-sustaining ERCs.
REFERENCESAUTM (Association of University Technology Managers). 2002. AUTM Licensing Survey, FY2001. Northbrook, Ill.: AUTM.Card, S.K., T.P. Moran, and A. Newell. 1983. The Psychology of Human-Computer Interaction.Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Cohen, W.M., R. Florida, L.P. Randazzese, and J. Walsh. 1998. Industry and the Academy: UneasyPartners in the Cause of Technological Advance. Pp. 171Ð199 in Challenges to Research Uni-versities, R. Noll, ed. Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.Lundvall, B.L. 1992. National Systems of Innovation: Towards a Theory of Innovation and Inter-active Learning. London: Pinter Publishers.Nelson, L. 2000. Many Forms of Technology Transfer from Universities. Viewgraph presented at theAAAS Science and Technology Policy Colloquium, Washington, D.C., April 2000.NSB (National Science Board). 2000. Science and Engineering Indicators 2000. Washington, D.C.:U.S. Government Printing Office.NSF (National Science Foundation). 2001. Engineering Research Centers: Partnerships for Competi-tiveness. Arlington, Va.: National Science Foundation.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2198Challenges for the FutureBased on the conditions, experiences, and trends in the five industries exam-ined in this study, the committee identified six major challenges that are likely to
affect the impact of university-based research on industry performance in the
coming years.SERVICESFinding 8-1.  Although innovations in service delivery are becoming more im-
portant, the academic research enterprise is not focused on or organized to meet
the needs of service businesses.Services account for almost 80 percent of the U.S. gross domestic product,employ a large and growing share of the science and engineering workforce, and
are the primary users of information technology. In most manufacturing indus-
tries, the service functions, such as logistics, distribution, and customer service,
have become leading sources of competitive advantage. The rate of innovation
and level of productivity in the services infrastructure (e.g., finance, transporta-
tion, communication, health care) have an enormous impact on the productivity
and performance of all other segments of the economy. Moreover, as the studies
of the financial services industry, the transportation, distribution, and logistics
services industry, and the network systems and communications industry show,
improving services is a major impetus for innovation throughout the economy.Nevertheless, the U.S. academic research enterprise, despite its broad dis-ciplinary base and potential for crossdisciplinary research and training, is not
focused on or organized to meet the needs of service businesses. MajorThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.220THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEchallenges facing universities are: (1) adapting and applying systems and in-dustrial-engineering concepts, methodologies, and quality-control processes to
service functions and businesses; (2) integrating technological research with
research in social sciences, management, and public policy; and (3) educating
and training engineering and science graduates to deal with management, policy,

and social issues.THE REGULATORY CLIMATEFinding 8-2.  Regulations and regulatory changes have profoundly influenced
industry receptivity to contributions by academic research. In some cases, aca-
demic research has helped to shape the regulatory environment; academia is well
qualified to provide interdisciplinary expertise to inform regulatory decisions.All of the industries in this study operate in an environment that is currentlyor has been highly regulated, and changes in the regulatory environment over
time have affected them in obvious and not so obvious ways. At one end of the
spectrum are the airline and trucking industries. For many years, strict regulation
precluded airlines and trucking companies from competing based on price; there-
fore, competition was based on speed, reliability, and other amenities that tended
to spur innovation. Deregulation in both industries has led to intense competition,
based on both price and quality of service. Although the need for innovation
remains, lower margins and, therefore, tighter research budgets have restricted
the focus of R&D. At the other end of the spectrum is the medical devices and
equipment industry. Companies in this industry operate in a highly regulated
environment in which the safety and effectiveness of new devices must be clearly
demonstrated. Universities, specifically academic medical centers, are particu-
larly well equipped to carry out the laboratory research and clinical trials de-
scribed in regulatory requirements. This industry is a prime example of how the
contributions of academic research are affected by the overall regulatory environ-
ment in which an industry operates.Academic research has also greatly influenced the regulatory environment.Based on economics research, much of it performed in academia, the role of
regulation has been redefined from protecting the public interest in naturally
monopolistic markets to promoting market entry and ensuring vigorous compe-
tition to achieve public benefits. The change has spurred deregulation in a num-
ber of industries, including network systems and communications. In the finan-
cial services industry, the impact of academic research on regulation has been
small historically, usually in response to crises; however, the impact is growing,
especially in the area of risk management. The influx of technically trained
scientists and engineers into financial regulatory bodies has enabled regulators
to draw on advances in risk modeling, which, in turn, has led to innovations in
the industry proper. In the medical devices arena, academic researchers couldThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHALLENGES FOR THE FUTURE221play an important role in the ongoing reform of the Food and DrugAdministrationÕs regulatory policies by assembling industry, regulatory, and
clinical panels to discuss appropriate requirements for bringing products, such
as artificial hearts and mechanical cardiac-assist devices, into widespread
clinical use.INTELLECTUAL PROPERTYFinding 8-3.  Over the past 25 years, research universities have increasingly
emphasized technology transfer and the generation of income from research re-
sults, through patenting, the creation of technology transfer offices, and licens-
ing. Although the increased attention to management of intellectual property has
had many positive consequences for industry and academia, questions remain
about the overall effectiveness of technology transfer investments, as well as the
impact of these activities on universitiesÕ core research and education missions.Throughout the 1970s and early 1980s, government policy increasingly
favored stronger protections for intellectual property resulting from publicly
funded research. Several universities had already increased patenting activity in
the 1970s, largely as a result of the emergence of biotechnology, but the propen-
sity to patent increased markedly after 1980. Since 1980, the number of univer-
sity technology transfer offices has grown from 25 to more than 200 (Sampat and
Nelson, 1999). These offices have provided an alternative interface with industry
to the traditional offices of sponsored research. Technology-transfer offices focus
on licensing university technologies and generating royalties.Other mechanisms for profiting from research have also been developed. Forinstance, some leading research universities have made long-term agreements
with individual companies for joint research, joint clinical trials, and profit shar-
ing; companies use these agreements to leverage research funded from other
sources. Universities are becoming more willing to take equity stakes in new
companies. A percentage of equity is often a requirement for companiesÕ partici-
pation in university-based business incubators, and universities are increasingly
providing some of the initial funding for faculty membersÕ start-up companies. In
addition, a growing number of university researchers have added financial gain
and entrepreneurship to their traditional university roles of teaching, research,
and service. In some cases, patents and royalties are shared with the university. In
other cases, faculty researchers have taken advantage of available venture capital
to fund new companies to produce commercial products based on their research.
All of these mechanismsÑpatents, licensing, contracting, industrial liaison pro-
grams, and start-up companiesÑhave expanded interactions between universities
and industry and changed the traditional role of universities in that relationship,
which, for the most part, had been limited to faculty consulting, small amounts of
contract research for companies, and the preparation of graduates for careers
in industry.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.222THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEThe emphasis on commercializing research results has affected the structureand dynamics of industry interactions with leading research universities. For ex-
ample, in the mature sectors of the aerospace industry the problem of the protection
and ownership of intellectual property is a significant barrier to collaborative
university-industry research. This situation may be attributable to the advanced
level of competition in the industry and could be indicative of things to come in
other mature, highly competitive, research-intensive industries. By contrast, the
treatment of intellectual property rights has not figured prominently in relations
between universities and the financial services industry, in which secrecy and first-
mover advantages prevail. Indeed, the lack of intellectual property rights in finan-
cial services might be an impediment to collaborative academic-industry research
in a different way because it is difficult for universities to maintain secrecy. In the
transportation, distribution, and logistics services industry, where intellectual prop-

erty is often developed and commercialized by the same faculty, consultancies and
start-up software companies have helped the industry avoid problems.Increased patenting activity by academic researchers has had many positiveconsequences for both industry and academia. Academic researchers now have
new incentives and new avenues for pursuing their entrepreneurial energies and
new products, services, processes, and companies to show for it. As Congress
predicted when it passed the Bayh-Dole Act in 1980, allowing universities to own
and profit from the results of their research has stimulated researchers to patent
and seek the commercialization of research results. Recent research indicates that
the willingness of industry to invest in the commercialization of inventions li-
censed from universities is closely correlated with strong property rights (Jensen
and Thursby, 2001; Dechenaux et al., 2002). The increase in patents has also had
benefits for industry: (1) patenting places research results in the public domain,
where they are much more accessible than they are through journals or unpub-
lished papers; (2) patents have value that can be capitalized through licensing
agreements or as collateral in securing financial resources for start-up companies;
and (3) patents provide at least some protection for the resulting commercial
products, thereby encouraging investors to make the capital investments neces-
sary for successful commercialization.At the same time, the growing emphasis on university ownership and exploi-tation of intellectual property has raised questions about the near-term efficacy of
the patent-licensing infrastructure, as well as the long-term impact on university-
industry interactions and the health of the academic research enterprise.  To date,

direct contributions of academic research through patenting activity has been
small. The creation of technology-transfer offices, with the technical, financial,
and legal expertise they require, however, can be expensive; indeed, relatively
few universities have earned much of a direct financial return on these invest-
ments. In fiscal year 2000, only 72 universities had income from licenses of more
than $1 million; and the University of California system accounted for nearly
one-quarter of the total license income reported in that year. Although even smallThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHALLENGES FOR THE FUTURE223amounts of income are important in the context of tight university budgets, li-cense income exceeded 5 percent of total research expenditures at only 15 univer-
sities; typically it is less than 1 percent (AUTM, 2001).Students of technology transfer and the research university have begun tolook into questions raised by the growing interest of universities and research
faculty in intellectual property (e.g., Henderson et al., 1998; Link et al., 2002;
Morgan and Strickland, 2000; Nelson, 2001; Press and Washburn, 2000; Stefan,
2000). Have investments in patent licensing infrastructure been worth it? Have
they made technology transfer from universities to industry more effective? Or
would the licensed technologies have been picked up by industry in any case?
Does the emphasis on capturing intellectual property rights raise the transaction
cost of research? Are there other value-added results from these investments, and
how should they be measured? To what extent does the emphasis on intellectual
property and secrecy inhibit the free flow of ideas, impede advances, and disrupt
the research culture? How has increased emphasis on intellectual property af-
fected teaching and learning? A better understanding of these and related issues
will have important implications for future practices and policies. Therefore, it is
critical that these questions continue to be addressed.INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYFinding 8-4.  Information technology is critical to the performance of all indus-
tries and will continue to be so in the future. IndustryÕs need for the continueddevelopment, diffusion, and application of advanced information technology pre-
sents major opportunities for academic research in many disciplines, including
mathematics, computer sciences, physical sciences, life sciences, multiple engi-
neering disciplines, social sciences, and behavioral sciences.The importance of information technology to industry performance cannotbe overstated. As hardware becomes cheaper and more powerful, networks and
communications are becoming more pervasive, and the volume of information
created, stored, and exchanged is growing exponentially. As a result, questions
about the management of information for private gain and/or public benefit are
also increasing. Addressing these issues will provide a wide range of challenges
for academic researchers in almost every discipline. To name just a few ex-
amples, industries will need software that facilitates the interoperability of legacy
systems and reduces the vulnerability of infrastructure and business to breaches
of security and privacy. Academia will also be expected to continue supplying
skilled technicians, developers, and managers (NRC, 2000).A BALANCED RESEARCH PORTFOLIOFinding 8-5.  Universities must maintain a balance of research projects to sustain
their role as repositories of expertise and resources in many disciplinesÑbasicThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.224THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEand applied research in engineering, life sciences, physical sciences, social sci-ences, behavioral sciences, managerial sciences, public policy studies, and inter-
disciplinary research.Basic, long-term research performed at universities is an essential part of thenational innovation system. All of the industries studied derive significant ben-
efits from basic research, although the importance of basic research to industry
performance is not well recognized, particularly among individual companies.
Most federal funding continues to support basic research, but industry-funded
academic research is focused mostly on problems that can be solved relatively
quickly. As universities become more entrepreneurial, the potential financial
gains from commercially relevant research could create strong incentives for
universities to focus on applied research at the expense of basic research. If so,

federal funding for basic, long-term research will be even more critical.Federal funding is now virtually the only source of support for basic re-search, which makes effective management of federal research programs of para-
mount importance. At the highest level, Congress should recognize and reaffirm
the importance of basic research at universities. To capture the imaginations of
the best academic researchers, program managers at the Defense Advanced Re-
search Projects Agency, National Science Foundation (NSF), and other agencies
should work with researchers to develop agendas that might lead to major new
insights. In some areas, such as network systems, the best researchers may al-
ready be losing interest. The challenge is not just to maintain a balance between
basic and applied research, but also to ensure that the basic research portfolio is
sufficiently diverse to stimulate innovative thinking by academic researchers in
many fields.To meet this challenge, the balance of federal funding for research in specificfields and agencies should be reassessed. The percentage of federal funding for
academic research supported by the National Institutes of Health increased from
49 percent to 62 percent from 1980 to 2001. During the same period, NSFÕsfunding decreased somewhat, from 20 percent to 17 percent. The relative shares
of federal funding for academic research at other federal agencies, such as the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the U.S. Department of Energy,
and the U.S. Department of Defense, have also declined (NSF, 2001). In a policy
statement accompanying Science and Engineering Indicators 2000, the NationalScience Board noted (NSB, 2000):The life sciences now account for more than 50 percent of the U.S. federalinvestment in basic researchÉ. TodayÕs strong federal support for the life sci-ences is warranted because biomedical research is on the cusp of a revolution inpreventative medicine and treatment. Nevertheless, todayÕs overall research bud-get is increasingly out of balance.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHALLENGES FOR THE FUTURE225The generation of key ideas that lead to technological breakthroughs, as wellas sustained incremental innovation, requires contributionsÑboth direct and in-direct via cross-sector technologiesÑfrom research in many fields. The value ofresearch results in one field often depends heavily on advances in complementary
fields, which is a strong argument for maintaining a balanced research portfolio
in many fields of science and engineering.Finally, research opportunities in the social and behavioral sciences pose an-other challenge for industry program managers, as well as academic researchers.
As the U.S. economy continues to shift toward services, and competitiveness inmanufacturing and services industries is defined increasingly by the relative ability
of firms to manage knowledge and human capital, as well as to anticipate and meet
the wants of customers (involving them more and more directly in the design and
production of goods and services), the importance of research in social, managerial,
behavioral, and policy sciences for industry and government will certainly grow.
For the most part, the value and relevance of this research has yet to be recognized
by industry or government agencies. Although research in selected areas of eco-
nomics and managerial sciences has had a demonstrable impact on industry prac-
tices, researchers in the social and behavioral sciences, in general, have not con-
veyed the value of their research to industry effectively. Examples in this study of
five very different industries show that research in the social and behavioral sci-
ences (integrated with the natural sciences and engineering) in areas related to
information technology and services can greatly improve our understanding of how
technological developments affect individuals and society as a whole.KEEPING PACE AND MOVING FORWARDFinding 8-6.  The core strengths of the academic research enterprise are stable
enough and flexible enough to respond to the rapidly changing needs of industry.A major challenge for universities is keeping pace with the rapidly changingresearch and human resource needs of industries while continuing to pursue basic
research in new areas to generate ideas that will provide the foundation for
industries in the future. This challenge is manifested differently in different in-
dustries. In the network systems and communication industry, as well as the
medical devices and equipment industry, where linkages to academic research
have been very strong, industry leaders are concerned that academic research
may not be able to adapt, articulate, and pursue basic and applied research and
training in new directions. In the financial services and the transportation, distri-
bution, and logistics services industries, which do not have a strong industry
R&D ethos, and in the mature sectors of the aerospace industry, industry is less
concerned about academic research Òkeeping upÓ than about academia meeting
their research and educational/training needs. All five industry studies revealedThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.226THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEproblems with participants in academic long-term research adapting to shiftingindustry priorities and emerging opportunities in particular areas.The academic research enterprise has some very important core strengths.Universities address a broader spectrum of ideas and disciplinary perspectives
than any other institutions in the U.S. innovation system; they have enormous
potential for multidisciplinary research. Universities also integrate advanced re-
search and education. The constant flow of new students through universities
continuously revitalizes the academic research enterprise, challenging the as-
sumptions of faculty and bringing fresh perspectives to research. Research-trained
graduates play a critical role in the development, transfer, diffusion, and applica-
tion of new knowledge and technology in industry. Universities can draw on
these core strengths to keep pace with current industry needs and move forward.REFERENCESAUTM (Association of University Technology Managers). 2001. AUTM Licensing Survey,FY 2000. Norwalk, Conn.: AUTM.Dechenaux, E., B. Goldfarb, S. Shane, and M. Thursby. 2002. Appropriability and the timing ofinnovation: evidence from MIT inventions. Summer Institute 2002, National Bureau of Eco-nomic Research, Cambridge, Mass. Available online at: http://www.nber.org/~confer/2002/si2002/thursby.pdf. [June 24, 2003]Henderson, R., A. Jaffe, and M. Trajtenberg. 1998. Universities as a source of commercial technol-ogy: a detailed analysis of university patenting, 1965Ð1988. Review of Economics and Statis-tics 80(1): 119Ð127.Jensen, R. and Thursby, M. 2001. Proofs and prototypes for sale: the licensing of university inven-tions. American Economic Review 91(1): 240Ð259.Link, A.N., J. Scott, and D. Siegel. 2002. The economics of intellectual property at universities: anoverview (forthcoming in Special Issue of the International Journal of Industrial Organization).Available online at: http://www.people.virginia.edu/~sa9w/ijio/abstracts/Accepted/Overview.pdf. [June 24, 2003]Morgan, R.P., and D.E. Strickland. 2000. U.S. university research contributions to industry: findingsand conjectures. Science and Public Policy 28(2): 113Ð121.Nelson, R.R. 2001. Observations on the post-Bayh-Dole rise of patenting at American universities.Journal of Technology Transfer 26(1-2): 13Ð19.NRC (National Research Council). 2000. Making IT Better: Expanding the Scope of InformationTechnology Research to Meet SocietyÕs Needs. Computer Science and TelecommunicationsBoard. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.NSB (National Science Board). 2000. Science and Technology Policy: Past and Prologue. A Com-panion to Science and Engineering Indicators, 2000. Available online at: http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2000/nsb0087/nsb0087.pdf. [June 24, 2003]NSF (National Science Foundation). 2001. Federal Funds for Research and Development: FederalObligations for Research to Universities and Colleges by Agency and Detailed Field of Scienceand Engineering: Fiscal years 1973Ð2001. Arlington, Va.: National Science Foundation.Press, E., and J. Washburn. 2000. The kept university. Atlantic Monthly 285(3): 39Ð54.Sampat, B., and R. Nelson. 1999. The Emergence and Standardization of University TechnologyTransfer Offices: A Case Study of Institutional Change. Prepared for the 1999 Conference ofthe International Society for the New Institutional Economics, September 16Ð18, 1999. Wash-ington, D.C.: World Bank.Stefan, P. 2000. Remarks at the Conference on University-Industry Technology Transfer, PurdueUniversity, West Lafayette, Indiana, June 10, 2000.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2279Conclusions and RecommendationsThis study has documented how performance in five very different industrieshas been improved by contributions from academic researchÑfrom the educa-
tion of graduates with research training at all levels to conceptual breakthroughs
and incremental technical advances based on basic and applied research to the
development and testing of tools, prototypes, and marketable products, processes,
and services. Numerous diverse, robust, and often mutually reinforcing vectors
link academic research to industry, including direct hiring of students, graduates,
and faculty; temporary exchanges of researchers; faculty consultancies; industry-
sponsored research contracts and grants; research centers; consortia; industrial
liaison programs; technology licensing; start-up companies; publications;
and conferences.Research-trained graduates at all degree levels are critical to the develop-ment, transfer, diffusion, and application of new knowledge and technology in
industry. Indeed, the interaction between research-trained individuals in academia
and in industry is essential to the exchange of knowledge and technology and to
the nationÕs innovation system.Basic long-term research at universities in many fields of science and engi-neering has had a huge impact on industry. Roughly half of all basic research in the
United States is conducted by universities. Basic long-term research is essential to
the health of universities as creators of new knowledge and understanding; and the
results of basic research in a wide range of disciplines intermingle, build on each
other, and eventually find their way by diverse paths into commercial life. Because
in most fields it is difficult for individual firms or groups of firms to appropriate

return on investment exclusively, commercial firms have little incentive to fund
The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.228THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEbasic research at universities. As a result, the federal government currently fundsthe majority of basic research in academia.Contributions from applied research at universities are also very important toindustry. The industry studies in this report document that academic researchers
and the academic research infrastructure are directly involved in the development
of industrial tools, prototypes, products, and production processes, as well as in the
delivery of products and services. Academic applied research has led to cumulative,
incremental advances that have been of great importance to whole industries; indi-
vidual companies have also benefited from university-based researchers working to
solve discrete practical problems related to their businesses. University-based re-
search centers, with industry participation, have become an important vector for
transferring the results of ÒdirectedÓ basic research and applied research to industry.
Most of the applied research and ÒdirectedÓ basic research performed at
universities is funded by federal agencies (e.g., the U.S. Department of Defense,
U.S. Department of Energy, and the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services) looking for solutions to specific problems. Industry funds a small por-
tion of applied research in universities, both directly and indirectly by supporting
university-based research centers that are largely federally funded. Although the
portion of academic research funded by industry increased in the 1990s, it is still
only about 7 percent of the total.Universities have benefited greatly from interactions with industry. Despiteminimal financial support from industry, questions posed by industry often reveal
gaps in knowledge that can be addressed by long-term academic research, thus
stimulating fundamental research in many fields. This is apparent in high-
technology industries (e.g., network systems and communications and the medi-
cal devices and equipment industries). But even in other industries (e.g., financial
services or transportation, distribution, and logistics services) that perform little
if any R&D but require lots of technology, industry challenges can be important
stimuli to both basic and applied research.The impact of university-based research on industry is not limited to researchin the natural sciences and engineering. Research in the social sciences, broadly
defined, has also made major contributions to industrial success. Research on
consumer behavior, for example, has influenced industry decision-making pro-
cesses in marketing, product design, and the setting of technical priorities; re-
search in economics has informed regulatory decisions, merger and acquisition
strategies, the development of financial products, and trade, monetary, and fiscal
policy; research in mathematics has had a direct impact on information technol-
ogy but has also been crucial to other fields (e.g., cryptography) that affect
personal and business transactions daily. In these and other fields, the cumulative
effects of academic research have led to changes in the legal and regulatory
frameworks essential to successful innovation.Often the contributions of academic research to industry are mediated throughother disciplines or embedded in technologies, products, and services derivedThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS229from other industries. The five industry studies show how academic research inphysics, biology, and chemistry has led to new knowledge and capabilities in
microelectronics, genetic engineering, and other fields that have directly contrib-
uted to the creation of high-value, high-technology products and services. They
also show how contributions from academic research to major cross-sector tech-
nologiesÑinformation technology in particularÑhave directly benefited mul-tiple industries. Information technology is critical to the technical and market
performance of aircraft and medical devices, for example, and has profoundly
changed the structure and performance of the financial services industry and the
transportation, distribution, and logistics services industry. The industry studies
also reveal the multidisciplinary character of many innovations in products and
services. The development of new medical devices, for example, requires not
only advances in the life sciences, but also advances in physical sciences and
engineering.  Many innovations in the network systems and communications

industry depend on complementary progress in several fields of engineering and
in the physical, social, and behavioral sciences.The committeeÕs review clearly indicates that academic research providesbenefits to industry and has had a long-term, positive impact on industry perfor-
mance. However, it is difficult to identify specific mechanisms by which this
impact can be maximized for several reasons. First, the nature of university-
industry interactions varies from industry to industry; each of the industries stud-
ied has a distinctive environment and poses different challenges for university
researchers. Second, research competencies, ability to interface with industry,
quality of infrastructure, and many, many other circumstances vary from one
university to another. Third, in general, companies, not industries, interface withuniversities. Companies in a given industry also vary in their ability to manage
that interface, in their expectations of what academic researchers can provide, in
the complexity of their research needs, and in their time horizons.All of these factors vary over time and under different circumstances (e.g.,economic cycles). When this study began, high-technology industries, such as
network systems and communications, were booming, attracting academic re-
searchers and potential graduate students to well funded industry laboratories,
growing operations, and new start-up companies.  When the study came to a

close, this same industry had suffered decreased sales, lower stock prices, lower
investments, cutbacks in research funding, and lower employment. As this real-
world example shows, the unique characteristics of individual academic institu-
tions and the changes wrought by economic cycles both affect the impact of
academic research.GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONSThe general recommendations in this study address six challenges high-lighted in the industry studies: (1) ensuring that universities remain repositoriesThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.230THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEof expertise and resources in many disciplines by maintaining a balance of re-search projects; (2) cultivating interactions between academic and industry re-
searchers; (3) harnessing academiaÕs broad disciplinary base and potential forcross-disciplinary research and training to meet the needs of service businesses
more effectively; (4) assessing the impact on the core research and educational
missions of universities of an increasing emphasis on intellectual property devel-
opment and management; (5) strengthening the contributions of academic re-
search to both regulatory agencies and the overall understanding of how regula-
tion and deregulation affect industrial growth and development; and (6) increasing
the contribution of academic research to the management of information for
private gain and/or public benefit in the information age.General Recommendation 1. Because the contributions of academic research
are diverse and often indirect, a broad and balanced portfolio of academic re-
search should be maintained. Recent trends in federal funding indicate that fund-
ing levels for research in the physical sciences, engineering, and the social and
behavioral sciences should be increased.¥Congress and the administration should restore the balance in federalfunding of academic research by increasing support for research in the
physical sciences, engineering, and the social and behavioral sciences to
complement and leverage the results of recent heavy investments in the
life sciences and medical sciences.¥Federal funding of academic research should continue to emphasize long-term basic research, as well as applied research (typically funded by
mission agencies). Multidisciplinary research should be encouraged
through support of project-specific research teams and other institution-
alized mechanisms, such as engineering research centers and other
university-industry research centers.General Recommendation 2. Industries and universities should continue to
explore mechanisms and pathways for bringing the benefits of academic re-
search to industry, keeping in mind that what works well in one industry may not
work well in another. Both partners should experiment with new approaches.
University-industry research linkages should be adaptable, and universities
should be on the lookout for opportunities to link up with new industries and
explore leading-edge industry research activities and challenges.Given the importance of personal relationships among academic and indus-trial researchers for productive collaboration and knowledge transfer, universities
and industry should foster interactions between university- and industry-based
scientists and engineers in the following ways:The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS231¥A major program of fellowships should be established to attract and sup-port graduate students in science and engineering.¥Sabbatical programs should be established and/or expanded to encourageacademic and industry researchers to spend time in each otherÕs homeresearch settings.¥More balanced participation by academic researchers and their industrycounterparts in major conferences on specific sectors, technical systems,
and disciplines should be encouraged.¥New ways of supporting personal interactions across academia-industryboundaries, including using technology to support collaboration, should
be explored.¥University-industry research centers should be structured to facilitate closeinteraction between academic and industry researchers.¥Academic reward structures, such as promotion and tenure criteria, shouldbe reviewed and modified (as necessary) to encourage and reward re-
searchers who attract research support from industry and/or address sig-
nificant research questions of direct importance to industry.¥Intellectual property rights policies and practices that facilitate pro-ductive research collaboration with industry should be promulgated
at universities.General Recommendation 3. The ability of academic researchers to contribute
to services industries and the receptivity of leaders in the services industries to
the potential contributions of academic research must both be improved. The
following steps would have immediate benefits:¥Academic research contributions and capabilities relevant to each indus-try should be documented and promoted in the targeted communities to
educate senior managers about how academic research might improve
company performance in the marketplace.¥Common legal frameworks acceptable to industry and academia shouldbe established detailing the terms of confidentiality and related conditions
to facilitate academic researchersÕ access to operational networks and
real-time data.¥Federal mission and regulatory agencies with primary responsibility forthe services industries (e.g., Securities and Exchange Commission, Inter-
nal Revenue Service, Federal Communications Commission, and U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services) should consider funding aca-
demic research in ways that encourage greater participation by the ser-
vices industries. Engineering research centers funded by the National
Science Foundation and university transportation centers funded by the
U.S. Department of Transportation could serve as models.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.232THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEGeneral Recommendation 4. Individual researchers and organizations, such as
the Association of University Technology Managers, that gather data on univer-
sity research and technology-transfer activities should continue to monitor and
assess the effectiveness of incentives for transferring academic research results
(particularly intellectual property policies and practices) and the impact of entre-
preneurial activity by academic researchers on the traditional university missions
of education, research, and service. The following issues should be addressed:¥The costs to institutions of patenting research results, including the costsof maintaining and defending patents, should be assessed and compared
to the benefits, in terms of income from licenses and royalties.¥Steps being taken to disseminate patent information to improvethe chances of commercialization should be reviewed and best prac-

tices identified.¥Best practices in the long-term management of patent inventories shouldbe shared among research institutions.¥The effectiveness of technology transfer via patented inventions shouldbe assessed and compared to transfer via more traditional mechanisms,
such as publications. The benefits to faculty and universities should also
be compared.¥The impact of university-industry research collaboration and technologytransfer activities on undergraduate, graduate, and continuing education,
the composition of academic research, the stability of academic research
funding, the private and social returns from academic research, the many
traditional service roles of the university, and other related issues should
be assessed.General Recommendation 5. Government regulatory agencies, including the
Food and Drug Administration, the Environmental Protection Agency, the Fed-
eral Communications Commission, and the Securities and Exchange Commis-
sion, should be encouraged to maintain and strengthen their productive inter-
action with academic researchers and to continue to explore new mechanisms for
bringing scientific and engineering advances, including scientifically based con-
cepts and tools, to bear more rapidly and effectively on regulatory processes.General Recommendation 6. Government, industry, and universities shouldwork together to meet the challenges and opportunities created by information
technologies. The following steps would be beneficial:¥Boost federal funding for fundamental research in information technolo-gies, as part of an effort to redress the imbalance in federal funding for
various disciplines in academic research.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS233¥Increase public and private sector investment in software research, withan emphasis on (1) engineering methods for assessing and improving
quality and (2) software that is more flexible and responsive to changing
business conditions.¥Support more interdisciplinary research on existing and potential infor-mation technologies that combines engineering methods and the social
and behavioral sciences.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Biographical InformationJEROME H. GROSSMAN
 (chair) is senior fellow and director of the Health
Care Delivery Project at Harvard University, where he brings his expertise in
the health care system and information technology and his experience in com-
munity services to innovations and reforms in the medical care delivery system.
He is also chairman emeritus of New England Medical Center, where he was

chairman and CEO from 1979 to 1995, professor of medicine at Tufts Univer-
sity School of Medicine, and an honorary physician at the Massachusetts Gen-

eral Hospital.Dr. Grossman is known for his leadership in the evolving role of academicmedical centers in American medicine. In 1988, he founded the Health Institute
at New England Medical Center, an organization involved in research and
development programs and practical applications in medical outcomes, func-
tional health status, the relationship of doctors and patients, and related areas. A
member of the Institute of Medicine, he has chaired four committees studying
utilization management and guidelines. In 1990, he was named a director of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston and was appointed chair from 1994 to 1997. In
1999, he was appointed to the National Academies Council on Government-
University-Industry Research Roundtable (GUIRR). In 2000, he was elected
trustee of the Committee on Economic Development and is cochair of the
Subcommittee on the Future of Employer-Based Health Insurance, Subcom-
mittee on Education Policy, and Committee on the Future Supply of Scientists
and Engineers. In 2001, he was invited to participate in the activities of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.235The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.236THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEALFRED V. AHO is vice president of computer sciences research at BellLaboratories, Lucent Technologies, Murray Hill, New Jersey. Prior to this ap-
pointment, Dr. Aho was professor and chair of the Computer Science Depart-
ment at Columbia University, and before that he was general manager of the
Information Sciences and Technologies Research Laboratory at Bellcore in
Morristown, New Jersey. Dr. Aho received a B.A.Sc. in engineering physics
from the University of Toronto and a Ph.D. in electrical engineering (computer
science) from Princeton University.Dr. AhoÕs research has focused on algorithms, compilers, database systems,and programming tools. He has written more than 60 research papers and pub-
lished 10 books that are widely used around the world in computer science
research and education. He is a coinventor of the AWK programming language
and several UNIX programming tools. Dr. Aho is a member of the National
Academy of Engineering, and a fellow of the American Association for the
Advancement of Science, the Association for Computing Machinery, Bell Labo-
ratories, and IEEE. He has received honorary doctorates from the University of
Helsinki and the University of Waterloo for his contributions to computer science
research. He has also been a distinguished lecturer at many leading universities
and is an active member of a number of national and international advisory
boards and committees.CYNTHIA BARNHART is codirector of the Operations Research Center at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), where she has been a faculty mem-
ber since 1992. Her research activities have focused on the development of plan-
ning models and algorithms to improve operations at airlines, railroads, trucking
firms, and intermodal partnerships. Problems she has addressed include airline
crew scheduling, airline fleet assignment, less-than-truckload routing and sched-
uling, truckload freight routing, intermodal (e.g., rail-air-ship) freight transporta-
tion planning, express freight service design, and rail service design. Professor
Barnhart has served as an associate editor for Operations Research, Transporta-tion Science, and 
Management Science, as a board member for INFORMS (Insti-tute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences), and as president of
the Women in Operations Research and Management Science Forum. She has
been awarded the Mitsui Faculty Development Chair, the Junior Faculty Career
Award from the General Electric Foundation, and the Presidential Young Inves-
tigator Award from the National Science Foundation. Her work has been pub-
lished in several books and research journals, including Transportation Science,Operations Research, Naval Research Logistics, Journal of Business Logistics,Mathematical Programming, Computational Optimization and Applications, andAnnals of Operations Research.ROBERT E. BIXBY is a research professor and the Noah Harding ProfessorEmeritus of Computational and Applied Mathematics at Rice University andThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION237technology fellow of ILOG S.A. He earned his B.S. in industrial engineeringfrom the University of California, Berkeley (1968) and his M.S. and Ph.D. in
operations research from Cornell University (1971 and 1972). His research inter-
ests include the solution of large-scale linear programming problems, the applica-
tion of linear programming methods to integer programming, parallel methods
for integer and linear programming, and algorithms for combinatorial optimiza-
tion problems. In one real-world application, Dr. Bixby and coworkers from
Princeton and Rutgers implemented a new algorithm for the solution of the linear
programming relaxation of a 13-million-variable airline crew scheduling model.In addition to his academic work, Dr. Bixby cofounded a software companyin 1988 called CPLEX Optimization, Inc., that markets algorithms for linear and
mixed-integer programming. CPLEX Optimization was recently acquired by
ILOG S.A, of which Dr. Bixby is a director. Besides its commercial applications,
the CPLEX optimizer is used by universities throughout the world in education
and research in integer and linear programming. Dr. Bixby is affiliated with many
scientific organizations, committees, and publications and is currently a member
of the Mathematical Programming Society, the Operations Research Society of
America, and the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM) and
chair of the Mathematical Programming Society Publications Committee. He has
published more than 60 papers and technical reports.LILLIAN C. BORRONE retired as the assistant executive director of the PortAuthority of New York and New Jersey in December 2000. In that position, she
advised the executive director and Board of Commissioners on various policy
issues, including international trade development, real estate acquisition and dis-
position for maritime, aviation, and mixed-use development projects and trans-
portation capital project management. For 12 years, Mrs. Borrone was director of
the Port Commerce Department, which oversees the agencyÕs vast marine termi-nals, waterfront development, and international relations responsibilities. During
her tenure, the maritime activities of the Port Authority increased significantly.Mrs. Borrone currently chairs the U.S. Department of Transportation Advi-sory Council to the Bureau of Transportation Statistics. She is past chair of the
National Research Council (NRC) Transportation Research Board and a past
member of the NRC Marine Board Executive Committee, secretary treasurer of
the Board of the Eno Transportation Foundation, and a member of the National
Academy of Engineering and the National Academy of Public Administration.In 2001, Mrs. Borrone was inducted into the Maritime Association Hall ofFame. She has also been honored with the Traffic Club of New York Transporta-
tion Person of the Year 2000 Award and the Containerization Institute ÒConnieAward.Ó She was a Year 2000 Executive Women of New Jersey 
ÒSalute to PolicyMakersÓ honoree and one of New Jersey
Õs Top Ten Business Women of 2000,selected by the Newark Star Ledger. Mrs. Borrone was also a recipientof the Port Authority of New York and New JerseyÕs Robert F. WagnerThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.238THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEDistinguished Service Medal. She holds an M.S. in civil engineering/transportation management from Manhattan College and a B.A. in political
science from American University.A. RAY CHAMBERLAIN, Ph.D., P.E., is vice president of ParsonsBrinckerhoff, a worldwide engineering consulting firm. He was vice president
for freight policy of the American Trucking Associations, Inc., from 1994 to
1998, and executive director of the Colorado Department of Transportation from
1987 to 1994. He also served terms as president of the American Association of
State Highway and Transportation Officials, chairman of the Executive Com-
mittee of the Transportation Research Board, and president of the National
Association of State Universities and Land Grant Colleges. From 1969 to 1980,
he was the president of Colorado State University. Dr. Chamberlain earned three
degrees in engineering and has comprehensive knowledge of surface transporta-
tion issues.JOHN M. CIOFFI received a B.S.E.E. in 1978 from the University of Illinois,
Champaign, and a Ph.D.E.E. in 1984 from Stanford University. After graduation,
he was a modem designer at Bell Laboratories from 1978 to 1984, and a disk
read-channel researcher at IBM from 1984 to 1986. He has been on the faculty of
Stanford since 1986, where he is now a tenured associate professor. He founded
Amati Communications Corporation in 1991 (purchased by Texas Instruments in
1997) and was an officer and director of the company from 1991 to 1997.Dr. CioffiÕs area of interest is high-performance digital transmission. He haspublished more than 200 papers and holds more than 40 patents, most of which
are widely licensed, including basic patents on DMT, VDSL, and V-OFDM. He
was elected a member of the National Academy of Engineering in 2001 and is a
fellow of the IEEE. He has received many awards: the 2001 IEEE Kobayashi
Medal; the 2000 IEEE Millennium Medal; the 2000 IEEE J.J. Tomson Medal; the
1999 U. of Illinois Outstanding Alumnus; the 1995 Outstanding Achievement
Award of the American National Standards Institute; and the 1991 IEEE Commu-nications Magazine Best Paper Award. Dr. Cioffi was a National Science Foun-
dation Presidential Investigator from 1987 to 1992 and has served in a number of
editorial positions for IEEE magazines and conferences. He is currently on the
boards or advisory boards of BigBand Networks, Coppercom, GoDigital, Ikanos,
Ionospan, Ishoni, IteX, Marvell, Kestrel, Charter Ventures, and Portview Ven-
tures. He is a member of the National Research Council Computer Science and
Telecommunications Board.PAUL CITRON is vice president of technology policy and academic relations at
Medtronic, Inc. Prior to this appointment, he was vice president of science and
technology, responsible for corporate-wide assessment and coordination of tech-
nology and for establishing and prioritizing corporate research. He was awardedThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION239a B.S. in electrical engineering from Drexel University in 1969 and an M.S. inelectrical engineering from the University of Minnesota in 1972. Mr. Citron was
elected a member of the National Academy of Engneering in 2003.  He was

elected founding fellow of the American Institute of Medical and Biological
Engineering (AIMBE) in January 1993, has twice won the American College of
Cardiology GovernorÕs Award for Excellence, and in 1980 was inducted as afellow of the Medtronic Bakken Society. He was voted IEEE Young Electrical
Engineer of the Year in 1979. He has numerous publications and eight U.S.
medical device patents to his credit. In 1980, he was given MedtronicÕs ÒInven-tion of DistinctionÓ Award for his role as co-inventor of the tined pacing lead. He
is a member of seven advisory boards and committees.COLIN CROOK retired from Citicorp in July 1997 as chief technology officer.He now advises clients worldwide on issues involving information technology,
business investments, the use of complex, adaptive-systems theory in business,
security, and global financial enterprises. Mr. Crook is a senior fellow of the
Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania and chairman of its Informa-
tion Technology Committee. He is a fellow of the Royal Academy of Engineer-
ing (elected in 1981) and a board member of several companies and nonprofit
institutes. During the course of his career, Mr. Crook has worked in many parts of
the world, has been involved with virtually all key information technologies, and
has held a wide range of management positions.ANTONIO L. ELIAS is executive vice president and general manager of Orbital
Sciences Corporation, where he has been senior vice president for advanced
programs, chief technical officer (from 1996 to 1997), and corporate senior vice
president (from 1992 to 1996). As first vice president for engineering, he led the
technical team that designed and built the Pegasus air-launched booster and was
the launch-vehicle operator on the carrier aircraft for the rocketÕs first and fourthflights. He also led the design teams of OrbitalÕs APEX and SeaStar satellites andthe X-34 hypersonic research vehicle.In 1980, Dr. Elias joined the faculty of the Massachusetts Institute of Tech-nology (MIT), where he held the Boeing Chair in the Department of Aeronautics
and Astronautics; he taught courses in control systems, spacecraft design, and
computer hardware and software design, and conducted research in computer-
aided engineering and air traffic control management. During the 1970s, Dr.
Elias worked on the design of the Space Shuttle Orbiter avionics system at Draper
Laboratory, where he originated the terminal area energy management (TAEM)
guidance strategy, which is currently used for Shuttle landings.Dr. Elias holds a B.S., M.S., E.A.A., and Ph.D. from MIT. He is a fellow ofthe American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA), 1991 AIAA
Engineer of the Year, and recipient of the AIAA Aircraft Design Award, Ameri-
can Astronomical Society Brouwer Award, and corecipient of the National MedalThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.240THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEof Technology and the National Air and Space Museum Trophy. Dr. Elias waselected a member of the National Academy of Engineering in 2001. He is the
author of several publications, holds several patents, and is a licensed radio
amateur and commercial pilot.DONALD M. ENGELMAN is Eugene Higgins Professor of Molecular Bio-
physics and Biochemistry at Yale University. His scientific interests are focused
on the structure and function of proteins and biological membranes. Dr. Engelman
holds an M.S. and Ph.D. in molecular biophysics from Yale. As a member of the
Board of Directors of the Stryker Corporation (Kalamazoo, Michigan), he par-
ticipated in a collaboration with a biotechnology firm to bring a new product,
OP-1, to market, based in part on science in the academic sector. He is a member
of the National Academy of Sciences, chair of the Science and Technology
Steering Committee at Brookhaven National Laboratory, and a member of sev-
eral National Academies panels; he also teaches biochemistry to undergraduates.
He is a past chair of his department, acting dean of Yale College, and director of
the Division of Biological Sciences.DAVID J. FARBER is the Alfred Fitler Moore Professor of TelecommunicationSystems at the University of Pennsylvania, where he has appointments in the
Computer Science and Electrical Engineering departments. He was responsible
for the design of the DCS system, one of the first operational message-based fully
distributed systems and is one of the authors of the SNOBOL programming
language. Dr. Farber was one of the principals in the creation and implementation
of CSNet, NSFNet, BITNET II, and CREN and was instrumental in the creation
of the NSF/DARPA-funded Gigabit Network Testbed Initiative; he was chair of
the Gigabit Testbed Coordinating Committee. His background includes positions
at Bell Laboratories, the RAND Corporation, Xerox Data Systems, University of
California-Irvine, and the University of Delaware.Dr. Farber is a fellow of IEEE and a member of the boards of directors ofboth the Electronic Frontier Foundation and the Internet Society. He was a
10-year alumnus of the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
(CSTB) of the National Research Council and a recipient of the 1995 SIGCOMM
Award (for seminal contributions to the field of computer networks and distrib-
uted computer systems) and the 1996 John Scott Award (for contributions to
humanity). He is a fellow of the Japan Glocom Institute and of the Cyberlaw
Institute, and a member of the U.S. Presidential Advisory Committee on High-
Performance Computing and Communications, Information Technology, and the
Next-Generation Internet.ANNETINE C. GELIJNS is director of the International Center for Health
Outcomes and Innovation Research and an associate professor of surgical sci-
ences in the Department of Surgery, College of Physicians and Surgeons, and theThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION241School of Public Health, Columbia University. Her current research is focused onthe factors driving the rate and direction of innovative activity in medicine,
technological change and its relation to health-care costs, and measuring the
outcomes of clinical interventions. Before coming to Columbia in 1993, she
directed the Program on Technological Innovation in Medicine at the Institute of
Medicine of the National Academies. From 1983 to 1987, she worked for the
Steering Committee on Future Health Scenarios and for the Health Council, the
Netherlands. Dr. Gelijns has been a consultant to various national and inter-
national organizations, including the World Health Organization and the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. She has a Ph.D.
from the medical faculty, University of Amsterdam, and bachelorÕs and masterÕsdegree in law from the University of Leyden, the Netherlands.CAMILO C. GOMEZ received a B.S. in 1981 in electrical engineering and a
Ph.D. in 1986 in physics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. From
1986 to 1991, he was principal investigator at Los Alamos National Laboratory in
the Los Alamos Laser Fusion Program. From 1992 to 1995, he worked in Equity
Derivatives at Lehman Brothers developing program trading systems and valua-
tion models for exotic derivatives. In 1995, he cofounded CASA and headed the
Investment Analytics Group, which focused on finance, risk management, and
corporate dynamics. Recently, he has been working on the application of ad-
vanced analytical methods to the measurement and management of risk in the
trade receivable space.DANIEL S. GREGORY has been associated with the Greylock Organization, a
Boston venture capital firm, since its formation in 1965, and has been a partner of
the Greylock Management Corporation; from 1976 to 1991, he was managing
partner of the partnerships. Mr. Gregory served in Governor William WeldÕscabinet as secretary of economic affairs until January 1992; he was the first chair
and is still a member of the GovernorÕs Council for Economic Growthand Technology.In 1983 and 1984, Mr. Gregory was president, and then chair, of theNational Venture Capital Association in Washington, D.C. He is a graduate
of Wesleyan University and was the recipient of WesleyanÕs DistinguishedAlumni Award in 1986. He served in the U.S. Navy as a deck officer from
1952 to 1955 and graduated from the Harvard Graduate School of Business
Administration in 1957. Mr. Gregory has served on the boards of directors of
numerous emerging, high-tech companies, including Avid Technology, Ge-
netics Institute, New England Business Services, Teradyne Corporation, and
Vertex Pharmaceuticals. He is a trustee of Wellesley College, Thompson
Island Outward Bound School, Mystic Seaport Museum, and Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution.The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.242THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEKENNETH C. HALL received his S.B., S.M., and Sc.D. from the Departmentof Aeronautics and Astronautics at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. From
1987 to 1990, he was an associate research engineer at the United Technologies
Research Center. In 1990, he joined the faculty of the Department of Mechanical
Engineering and Materials Science at Duke University; he is currently the chair
of that department. Dr. HallÕs primary research is on the unsteady aerodynamicsand aeroelasticity of gas turbine engines and aircraft. Other areas of research
include optimization techniques, structural dynamics, and animal propulsion. He
is a fellow of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers and an associate
fellow of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics.GEORGE H. HEILMEIER is chairman emeritus of Telcordia Technologies(formerly Bellcore), a leading provider of telecommunications software and pro-
fessional services based on world-class research. Before joining Bellcore in 1991,
Dr. Heilmeier was senior vice president and chief technical officer of Texas
Instruments, Inc. He holds a B.S. in electrical engineering from the University of
Pennsylvania and an M.A., M.S.E., and Ph.D. in solid-state electronics from
Princeton University. He has also been awarded honorary degrees by Stevens
Institute and the Israel Institute of Technology (The Technion).Dr. Heilmeier joined RCA Laboratories in 1958, where his work with electro-optic effects in liquid crystals led to the first liquid-crystal displays for calcula-
tors, watches, computers, and instrumentation. In 1968, he was honored with the
prestigious David Sarnoff Award from the IEEE and the Eta Kappa Nu Award as
the Outstanding Young Electrical Engineer in the United States. In 1970, he was
chosen as a White House fellow working on long-range research and develop-
ment planning and technology assessment as a special assistant to the Secretary
of Defense. A year later, he was appointed assistant director of Defense Research
and Engineering in charge of all U.S. Department of Defense programs in elec-
tronics, computer technology, and the physical sciences. Heilmeier won confir-
mation in 1975 as director of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
(DARPA), where he initiated major efforts in stealth aircraft, space-based lasers
and reconnaissance systems, infrared technology, and artificial intelligence. Dur-
ing his tenure at DARPA, he was twice awarded the Department of Defense
Distinguished Civilian Service Medal.Dr. Heilmeier has received numerous other awards, including the JapaneseCommunications and Computers Prize (1990) and three major IEEE awards. In
September 1991, he was awarded the National Medal of Science by President
Bush for contributions to national security and competitiveness. He received the
National Academy of Engineering Founders Award in 1992 and the Eta Kappa
Nu Vladimir Karapetoff Eminent MemberÕs Award in April 1993. In 1993, hereceived the Industrial Research Institute Medal for outstanding accomplishment
in leadership of industrial research and was named the first Technology Leader of
the Year by Industry Week magazine. In 1996, he received the John Scott Award
The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION243for Scientific Achievements from the city of Philadelphia for his pioneering workin the development of liquid-crystal displays. Dr. Heilmeier is a member of the
National Academy of Engineering, Defense Science Board, and the National
Security Agency Scientific Advisory Board; he serves on the boards of directors
of several companies.ROBERT J. HERMANN is senior partner at Global Technology Partners,
LLC. Prior to this, he was senior vice president, science and technology, at
United Technologies Corporation, where he was responsible for the develop-
ment of the companyÕs technical and scientific resources and overseeing theUnited Technologies Research Center. He joined the company in 1982 as vice
president, systems technology, in the electronics sector and later served in a

series of assignments in the Defense and Space Systems groups. For 20 years,
Dr. Hermann served with the National Security Agency, where he was assigned
to research and development, operations, and NATO. In 1977, he was ap-
pointed principal deputy assistant secretary of defense for communications,
command, control, and intelligence. In 1979, he was named assistant secretary

of the Air Force for research, development and logistics and director of the
National Reconnaissance Office. He received his B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. in
electrical engineering from Iowa State University. Dr. Hermann is a member of
the Defense Science Board, National Academy of Engineering, and Board of
Directors of the American National Standards Institute; he is chair of the Board
of Directors for Draper LaboratoryADAM B. JAFFE is Fred C. Hecht Professor of Economics and Dean of Artsand Sciences at Brandeis University. He is also coordinator of the Innovation
Policy and the Economy group of the National Bureau of Economic Research
(NBER). At NBER, he was also principal investigator for a National Science
Foundation research project, funded through NBER, to compile a comprehensive
database on patents and patent citations and use these data to document the flows
of technological knowledge across time, industries, and geographic areas. Previ-
ously, he was assistant and then associate professor of economics at Harvard
University. From 1992 to 1994, he was visiting professor at the John F. Kennedy
School of Government at Harvard.Professor JaffeÕs areas of specialization are the economics of technologicalchange, the economic impact of universities, and the economics of regulated
industries. He has published papers on industrial research and development, the
economics of basic research and universities, incentive regulation and regulatory
reform, and the determinants of the diffusion of new technologies. In 1990Ð1991,Dr. Jaffe took leave from Harvard to serve as senior staff economist to the
PresidentÕs Council of Economic Advisers in Washington, D.C., where he wasresponsible for energy policy, technology policy, and regulatory policy. He re-
ceived his S.B. in chemistry (1976) and his S.M. in technology and policy (1978)The Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.244THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEfrom Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and his Ph.D. in economics fromHarvard University (1985).JACK L. KERREBROCK is professor emeritus of aeronautics and astronauticsat Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). He joined the faculty of MIT in
1960, where he remained as professor, department head, and associate dean
(except for two years as associate administrator for aeronautics and space tech-
nology at National Aeronautics and Space Administration [NASA]). Dr.
Kerrebrock is a member of the National Academy of Engineering and was chair
of the National Research Council (NRC) Committee on the Space Station. He has
also served as member and chair of numerous other NRC and NASA committees.
Dr. Kerrebrock received his Ph.D. from the California Institute of Technology.KENT KRESA was elected president of Northrop Grumman in 1987, chief
executive officer in January 1990, and chairman in September 1990. Before
joining Northrop Grumman in 1975, he worked at the Defense Advanced Re-
search Projects Agency, where he was responsible for applied research and de-
velopment programs in the tactical and strategic defense arena. From 1961 to
1968, he was associated with the Lincoln Laboratory at Massachusetts Institute
of Technology (MIT), where he worked on ballistic missile defense research and
reentry technology.Mr. Kresa has received many industry and government honors, most re-cently, the Private Sector CouncilÕs 2001 Leadership Award (for commitment toimprove governmental efficiency), the Aerospace Historical Society International
von K⁄rm⁄n Wings Award (for contributions to the industry), and (with NorthropGrumman) ÒManufacturer of the CenturyÓ by the California Manufacturers and
Technology Association. Mr. Kresa is serving a one-year term as president of the
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA). He is a member of
the National Academy of Engineering, the past chair of the Board of Governors
of the Aerospace Industries Association, and chair of the Defense Policy Advi-
sory Committee on Trade. Mr. Kresa received a B.S., M.S., and E.A.A., all in
aeronautics and astronautics, from MIT.BLAKE D. LEBARON, who earned a Ph.D. in economics from the Universityof Chicago, is professor of finance at the Graduate School of International Eco-
nomics and Finance of Brandeis University, a faculty research fellow at the
National Bureau of Economic Research, a member of the external faculty of the
Santa Fe Institute, and a Sloan fellow. Before moving to Brandeis, Dr. LeBaron
was associate professor of economics at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. In
1993, he was director of the Economics Program at the Santa Fe Institute. Dr.
LeBaronÕs research has been concentrated on the nonlinear behavior of financialand macroeconomic time series. His current interests are the quantitative dynam-
ics of interacting systems of adaptive agents and how these systems replicateThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION245observed real-world phenomena and the observed behavioral characteristics oftraders in financial markets, including strategies and policy questions. In general,
he seeks to discover the empirical implications of learning and adaptation as
applied to finance and macroeconomics.JOHN M. MULVEY is a professor in the Department of Operations Research
and Financial Engineering and a founding member of the Bendheim Center for
Finance at Princeton University. His specialty is the application of large-scale
optimization models and algorithms, with an emphasis on strategic financial
planning. He has implemented integrated risk-management systems for many
companies, linking the key risks to the organization and assisting in high-level
decisions. In addition, he has designed a number of significant planning systems
for government agencies, including the Office of Tax Analysis for the Treasury
Department, the Joint Chiefs of Staff in the U.S. Department of Defense, and
personnel planning for the U.S. Army. He holds a B.S. (1969) in general engi-
neering and an M.S. (1969) in computer science from the University of Illinois,
Urbana, and an M.S. (1974) and Ph.D. (1975) in management science from the
University of California, Los Angeles. He has edited three books and published
over 100 scholarly papers.HOMER PIEN is chief executive officer of SRU Biosystems, Woburn, Massa-chusetts; previously, he was chief technology officer of Medical OnLine, Lexing-
ton, Massachusetts. Dr. Pien also spent 10 years at Draper Laboratory, both as
manager of biomedical technologies and head of the Image Recognition Systems
Laboratory. Concurrently, he was director of technology at the Center for Innova-
tive Minimally Invasive Therapy, a research consortium comprising Massachu-
setts General Hospital, Brigham and WomenÕs Hospital, Massachusetts Instituteof Technology (MIT), and Draper Laboratory. Prior to joining Draper, he was
with MIT Lincoln Laboratory for five years. Dr. Pien received his B.S. in math-
ematics from the University of Illinois, his M.S. and Ph.D. in computer science
from Northeastern University, and an M.S. (Management) from the MIT Sloan
School. He is an adjunct professor in the Graduate College of Computer Science
at Northeastern University and a member of the Department of Radiology at
Massachusetts General Hospital.H. DONALD RATLIFF is UPS and Regents Professor of Industrial andSystems Engineering, as well as executive director of the Logistics Institute,
at Georgia Institute of Technology. He is also cofounder and president of
CAPS Logistics, a leading-edge supplier of logistics software. He has pub-
lished more than 50 refereed papers, designed a variety of computer software
applications addressing logistics issues, delivered more than 200 invitedpresentations at national and international meetings, and has been a consult-
ant for more than 40 companies on a wide range of issues related to theThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.246THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEmovement and storage of products. He has supervised 20 Ph.D. students,11 of whom currently hold faculty appointments at various universities. Dr.
Ratliff has been editor in chief of the Journal of Operations Research, areaeditor for Optimization, departmental editor for applied optimization in IIETransactions, and associate editor of Management Science. He was awardedthe 1991 Outstanding Research Award of the Institute of Industrial Engi-
neers for his work in logistics and is a fellow of the Institute of Industrial
Engineers and a member of the National Academy of Engineering.J. DAVID ROESSNER is professor of public policy at Georgia Institute ofTechnology, codirector of the Technology Policy and Assessment Center at
Georgia Tech and, since September 1995, program manager for technology policy
at SRI International. Prior to joining the Georgia Tech faculty in 1980, he was
principal scientist and group manager for industrial policy and planning at the
Solar Energy Research Institute in Golden, Colorado; policy analyst with the
National Science Foundation (NSF) R&D Assessment Program; acting leader of
the Working Group on Innovation Processes and Their Management in the Divi-
sion of Policy Research and Analysis at NSF; and research associate at the
Bureau of Social Science Research, Inc. He began his professional career as a
development engineer for Hewlett-Packard in Palo Alto, California.Dr. Roessner received his B.S. from Brown University, his M.S. in electricalengineering from Stanford University, an M.S. and his Ph.D. in science, technol-
ogy, and public policy from Case Western Reserve University. His research
interests include national technology policy, the evaluation of research programs,
the management of innovation in industry, technology transfer, and indicators of
scientific and technological development. In addition to numerous technical re-
ports, he has published papers in many policy-oriented journals. From 1987 to
1995, he was a U.S. editor of Research Policy and is still an advisory editor for
that journal. He is also a member of the editorial boards of the Journal of Tech-nology Transfer and 
Technology Studies; principal author of The Impact of OfficeAutomation on Clerical Employment, 1985Ð2000 (Quorum Books, 1985); editor
of Government Innovation Policy: Design, Implementation, Evaluation (St.
MartinÕs Press, 1988); editor of a special issue of Research Policy, published in1989, devoted to the evaluation of government innovation programs; and
co-editor of a 1996 special issue of Research Policy, ÒEvaluation of Indus-trial Modernization.ÓDr. Roessner is a member of the Committee on Science, Engineering andPublic Policy of the American Association for the Advancement of Science
(AAAS) and, in 1996, was elected a fellow of the AAAS. He has served as a
consultant to the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment; the U.S.
Departments of Defense, Energy, and Commerce; National Science Foundation;
Jet Propulsion Laboratory; Oak Ridge National Laboratory; Sandia NationalThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION247Laboratories; Los Alamos National Laboratory; the General Accounting Office;the RAND Corporation; and SRI International.ROBERT F. SPROULL, vice president and fellow at Sun Microsystems Labo-ratories, leads a section of the laboratory in Burlington, Massachusetts. Since his
undergraduate days, he has been building hardware and software for computer
graphics, including clipping hardware, an early device-independent graphics
package, page description languages, laser printing hardware and software, and
window systems. He has also been involved in VLSI design, especially of asyn-
chronous circuits and systems. Before joining Sun, he was a principal with
Sutherland, Sproull & Associates, an associate professor at Carnegie Mellon
University, and a member of the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center. He is co-
author, with William Newman, of Principles of Interactive Computer Graphics(McGraw-Hill, 1981) and an author of Logical Effort (Morgan Kaufmann Pub-
lishers, 1999). Dr. Sproull is a member of the National Academy of Engineering,
has served on the U.S. Air Force Scientific Advisory Board, is a special partner of
Advanced Technology Ventures, and is a member of the Board of Directors of
Alphatech, Inc.MORRIS TANENBAUM retired as vice chairman of the board and chief finan-
cial officer of AT&T on June 30, 1991. He began his career there in 1952 as a
member of the technical staff of Bell Telephone Laboratories, was promoted to
department head in the Research Division in 1955, to director of the Solid State
Device Laboratory in 1962, director of research and development for the Western
Electric Company in 1964, followed by vice president of the Engineering Divi-
sion and vice president of manufacturing, before returning to Bell Labs in 1975 as
executive vice president responsible for the development of customer services,
switching and transmission equipment, and electronics technology. Dr.
Tanenbaum holds seven patents and has contributed to numerous books and
technical journals. He pioneered the use of silicon as a commercial semiconduc-
tor material with the invention of the diffused-base silicon transistor, which be-
came the principal building block of integrated circuitry. Later he supervised the
group that discovered the first practical superconducting materials for high field
strength magnets.Dr. Tanenbaum has served on many corporate boards and is a director of theNew Jersey Performing Arts Center, a member of the Corporation of the Massa-
chusetts Institute of Technology, an associate trustee of Battelle Memorial Insti-
tute, an honorary trustee of the Brookings Institution, and trustee emeritus of the
Johns Hopkins University and Tufts University. Formerly, Dr. Tanenbaum served
as vice president and councillor of the National Academy of Engineering and as
a member of the Governing Board of the National Research Council. He is a
fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, the IEEE, the American
Physical Society, the American Association for the Advancement of Science, andThe Impact of Academic Research on Industrial PerformanceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.248THE IMPACT OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH ON INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCEa member of the American Chemical Society and the Metallurgical Society ofAIME. Dr. Tanenbaum earned a B.A. in chemistry from Johns Hopkins Univer-
sity and a Ph.D. in physical chemistry from Princeton University.FREDERICK W. TELLING is a corporate vice president of Pfizer, Inc., and
head of Corporate Policy and Strategic Management; he began his career with
Pfizer in 1977. Dr. Telling received his B.A. from Hamilton College and his
Master of Industrial and Labor Relations and Ph.D. in economics and public
policy from Cornell University. He is vice chairman for the American Founda-
tion for Pharmaceutical Education and an invited faculty lecturer at the Harvard
University School of Public Health and Cornell University. He is involved in the
work of the Council on Competitiveness, the National Association of Manufac-
turers, and the Institute of Medicine (IOM), where he was a contributing author to
the IOM series on Technology Innovation in Medicine. He is a member of theBoard of the Alliance for Aging Research, Bergen County United Way and
Bergen County United Way Community Foundation, Biotechnology Industry
Organization (BIO), California Health Care Institute, Children of Bellevue, Com-
mittee for Economic Development, HealthCare Institute of New Jersey, National
Council on Aging, New York Academy of Medicine, New York Academy of
Sciences, and many other organizations. He is also a trustee and a member of the
Executive Committee of the New Jersey Aviation Hall of Fame; he is actively
involved in aviation policy and history.STEPHEN WOLFF is executive director of the Advanced Internet Initiatives
Division of Cisco Systems, Inc., where he is responsible for seeking out, initiat-
ing, and leading CiscoÕs participation in partnerships at the forefront of Internetdevelopment and deployment worldwide, including U.S. Next Generation Internet
Program and the Internet2 Project. Prior to joining Cisco in 1995, Mr. Wolff was
director of the Division of Networking and Communications Research and Infra-
structure at the National Science Foundation (NSF), where he was responsible for
the National Research and Education Network (NREN) and NSFNET programs
and for NSFÕs support of basic research in networking and communications. Hewas educated at Swarthmore College, Princeton University, and Imperial Col-
lege; he is a member of the Association for Computing Machinery and a life
member of the IEEE.