DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/10940The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security:Proceedings of a Workshop576 pages | 8.5 x 11 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-09035-3 | DOI 10.17226/10940Board on Mathematical Sciences and Their Applications; Division on Engineeringand Physical Sciences; National Research CouncilThe Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES™ ROLE IN HOMELAND SECURITY Proceedings of a Workshop        
  Board on Mathematical Sciences and Their Applications  Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences 
         
  THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS Washington, D.C. 
www.nap.edu
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. ii    THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS    500 Fifth
 Street, N.W.    Wa
shington, DC 20001 
 NOTICE:  The project that is the subject of
 this report was approved by the Governing 
Board of the National Research Council, whos
e members are drawn fr
om the councils of 
the National Academy of Sciences, the Na
tional Academy of Engineering, and the 
Institute of Medicine.  The members of th
e committee responsible for the report were 
chosen for their special competences and 
with regard for appropriate balance.   
This study was supported by the Army 
(Grant No. DAAD 190210066), the Air Force 
(PR# fq8671-0200746), the National Security
 Agency (Contract MDA904-02-01-0104), 
Microsoft Corporation (Award # 2327100), th
e National Science Foundation (Grant No. 
DMS-0215714), and the Navy (Grant No. N00
014-02-1-0366). Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in 
this publication are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the views of th
e organizations or agencies that provided 
support for the project. 
  International Standard Book Number 0-309-0935-0 (POD) 

International Standard Book Number 0-309-53149-7 (PDF) 

  
Additional copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 500 

Fifth Street, N.W., Loc
kbox 285, Washington, DC 20055; (
800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-
3313 (in the Washington metropolitan ar
ea); Internet, http://www.nap.edu   
Copyright 2004 by the National Academy 
of Sciences.  All rights reserved. 
  
Printed in the United States of America 

 
COVER ILLUSTRATIONS:  On the left is "c
ircuit earth," a conceptual image of the 
earth as being as interconnected as a complex semiconductor circuit.  While the 
worldwide interconnectivity is indisputable, scientists and engineers are a long way from 
being able to map, characterize, and analyze th
is complex network.  That task will require 
many new developments in the mathematical sciences.  The image on the right is of a 

human iris, the patterns of which are someti
mes used in biometric security systems.  
Realization of the full potential of such biometric technologies also depends on future 
mathematical developments.  The "circuit ear
th" illustration is cour
tesy of PhotoDisc, Inc., while the iris image is courtesy of 
John Daugman, University of Cambridge.  Both 
images are reprinted with permission. 
   The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. iii The National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating 
society of distinguished scholars engaged 
in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furt
herance of science and technology and to their use for the 
general welfare.  Upon the authority of
 the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate 
that requires it to advise the federal 
government on scientific and 
technical matters.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts is president 
of the National Academy of Sciences. 
The National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the charter of the National Academy of 
Sciences, as a parallel organi
zation of outstanding engineers.  It is autonom
ous in its administration and in the selection 
of its members, sharing with the National Academy of Scien
ces the responsibility for advising the federal government.  
The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors e
ngineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, 
encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers.  Dr. Wm. A. Wulf is 
president of the National Academy of Engineering. 
The Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academ
y of Sciences to secure the services of 
eminent members of appropriate professions in the examinati
on of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public.  
The Institute acts under the responsibility given to the Nationa
l Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to be 
an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initia
tive, to identify issues of medical care, research, and 
education.  Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine. 
The National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad 
community of science and technology with the Academy™
s purposes of furthering knowle
dge and advising the federal 
government.  Functioning in accordance w
ith general policies determined by th
e Academy, the Council has become the 
principal operating agency of both the National Academy of
 Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in 
providing services to the government, the public, and the sc
ientific and engineering communities.  The Council is 
administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of 
Medicine.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts and Dr. Wm. A. Wulf are 
chair and vice chair, respectively,
 of the National Research Council. 
  www.national-academies.org 
. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. ivBOARD ON MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES AND THEIR APPLICATIONS 
 PETER J. BICKEL, Chair
, University of California, Berkeley DIMITRIS BERTSIMAS, Massachusetts In
stitute of Technology, Sloan School of 
Management 

JOHN E. HOPFCROFT, Cornell University 

ROBERT E. KASS, Carnegie Mellon University 

ARJEN K. LENSTRA, Citibank, N.A. 

ROBERT LIPSCHUTZ, Affymetrix, Inc. 

CHARLES M. LUCAS, American
 International Companies 
GEORGE C. PAPANICOLAOU, Stanford University 

LINDA R. PETZOLD, University of
 California, Santa Barbara PRABHAKAR RAGHAVAN, Verity, Inc. 

DOUGLAS RAVENEL, University of Rochester 

STEPHEN M. ROBINSON, Univer
sity of Wisconsin-Madison 
  Staff   BMSA Workshop Organizers  
Scott Weidman, BMSA director 

Richard Campbell, program officer 

Barbara Wright, administrative assistant 

  
Electronic Report Design
  Jennifer Slimowitz, program officer 
Sarah Brown, research associate The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. vACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
  This report has been review
ed in draft form by individu
als chosen for their diverse 
perspectives and technical expertise, in
 accordance with procedures approved by the 
Report Review Committee of the National Re
search Council (NRC). The purpose of this 
independent review is to pr
ovide candid and critical comme
nts that will assist the 
institution in making its publis
hed report as sound as possibl
e and to ensure that the 
report meets institutional standa
rds for objectivity, evidence, 
and responsiveness to the 
study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript remain confidential to protect 

the integrity of the deliberative process. We
 wish to thank the following individuals for 
their review of this report: 

  
 George Casella, University of Florida, 

 David Ferguson, The Boeing Company, 

 Valen Johnson, University of Michigan, and  

 Jon Kettenring, Telcordia Technologies. 

  
Although the reviewers listed above have 
provided many constructive comments and 
suggestions, they were not asked to endorse 
the conclusions or r
ecommendations, nor did 
they see the final draft of the report before its
 release. Responsibility for the final content 
of this CD report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the institution. 
 The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. viPreface  On April 26-27, 2002, the Board on Mathematical Sciences and Their 
Applications (BMSA) of the National Research Council organized a workshop on 
the role of the mathematical sciences in homeland security. The workshop was 
developed to illustrate contributions of
 mathematical sciences research to 
important areas of homeland security. 
The workshop drew over 100 researchers and focused on five major areas of research: data mining, detection and epidemiology of bioterrorist attacks, image analysis and voice recognition, communications and computer security, and data fusion.  The goal of this CD report is to help mathematical scientists and policy 

makers understand the connections between lines of research and important problems of national security. Included in 
this report are video 
presentations from 
most of the speakers at the workshop, as well as transcripts and summaries of the presentations, and any presentations materials used, such as power point slides. The presentations represent independent research efforts from academia, the private sector, and government agencies, and as such they provide a 
sampling rather than a complete exam
ination of the interface between the mathematical sciences and the complex challenge of homeland security. 
 Each presenter identified numerous
 avenues of mathematical sciences 
research necessary for progress in homel
and security.  By design, none of the presentations provides 
a broad outline connecting the five major areas of research.  However, common threads di
d emerge, such as the need for non-parametric methods, data visualization, 
understanding verification and validation 
of models and simulations, the need to 
deal with high-dimensional data and 
models, and the value of basing actions on sound mathematical analyses.   This proceedings represents the viewpo
ints of its authors only and should not be taken as a consensus report of the BMSA or of the National Research 
Council. We are grateful to the following 
individuals who reviewed this report: 
George Casella, University of Florida; 
David Ferguson, The Boeing Company; 
Valen Johnson, University of Michigan; and Jon Kettenring, Telcordia Technologies.  
 Funding for the workshop, its videotaping, and resulting report was provided by the National Science Foundat
ion, Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency, Microsoft Corporation, Office of Naval Research, Air Force Office of Scientific Research, and the Army Research Office. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   11 THE MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES™  ROLE IN HOMELAND SECURITY National Research Council 
Washington, D.C. 
April 26-27, 2002 
 Welcome and Overview of Sessions, April 26
 Peter Bickel, Chair, Board on Mathematic
al Sciences and Their Applications  
Department of Statistics, Univer
sity of California at Berkeley 
   Data Mining, Unsupervised Learning, and Pattern Recognition  James Schatz
, National Security Agency,
 Session Chair Introduction 

 
Jerry Friedman, 
Stanford University
  Role of Data Mining in Homeland Defense   
 
Diane Lambert, 
Bell Laboratories
  Statistical Detection from Communications Streams  
 
Rakesh Agrawal, 
IBM-Almaden
  Data Mining: Potentials and Challenges 
  Review and Discussion 
Remarks, 
Donald McClure, 
Brown University
  Remarks, 
Werner Stuetzle, 
University of Washington 
    The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   22Detection and Epidemiology of Bioterrorist Attacks 
 Claire Broome
, Centers for Disease C
ontrol and Prevention, 
Session Chair 
Introduction  

 
Kenneth Kleinman, 
Harvard Medical School
 Ambulatory Anthrax Surveillance: An Implemented System, 
 with Comments on Current Outstanding Needs  
 Stephen Eubank, 
Los Alamos National Laboratory
 Mathematics of Epidemiological Simulations for Response Planning  
 Sally Blower, 
University of California at Los Angeles
 Predicting the Unpredictable in an Age of Uncertainty  
  Review and Discussion 
Remarks, 
Simon Levin, 
Princeton University
  Remarks, 
Arthur Reingold, 
University of California at Berkeley
    Image Analysis and Voice Recognition 
 Roberta Lenczowski,
 Technical Directory (Bethesda), National Imagery and 
Mapping Agency, 
Session Chair 
Introduction 
 Jitendra Malik, University of California at Berkeley
  Computational Vision  
 
Ronald Coifman, 
Yale University
  Mathematical Challenges for Real-Time Analysis of Imaging Data 
 
Larry Rabiner, 
AT&T Laboratories
 Challenges in Speech Recognition 
   Review and Discussion 
Remarks, 
David McLaughlin, 
New York University
    Remarks, 
David Donoho, 
Stanford University
     The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   33 Opening Remarks and Discussion, April 27
     Communications and Computer Security 
 Howard Schmidt
, President™s Critical In
frastructure Board, 
Session Chair
 Introduction 

  
Dorothy Denning, 
Georgetown University
 A Security Challenge: Return on Security Investment 

 Kevin McCurley,
 IBM Almaden Talk omitted at speaker™s request
   David Wagner, 
University of California at Berkeley
  A Few Open Problems in Computer Security 
  Review and Discussion 
Remarks, 
Andrew Odlyzko, 
University of Minnesota
  
Remarks, 
Michael Freedman, 
Microsoft Research 
Remarks omitted at speaker™s request 
  Data Integration and Fusion  Alexander Levis, 
U.S. Air Force, 
Session Chair  
Introduction  
 Tod Levitt, 
IET, Inc.
  Reasoning About Rare Events 
 Kathryn Laskey, 
George Mason University 
Knowledge Representation and Inference for Multisource Fusion  
 Valen Johnson, 
Los Alamos National Laboratory 
A Hierarchical Model for Estimating the Reliability of Complex Systems  
  Review and Discussion 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   44Remarks, 
Arthur Dempster, 
Harvard University
   Remarks, 
Alberto Grunbaum, 
University of California at Berkeley
     Funding for this workshop, its videotaping, and the resulting report was provided 
by the National Science Foundation, t
he Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency, Microsoft Corporation,
 the Office of Naval Research, the Air Force Office 
of Scientific Research, and the Army Research Office. The summaries of the 
presentations were derived from the tr
anscripts by science writer Steven J. 
Marcus and BMSA staff.  
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   55Peter Bickel ﬁOpening Remarks,ﬂ April 26  
Transcript of Remarks   
Summary of Remarks
 Video Presentation   Peter Bickel's research spans a number of areas.
 In his work on semiparametric models (he is a 
co-author of the recent book 
Efficient and Adaptive Estimation for Semiparametric Models
), he 
uses asymptotic theory to guide development and assessment of such models. He has also 

studied hidden Markov models, which are important
 in such diverse fields as speech recognition 
and molecular biology from the point of view of how well the method of maximum likelihood 
performs. Recently he has become involved in 
developing empirical statistical models for 
genomic sequences. He is a co-author of the text 
Mathematical Statistics: Basic Ideas and 
Selected Topics
. He is past president of the Bernoulli So
ciety and of the Institute of Mathematical 
Statistics, a MacArthur fellow, and a member of
 the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and 
of the National Academy of Sciences. 
  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   66DR. BICKEL:  Ladies and gentlemen, I think we had better get started. As usual we are running a little bit 
late, but that is fine. Welcome. I am Peter Bickel. I am Chair of the Board on Mathematical Sciences and Applications of the National Research Council, a Board whose charge in part is 
to see what the mathematical sciences can do for the nation 
and of course, also, what the nation can do for the 
mathematical sciences. When we proposed this workshop it was just 2 months after September 11, and we and most mathematical 
scientists in common with our fellow citizens want to help protect our country against terrorism. We realized that although the mathematical sciences play a key role in most of the defenses that could 
be mounted against terrorism this was not appreciated by 
most of our fellow mathematical scientists, as well as many 
of the agencies working on homeland security. So, we decided to try to do something about the situation, and with the generous assistance of the DOE, the National Science Foundation, National Security Agency, the Air Force Office of Scientific Research, Office of Naval 
Research and DARPA and Microsoft we have convened this 
workshop. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   77So, what is the element that makes the mathematical sciences have a central role?  Preventing or 
minimizing the effect of terrorist activity requires 
learning as much as possible about future terrorist plans or about the nature of a current terrorist attack. Mathematics, operations research statistics and computer science provide the fundamental tools for 
extracting relevant information from the flood of data of 
all types that our senses receive. We want to know about people moving, money moving, materials moving and so on. This data may be in the 
form of numbers and text that is then subject to the techniques known under the names of data mining or unsupervised learning or pattern recognition. That is the subject of this first session. The data may be in the form of voice messages or video images 
corrupted by noise, and it is then subject to mathematical 
techniques which extract the true sounds or images from the 
corrupted form in which it is received.  That is largely 
the subject of Session Three. Information bearing on what may happen often comes from several sources simultaneously, for instance, 
modern communications, zone images, intelligence data. 
Putting such data together is the subject of Session Five. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   88Terrorists can encrypt their communications, and we need to decrypt them. Conversely you want them not to 
know about our knowledge and actions.  That is the subject 
of Session Four. Finally in the domain of biothreats we may be faced not with isolated cases but with full-blown epidemics 
of unknown origin. Stopping these and tracing their origin 
as quickly as possible on the basis of information gleaned 
from the pathogens, geography, speed of transmission, etc., 
is the subject of Session Two. Of course, there is a great deal of overlap between the subjects in these sessions. The synergy achieved by bringing these different groups of researchers together is also one of our goals. We have been fortunate that a collection of distinguished speakers with expertise in each of these 
areas agreed to give expository talks, that a number of 
distinguished mathematical scientists not working in these 
areas have agreed to act as discussants, and that a number 
of distinguished officers of the federal agencies concerned with homeland security have agreed to chair these sessions. As you see we have left plenty of time for discussion. We hope that these discussions will lead to The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   99future research and contributions by the mathematical science community to these questions.  I encourage the various federal agency representatives, I am glad to see are in attendance to help point the way towards this future work. I hope and expect to see two goals achieved, appreciation by mathematical scientists of the important 
contributions that they make to homeland security and 
appreciation by the federal agencies of the important role 
of the mathematical scientists in the campaign for homeland 
security. I will now turn to the chair of the first session, Jim Schatz. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   1010Welcome and Overview of Sessions 
 Peter Bickel 
 Dr. Bickel welcomed the participants to th
e workshop and spoke about how important it 
is for both the mathematics community and 
the security community to understand and appreciate the role that the mathematical sc
iences play in security.   Mathematics, 
operations research, statistics, and computer
 science provide the fundamental tools for 
extracting relevant information fr
om the flood of data of all types that our senses receive.  The techniques to be discussed are used to search and sort data, stop and trace disease outbreaks, extract true data from a message
 complicated by noise, encrypt and decrypt 
messages, and pull together data from disparate sources. 

 
Dr. Bickel mentioned how fortunate we were
 to have such a distinguished group of participants and said that he hoped the discussions would lead to future research and contributions by the mathematical science comm
unity to questions dealing with security. 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   1111James Schatz  ﬂIntroduction by Session Chairﬂ  
Transcript of Presentation  
Summary of Presentation 
Video Presentation   James Schatz is the chief of the Mathematics Rese
arch Group at the National Security Agency. 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   1212 DR. SCHATZ:  Thank you, Peter.  We had a session 
in February down at the Rayburn Building in Washington to 
talk about homeland security that the American Mathematical 
Society sponsored and I thought I would like to just as an 
introduction to our first session here give some of the 

remarks we made down there which I think are relevant here. It is a wonderful privilege to be here today. In these brief remarks I would like to describe the critical role that mathematics plays at the National Security Agency 
and explain some of the immediate tangible connections 
between the technical health of mathematics in the United 
States and our national security. As you may know already the National Security Agency is the largest employer of mathematicians in the 
world. Our internal mathematics community is a dynamic professional group that encompasses full-time agency employees, three world-class research centers at the 
Institute for Defense Analyses that work exclusively for 
NSA and a network of hundreds of fully cleared academic 
consultants from our top universities. As the Chief of the Mathematics Research Group at NSA, and the executive of our mathematics hiring process I The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   1313have been the agency's primary connection to the greater US 
mathematics community for the past 7 years. The support we have received from the mathematicians in our country has been phenomenal. Our concern for the technical health of mathematics in our country is paramount. Perhaps the most obvious connection between mathematics and intelligence is the science of cryptology. 
This breaks down into 
two disciplines, cryptography, the making of codes and cryptanalysis, the breaking of codes. All modern methods of encryption are based on very sophisticated mathematical ideas.  Coping with complex 
encryption algorithms requires at the outset a working knowledge of the most advanced mathematics being taught at 
our leading universities and at the higher levels a command 
of the latest ideas at the frontiers of research.  Beyond cryptology the information age that is 
now upon us has opened up a wealth of new areas for pure 
and applied mathematics research, areas of research that are directly related to the mission of the National Security Agency. While advances in telecommunications science and computer science have produced the engines of the 
information age, that is the ability to move massive The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   1414amounts of digital data around the world in seconds, any attempt to analyze this extraordinary volume of data to 
extract patterns, to predict behavior of the system or 
recognize anomalies quickly gives rise to profound new mathematical problems. If you could visit the National Security Agency on a typical work day you would see many, many groups of 
mathematicians engaged in lively discussions at 
blackboards, teaching and attending classified seminars on 
the latest advances in cryptologic mathematics, arguing, 
exchanging and analyzing wild new ideas, mentoring young 
talent and most importantly pooling their knowledge to attack the most challenging technical problems ever seen in the agency's history. You would hear conversations on number theory, abstract algebra, probability theories, statistics, 
combinatorics, coding theory, graph theory, logic and 
Fourier analysis. It would probably be hard to imagine that out of this chaotic flurry of activity and professional camaraderie anything useful could emerge.  However, there is a serious sense of urgency underlying every project, and you would soon realize that 
the mathematicians of NSA are relentless in their pursuit The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   1515of tangible, practical solutions that deliver critical intelligence to our nation's leadership. The mathematicians of NSA, the Institute for Defense Analyses and our academic partners are the fighter pilots in a way that takes place in the information and knowledge layer of cyberspace. As Americans you would be very proud of their achievements in the war on terrorism. The National Security 
Agency's need for mathematicians is extreme right now.  Although we hire approximately 50 highly 
qualified mathematicians per year, we actually require more 
than that, but the talent pool will not support more. Over 60 percent of our hires have a doctorate in mathematics, about 20 percent a master's and 20 percent a 
bachelor's degree.  We are very proud of the fact that 40 percent of our mathematics hires are women and that 15 percent are 
from under represented minority groups.  Of course, the agency depends solely on the 
greater US mathematics community to educate each new generation of students, but we, also, depend on the professors at universities across the country to advance 
the state of mathematics research. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   1616If the US math community is not healthy the National Security Agency is not healthy, and I always like 

to use an occasion like this to thank everybody here for 
all they have done for math in this country because our agency benefits so greatly. Okay, this first session here is on data mining, unsupervised learning and pattern recognition. This is a 
very exciting, very active area of research for my office 
and for the agency at large.  We attended just recently the Siam Conference on Data Mining about, when was that, just about a week ago 
here in Washington, and had a great presence there.   It is a wonderful topic. There is absolutely nothing going on in this conference that isn't immediately 
relevant to NSA and homeland security for us, and this 
first topic is an area of research that I think we had a 
bit of a head start on. We have been out there doing this 
for a few years, but there is a whole lot to learn. It is a 

young science. So, let me without further ado bring up our first speaker for this session, and that is Professor Jerry Friedman from Stanford University. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   1717Introduction by Session Chair
  James Schatz 
 Perhaps the most obvious connection between ma
thematics and intelligence is the science 
of cryptology. This breaks down into two disciplinesŠcryptography, the making of 
codes, and cryptanalysis, the breaking of codes. All modern methods of encryption are 
based on very sophisticated mathematical 
ideas.  Coping with complex encryption 
algorithms requires at the outse
t a working knowledge of the most advanced mathematics 
being taught at our leading universities and at the higher levels a command of the latest 
ideas at the frontiers of research.  

 
Beyond cryptology the information age that is
 now upon us has opened up a wealth of new areas for pure and applied mathematics research. While advances in 

telecommunications science and computer science have produced the engines of the information ageŠthat is, the ability to m
ove massive amounts of digital data around the 
world in secondsŠany attempt to
 analyze this extraordinary volume of 
data to extract patterns, to predict behavior of the system, or to recognize an
omalies quickly gives rise to 
profound new mathematical problems.  

 
Although the National Security Agency hires approximately 50 highly qualified 
mathematicians per year, it actually requires mo
re than that, but the talent pool will not support more. Of course, the agency depends 
on the greater U.S. mathematics community 
to educate each new generation of students, and it also depends on the professors at universities across the country to advance the state of mathem
atics research. If the U.S. 
math community is not healthy, the Nati
onal Security Agency is not healthy. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   1818Jerry Friedman  
ﬁRole of Data Mining in Homeland Defenseﬂ  Transcript of Presentation  Summary of Presentation  
PDF Slides 

Video Presentation 
  Jerry Friedman is a professor in the Statistics 
Department at Stanford 
University and at the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center.  
  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   1919 PROF. FRIEDMAN:  Jim asked me to talk about the 
role of data mining in homeland defense, and so in a weak 
moment I agreed to do so, and in looking it over I 
discovered that unlike any other areas of the mathematical sciences there is a well-perceived need among decision makers for data mining on homeland defense.  So, I have a few examples. Here is an excerpt from a recent speech by Vice President Cheney, and he said, 
"Another objective of homeland defense is to find 

connections with huge volumes of seemingly disparate 
information. This can only be done with computers and only 
then with the very latest in data linkage analysis." So, that was in a recent speech by Vice President Cheney.  Here is a slightly higher decision maker. This is 

from the President's Office on Homeland Security 
Presidential Directive 2, and it is a section on the use of 
the best opportunities for data sharing and enforcement 
efforts.  It says, "Recommend ways in which existing 

government databases can best be utilized to maximize the 
ability of the government to identify and locate and apprehend  terrorists in the United States.  The utility of 
advanced data-mining software should be addressed."  Here is the trade journal, the Journal of 
Homeland Security. Technologies such as data mining, as The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   2020well as regular statistical analysis can be used at the 
back end of biodefense communication networks to help 
analyze implied signatures for covert terrorist events. In addition data mining applications might look for financial transactions occurring as terrorists prepare for their attacks. Okay, here is the popular press. Computer databases are designed to become a prime component of 
homeland defense. Once the databases merge the really 
interesting software kicks in, data mining programs that can dig up needles in gargantuan haystacks. Okay, as many of you know DARPA has set up an information awareness office and they were charged among other things to look into biometric speech recognition and 
machine translation tools, data sharing among the agencies 
for quick decisions and knowledge discovery technology; 
knowledge discovery is another code word for data mining, 
that uncovers and displays links among people, content and 
topics.  Here is my favorite. It is not quite germane but 
this is a comment by Peter W. Hoover, not Peter Hoover the statistician but the engineer from MIT, and he said that in 
this new era of terrorism it will be their sons versus our 
silicon, a rather startling point, but I think part of our The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   2121silicon will be data mining algorithms running our computers, and the data mining bureau, Interpol and the 
DARCY(?) coined the phrase MacInt for machine intelligence. 
It sounds like something that might come from either Apple computer or a hamburger chain, but we need a MacInt or machine intelligence capabilities to provide cuing or early 
warning from data pertaining to national security. So, there doesn't seem to be a need to convince decision makers that data mining is relevant to national 
security issues.  Many think it is central for national 

security issues. So, I think the problem here is not in convincing decision makers of the need for data mining technology but to live up to the current expectations of its capabilities, 
and that I think is going to be a big job.  Now, what is data mining?  Well, data mining is 
about data and about mining. Okay, let us talk about data. 
What are the kinds of data we are going to see in homeland 
security applications? Well, there would be real-time high-
volume data streams, massive amounts of archived data, distributed data that may or may not be centrally warehoused; hopefully it will be centrally warehoused, but 
you can't centrally warehouse it all and of course many 

different data types that will have to be merged and The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   2222analyzed simultaneously like signals, text, images, transactional data, streaming media, computer-to-computer 
traffic, web data and of course biometric data. So, that is the kind of data we will be seeing. I will have more to say about that in a moment. Where is that data going to come from? Well, 
there is a big effort as 
most of you know in the government for data information 
sharing. The buzz word is to tear down the information 
stovepipes between the various agencies who apparently 
guard rather carefully all their own databases and 
information.  Now, the big effort is to merge them. So, here is a quote from an unnamed official in the Global Security Newswire. It says, "There are many community-wide data mining architectures that are being 
looked at to allow information sharing among intelligence 
and law enforcement communities," and a big example of that 
is going on right now. It is the merging of the CIA and the 
FBI databases for forensics, and that will be made 
available to state and federal agencies that they can query 
that and this year the Federal Government is spending $155 million for this effort of tearing down information stovepipes and next year they have requested over $700 
million for that. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   2323So, that is where  the data is going to come 
from. Here is another example again that I like. I got this 
from www.privacy.org, another example of where the data is 
going to come from.  Federal aviation authorities and technology companies will soon begin testing a vast air security 
screening system linking every reservation system in the US 
to private and government databases designed to instantly 
pull together every passenger's travel history and living 
arrangements, plus a wealth of other personal and 
demographic information. The network reviews data mining and prediction software to profile passenger activity and intuit obscure clues about potential threats even before the scheduled 
date of the flight.  That is a tall order, and now, 

www.privacy.org doesn't necessarily consider this a 
positive development, but it certainly is an example of the 
kind of data that we are going to be seeing. Now, what are the applications? Again, when you talk about data mining the first thing you have to think about is where is the data going to come from and second, what do you want to do with it; what are the applications? Okay, well, the applications read like the titles of the sessions of this conference, obviously bioterrorism, The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   2424detect early outbreaks of diseases and look for characteristic signatures of bioterrorism versus some other 
natural outbreak.  Cybersecurity is a big area that of course is being studied on the commercial front quite a lot, intrusion detection, protection of physical infrastructure 
with surveillance systems. Lots of data are going to come 
from security cameras everywhere and/or transfer the 
infrastructure like transportation, water, energy, food 
supplies.  Of course, document classification, as was 

mentioned before we have to recognize coded messages. There are some more applications. Again, they are all going to be discussed here and mathematical sciences are relevant to all of them. Behavior recognition, travel behavior, financial behavior, immigration behavior, automatic screening of 
people, mail, cargo, and of course forensics, post-
apprehension. If there is an attack you want to catch the 
perpetrators and all those who planned it so they can't 

plan another one. Now, what all of these problems have in common are they are needle in haystack problems, namely, you are 
looking for a very, very small signal in a very, very big 
background. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   2525Now, what is kind of the current state of the art in data mining?  Well, to talk about that in 20 minutes is 

kind of hard, but let me give you just a very rough 
overview. The most successful applications of data mining have been commercial applications which you can basically characterize as behavior recognition using transactional 
data.  Classic example are fraud detection, fraudulent 
phone calls, fraudulent credit card usage, tax evaders, 
those are classic applications of the commercial. Churn analysis, where you look for customers who are likely to quit your services or your competitor,a nd this is very important among competitors who offer virtually the same service like telephone companies. They 
do a lot of that. Purchasing patterns, recommender systems 
have been reasonably successful and other ways of trying to 

detect consumer purchasing patterns so you can promote very 
special things and hopefully make more money.  Direct 

marketing, who do I send my brochures to, and in general 
customer relation management have many texts on data mining, actually have commercial customer relation management in their title. That has been the main focus and 
the main success so far in data mining, and of course, 
stretching a little bit of course document search over The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   2626large corpora like web and library search engines have obviously been very successful. Now, homeland security problems if you look at 
them are very similar qualitatively to many of the commercial applications. They are of the same kind but in my view at least are different in degree because I think 
they are much harder and here are the reasons why I think 
they are much harder.   First of all the haystacks are bigger. We are looking for needles in haystacks. The government database 
and although data mining has been applied to some very 
large commercial databases the government databases are going to be even larger and they are going to be more 
diffuse in the kinds of information, and the needles are 
going to be smaller. I mean hopefully there are fewer 
terrorist than people who are trying to make fraudulent 
phone calls or trying to cheat on their taxes, and so the 

needles are going to be really small, and the stakes are 
much higher. If your data mining algorithm on a consumer database doesn't quite get all the customers who might be attracted to your product, well, your client is going to 
realize slightly less profit and won't even probably know 
it.  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   2727Here if we make a mistake the mistakes are highly visible and can lead to catastrophes, and so the stakes are 
very much higher. We need fast response. We can't take time 
to print up our brochures. We don't have any luxury of time. We have to worry about what the machine learning people call concept drift, namely, the underlying joint 
distribution of the variables if you like is changing with 
time for both the signal because the terrorists aren't 
stupid and the background.  People's shopping patterns are 

likely to change or they are changing because of our 
intervention in homeland security, and we have an 

intelligent adversary and I think that is one of the things that makes these kinds of problems unique, not that consumers aren't intelligent but they generally don't try 
to evade you. So, the data that we are trying to see I characterize as maliciously observational data. First of 
all it is observational. You can't design experiments, and 
all data mining is applied to observational data, but more 
importantly they know we are watching. They are going to 
try to disguise their transactions and as they realize we are detecting them they are going to change the signatures 
in real time as we detect them, and they can also jam us 
with deliberate decoys.  They can go through the motions of 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   2828planning an attack, do all the things we know how they would and then not attack and do that repeatedly just like 
car alarms that you ignore now until finally you know you 
say, "Well, this isn't working. We keep predicting attack and it is not happening. Obviously we are having many errors of a false positive nature. So, something is wrong 
with our system," and maybe nothing is wrong with our 
system. So, this maliciously observational data I think is a new twist that certainly existing data mining 
algorithms may be valuable to tell us about fraudulent 
phone calls but I think that is a really new twist to this kind of thing.  So, what are the properties that our methodology 
is going to have to have? It is 
going to have to be fast in 
both training, that is in developing the data mining 
detection algorithms and it is going to also have to be 
fast in predicting and that will leave out a lot of 
traditional data mining because the computing requirements 
are going to be intense. They are going to have to be real time, of course, timely, accurate, robust and adaptive because everything will be changing with time. What are some of the other attributes of the methodology that we are going to have to have? It is going The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   2929to have to be dynamically updatable.  Again, lots of data 
mining algorithms you run them on the data; if you change 
the data you are going to have to run them on the data 
again, and we can't tolerate that. You are going to have to model complex changing, surely non-linear relationships and those relationships as 
I mentioned before will be changing both of the signal and 
of the background. To the extent we can do any inference at 
all, it is going to have to be assumption free and I think 
most important is we will have to effectively incorporate 
the new knowledge which in most traditional data mining we 
haven't done that with the possible exception of the Bayesian-belief networks which may actually if we can ever get them fast enough might really have a lot to offer here.  In my view we are not there yet. Now, of course, 
if all you have is a hammer every problem looks like a 
nail, and I think that all of us working on homeland 
defense issues will bring their own favorite set of tools 
to these problems.  In the data mining area popular techniques are decision trees, rule induction, support vector machines and neural networks and a lot of other things, and it is not 
clear at least in my mind which if any of these will 
provide success. They all have advantages and The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   3030disadvantages, and none of them have enough of the advantages that are going to be required for the kinds of 
accuracy, speed and other properties that will be needed, 
and all of them if they are used will need a big increase in their performance both in their computational performance and in their statistical performance as well.  I don't think all is lost. This allows us to do 
research into new methodology and often new good things can 
happen. First of all as I said, we will have new kinds of 
data. The data itself won't be new kinds but the fact that 
we have to merge it and analyze it simultaneously  I think 

is fairly new, the fact that a single database will have transactional data, audio, video and text data all in it 
and we will have to treat it all simultaneously. Nearly all 
of everything we measure will be irrelevant. The 
signatures,for instance the reservation database, the 
travel database, of all the things that they are going to 
pull out of there about the nature of their trip very few 
of them will be really relevant.  Very few attributes will be relevant to detect the terrorist attack and the performance requirements as I mentioned before both computational and statistical are 
very high, at best severely challenging or probably 
exceeding the present state of the art. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   3131So, there are huge expectations. A lot of these databases are being merged and a lot of money spent on the 
expectation that the data mining algorithms will find 
things in them, and that is their raison d'etre for merging all of this data, spending all that money, and so I think that we are going to have to perform and figure out ways to 
increase computational and statistical performance so that 
we really do something with these very large and complex 
databases when we see them.  However, I think that as is often the case more 
time requirements often lead to scientific advances and in 
World War II there were a ton of them in the mathematical 
area. Of course, it played a huge role and many aspects of World War II led also to advances in mathematics that led 
to the invention and advances in computers which of course 
have changed our lives in many areas other than code 
breaking, and advances are certainly needed in data mining 
if we are going to successfully address the expectations of 
what data mining can do in homeland security, and if we are 
successful, even remotely so we will also impact a wide variety of other areas which are not quite so difficult. So, I think it is a wonderful opportunity and of 
course very important. Thank you. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   3232(Applause.) DR. SCHATZ:  Thank you, Jerry. 
Technical note. We requested that the speakers speak here at the podium and if assistance is needed with the changing of transparencies, etc., we have an assistant who will do that.  For the camera though they would like 

you up here. Just a couple of points I wanted to make about our last talk.  A wonderful talk. It is very much to the 

point of my daily life right now. The government problems 
are much bigger typically than what you are seeing anywhere 
else, and the needles are very tiny.  We talk about volume, variety and velocity where 
I come from, and one of the good points, also, made there 

was the robustness issue. In certain databases the data is 
very clean. It is very uniform. Certainly for the problems 

we deal with we have fragmented data, very badly garbled 

data, data from different sources that we are trying to 
pull together and the scalability of algorithms is 
absolutely a critical point to be made in all this. Certainly other fine points we have here are trees, rule based algorithms, support vector machines, 
neural nets; we are using all those techniques right now. 
They all are useful.  They all help to a degree. They are 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   3333all not enough. So, there is really a wonderful opportunity here I think to bring in some advanced statistics and 
mathematics into these problems. 
Also, a wonderful point about the fact that wartime has certainly in the past inspired some amazing advances in science, the Manhattan Project, of course being one and the cryptography effort 
that really began, modern cryptography really began of 
course during World War II in the serious sense, and I 
think I agree with Jerry's point there exactly.  I think if we look at this war on terrorism, the big advance is going to be in information processing and 
data extraction because that is the edge we need at this point. Okay, well, we are a little ahead of schedule which is fine, and I think Diane 
is ready. So, our next speaker is Diane Lambert form Bell Labs. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   3434The Role of Data Mining in Homeland Defense 
  Jerry Friedman 
  The problem is not in convincing decision ma
kers of the need for data-mining technology 
but in living up to their expectations. We must 
be able to handle a variety of data formats, including real-time, high-volume data stream
s, massive amounts of archived data, and 
distributed data that may not be centrally ware
housed.  We also must be able to handle 
various data types, including signals, text, images, transactional data, streaming media, 
computer-to-computer traffic, Web data, a
nd biometric data.  In addition, data-mining 
methodologies must operate in real-time 
and be accurate, robust, and adaptive. 
  
In an effort to bring compatibility to vari
ous government databases, the government has 
begun work on a project to merge the CIA and 
FBI forensic databases.  The product will 
be made available to other agencies, federa
l and state, for querying. In 2002, the federal government invested $155 million in this e
ffort, and it plans to increase the 2003 budget 
to more than $700 million. 

  
Data mining has several applications to hom
eland security: air travel, characteristic 
signatures of bioterrorism versus natural outbreaks, cybersecurity, intrusion detection, surveillance, and travel, financial, or immigration behavior.   
Currently, the federal government plans to cr
eate a vast air-security screening system 
linking every reservation network in the United Stat
es to private and government 
databases. The system is designed to instan
tly pull together every passenger™s travel history and living arrangements, plus a wealth
 of other personal software to profile passenger activity and intuit obscure clues about potential threats. 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   3535Diane Lambert   ﬁStatistical Detection from Communications Streamsﬂ  
Transcript of Presentation  
Summary of Presentation 
PDF Slides 

Video Presentation 
 Diane Lambert is head of the Statistics Resear
ch Department of Bell Laboratories, Lucent 
Technologies, and a Bell Labs fellow. She is also 
a fellow of the American Statistical Association 
and the Institute of Mathematical Statistics 
and has served on NSF and National Academy of 
Science panels and as editor of the 
Journal of the American 
Statistical Association
. She has also 
served on ACM and SIAM program committees for 
conferences on data mining. Her research for 
the past several years has focused on ways to analyze and model the kinds of massive, complex 

data streams that arise in telecommunications. 
  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   3636DR. LAMBERT:  It is actually a little 
overwhelming to be here since I don't work in security and 
so trying to guess what someone's problems are when you 
don't work in the area always seems a little bit dangerous. So, what I am going to stick with is communications data.  So, one thing that we have a lot of 

at Bell Labs is communications data, and you can imagine 

that communications data has a lot of information in it 

that would be of interest to people who are trying to track 
what is going on. So, there are all kinds of communications records that are kept now about all different kinds of communications, much more than maybe the average person is aware of. Every call of course has to be billed. So, for a 
very, very long time you have had a record of every call 
that is placed. You know who placed the call, when the call 
was placed, who was called and if it is a mobile phone you 
know where they were when the call was placed, at least 
generally because you know which cell site handled the 
call. You know how they paid for it. There is just a lot of information in this record.  Okay, now, there is 

actually a lot of information about online communications, 
too. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   3737If you request a file, if you want to download a file, then in a log file there is a record of that 
transfer. It says, "Who" where here Who depends on whether 
you allow cookies to be used or not and Who might be just an IP address. It is not too meaningful or it may actually be meaningful, but you know when and what was downloaded, 
which images and everything else. Going beyond that a bit online chatrooms the way they are structured there is actually a record kept in a 
log file of everything that is posted. That tells you who 
did the posting where again who might be an IP address. Who 
might partially a user name that somebody uses consistently. Who  might be an actual person in some cases. You know which room they were posting in. You know when they posted and what they posted. All of this is 
kept in the file.   So, there is this wealth of information about what people are doing both generally and in particular. You 
know can you get any useful information out of that. If you 
want to learn something about users and about people or about groups, you know, what can you actually do with this data? Now, to be believed that if you have data then all you have to do is think about it enough and you  will 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   3838be able to extract information from it, and I am not sure we have made a lot of progress here  yet, but let me tell 
you what we have done. Next slide, please?  The first question is what kind of information do we want, and you know, it is always a little hard to do 
particular examples because in any particular example you 
can say, "I don't want that information," but we will start 
with the easy one which is 
the easiest flows of all are 
really just call records. So, they are records of the calls. So, this for example, is one user. Now, you don't get this user or this caller's, in this case it is a cell phone, you don't get the call phone records all nicely delineated like this. 
They come all mixed and interleaved together, but for the 
moment imagine you have got a process which isn't too hard 
to imagine that sort of filters them all for use. You get 

them all together. Maybe you have just pulled them all off, 
and you look at them. Now, what you can see here is each one of these vertical lines represents a call. Longer calls are represented by longer lines. You have time going on the 
horizontal axis, and then you get sort of categorical 
information by color. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   3939Here it is terminating number, and you get things like which calls are incoming, which calls are outgoing, 
and then from that you can think of describing what the 
typical behavior of that caller is, and then you can also think of how do I find something that is atypical; how do I detect there is a change in the pattern?  Now, if we look at it you can see that all of a 
sudden on the right there is all this purple stuff that 
starts happening that has longer lines and there is more of 
it. So, it looks in fact if you look at it as if 
there is a change, but actually that is a month's worth of data in the purple part over there, and you don't want to wait a month in order to say, "Oh, yes, there is something 
interesting going on." Also, you don't get to look at all the past data when you want to make a decision 
about this one. So, as 
soon as it turns purple you would like to say something 
interesting, and you would, also, like to be able to do 
that without looking at all the past data. So, the question is how do you describe behavior in an ongoing way? You can keep updating and you can start 
from new callers, okay, people you have never seen before The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   4040because that happens all the time. In such a way you can tell when something interesting is happening. Now, as Jerry said, you can't hope to be perfect 
here. All we can hope in some sense is to provide a filter and to give a rich set of calling, of numbers to some human analyst that then will look at it to figure out what really 
is interesting. So, all we are thinking of here is sort of filtering the data to look for interesting behavior but 
even in that one it is fairly hard.  So, what do we have to think about behavior? If 
you are going to think about behavior and you are going to do it all automatically, all right, you can't think about behavior as I don't know, we can't think about behavior as 
a picture. We have to think about it as something more 
structured than that. So, how are we going to represent behavior? What we are going to do is say that behavior is just a 
probability distribution, that what it means is what are 
you likely to do and what are you unlikely to do and both of them may be of interest to you. In some cases you want to know what typical behavior is just to know how something is being used, but 
if you want to detect a change in behavior then you, also, The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   4141have to know what is typical because you have to know its baseline. If something is typical all the time, then you can't actually, you know, if what you are looking for is typical then there is no hope of finding it basically. So, we are looking for this change in behavior. Now, what we have are records for people. Either a record is the phone call record or it may be the posting 
in the chatroom, but basically you have got records and so 
that record just has some information in it that you can 
then extract and put into variables.  In some cases it is pretty easy to see what a 
variable might be. So, for example, a variable might be the person who posted it, the time the post was made, which 
room it was posted in and then you can, also, get content 
information, too. You get this record that you have and then that has some distribution that varies widely across people. So, 
what people, the kinds of posts people make, how often they 
do it, what the different rooms look like all that is changing.  Now, if it is changing too quickly you have no 
hope of tracking it, but on the other hand most things 
don't change too quickly. So, the hope is that you can 
evolve the probability distribution as time goes on. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   4242So, what we want to do is to track those 
probability distributions. Okay, now, these bulletin boards 
and chatrooms, there are lots of them out there. There are 
at least 35,000 web sites that support specialty forums, and  some of those have thousands of forums, aol.com, 
yahoo, right?  There are all kinds of forums people can 

join, and then you know some of them are new. Some of them 
are technical, just anything that you can imagine and these 
discussions can be fractured and free flowing.  So, most of the time people will post something 
and no one will answer. It will just go flat, and then 
about half of the time if there is an answer it is something completely unrelated to anything that has been 
said before, and probably about 80 percent of it is 18-
year-old males seeking something or other. (Laughter.) 
DR. LAMBERT: So, there is a lot of it that may or may not be interesting. Next slide, please? 
So, this is just a small example of what a chat record would look like with stripping off who is making the post, that this is September 17. This is the day that the 

stock market opened after September 11, from the www. 
financialchat.com, and you can see there are two different The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   4343posters here. One is purple, and one is white, and they are sort of talking to each other in some sense. So, the question if someone all of a sudden starts saying something interesting are you going to be able to pick it up. We don't actually know that, but what 
we are actually trying to do first is to understand whether 
we can understand what, you know, kind of represent what 
people are doing because if you can't do that, it is going 
to be much harder to find anything that is interesting. Next slide, please? 
 Okay, so what we are actually doing here, and I 
am not trying to say that this is the best way to do it at all. I am just trying to say that this is the way we have 
implemented it, and actually Mark has implemented this. 
This is beyond my understanding, unfortunately, but I can 
at least explain this picture. So there are all these discussions going on and these discussions use something called the IRC, the 
Internet Relay Chat protocol and so they are just writing 
files kind of like you would write in a log file for a web download. Okay, so, we have a fire wall and on one side of the fire wall -- Next? The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   4444On one side of the fire wall we have our system which is doing the data collection which is just a bunch of 
Linnex(?) machines basically and then on the other side of 

it -- Can you hit the next slide, please? On the other side of it is all the chatrooms which are all running different kinds of protocols. So, 
basically you have to be able to deal with all that kind of 
stuff, but you know that is a hard problem, but that is something that you can at least come up with solutions for. So, at the moment what we are doing is on the right where the chatrooms are we are monitoring somewhere 5 
to 10 thousand chatrooms. These chatrooms, to monitor a chatroom doesn't mean that you are necessarily taking everything form it all 
the time because most of the time chatrooms are actually 

inactive except for very large ones, and so what you might 
do is you have to decide what you want to watch. So, if there is only, you know, if there is only a little bit of activity like five posts in the past hour 
then you may decide only two posters are active right now. You may decide that you don't want to sample that and move 
on to the next one. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   4545So, there is some question about where you want to do it. Now, suppose you actually had some chat streams 
that you have collected. You bring them up beyond the fire 
wall and they are all in sort of a funny kind of time order, not exactly time order but they are not in the order of users. They are not in the order of topic, and they are 
not in the order of even room anymore. It is kind of all 
mashed together. So, what you have to do if that is what you are 
interested in is a different unit other time, and typically 

time is not interesting when you aggregate over everything 
because you have to somehow extract from this information about users, information about the group itself.  So, let me just go on
. So, some of it we are going to get here are things that are variables that you 
read out directly and some of it is things that you have to 
extract. So, for example, rate, you have to get a drive for 
knowing the time of this post and the time of the last post 
and just dynamically adapting a rate estimate over time. Okay, and other parts of it you are going to have to get out topic information. Next slide, please? 
Okay, so now what we want to do is to take each 
user for example or each room and what we are going to say The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   4646is what is the probability distribution that would allow you to predict what is going to happen next for that person 
or for that room. Now, you are not going to be able to predict exactly.  So, that is where we 
end up that you need to do this probability distribution.  Now, since everybody has a probability distribution, every room has a probability distribution and 
every topic has a probability distribution all over 
different kinds of variables what you have to do is to make 
sure that you are not trying to be too aggressive here. So, 
you have to have a distribution that is non-parametric because the variables vary so much from one user to another there is no hope of choosing one family with a small number 
of parameters and just estimating that.  It, also, has to be small because you are 
keeping so many of these. You don't get to have much space 
or much detail on any one person.  I mean maybe something 

that is not quite so obvious is you want to have it simple 
and that is because it turns out it is often useful to let people know if you are going to show them something what the state of knowledge about the person that you are 
showing them was at the time you made your decision. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   4747So, it can't be so complicated that someone can't look at it and make sense  out of
 it, and then the last two 
are some technical problems that arise. New users are coming into the system all the time. Somehow you have to be able to start off their probability distribution in a reasonable way and so this 
makes kind of odd clustering kinds of problems in a way or 
indexing problems because you could look at a few records 
for an individual and say,"Oh, this individual looks like 
they are going to behave like that group of people," and 
take an average for that group of people to start them off 
with, and then once you initialize you know that is not very good. It is better than just sort of guessing average over everything in the world, but it is not very good. So, 
you have to have ways to update it, and this has to be done 
record by record because you never get to go back and look 
at all the old records. Once you see them you have to move on. It just takes you too long to go back.  Can you go back, please?  So, there are many ways to do this. I am not 
saying that this is the best by any means but just to let 
you know what we have done. We say that this is a big joint The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   4848distribution. We are going to model it by a set of marginal and conditional histograms so that they don't take up too 
much space and if you had all of the marginals and 
conditionals then you could always get back the full joint distribution, but clearly there are some of these that are not so relevant. At any rate, you can come up with ways for choosing marginal and conditional histograms and maybe I 
will say a bit more about that later, and again you can do 
this for topics well. I mean not 
well. You can do these topics as though, you know, you have a topic; you have just 
standard information retrieval processes that get you started here. Next slide, please? 
 Okay, so, one problem that comes up here that we 
run into is how are we going to visualize all of this 

stuff. So, you make a probability distribution up for 
everyone and then you are trying to track everyone. Is 
there any useful information you get out about what is 
going on out there in the world using all those probability distributions that you have collected?  You have been just 
sort of using all that data. Well, you know if we have just 
the call records we can visualize that, right? You can make 
that plot and then you can look at it, and you can say, The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   4949"Oh, yes, I can see what is going on here. This person makes calls in between 1 and 2 minutes about such and such 
a rate. They never make them in the middle of the night." You can look at that and you can visualize that and then you can, also, get a sense of whether you think there is a reasonable pattern there.  You can, also, if it 

spits it out and says, "This is something where fraud is 
being committed," you can then go back and look at it and 
say, "Oh, yes, the fraud started here. I believe this," or 
also equally likely probably the fraud, there is no fraud 
here. This is just that the system has been confused. Now, in this chatroom thing how are we going to actually visualize because it is much more complex than in 
the call record world. First of all there is there is this topic, this text stuff. Well, there is kind of a history in the Bell 
system of using sound, maybe because of the phone. I don't 
know. There is kind of a history that comes back from time 
to time about using sound as well as visualization in order 
to understand high-dimensional data.  So, going back to the 1960s Tukey was involved 
in verifying atomic test ban treaties and one thing they 
did was they discriminated ea
rthquakes and atomic blasts using sound, what they called seisometer sounds and so then The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   5050they put on a map, okay, so you take the data; you would map that to a sound which either represented an earthquake 
of a certain magnitude or it represented an atomic blast, 
but you didn't know which. You just had the sound. Okay, then you played the sound that went with that. So, you took this time series of seismometer readings. You map that into 
sound and then you play that back and then the analyst can 
tell. I didn't bring it with me, but it is pretty easy to 
tell which is the atomic blast and which is the earthquake. So, that was one case where sound was very successful. There are other works about a decade later 
which used going back to Max Matthews who is a musician among other things and John Chambers about using sound to represent point clouds. Now, more recently  Mark Hanson who 

is Bell Labs and Ben Rubin who is something called the Ear 
Studio had a grant from Lucent(?) in order to see how sound 
could be used to visualize web data and so what they do is 
they use sight and sound to represent the evolution of 
chatrooms. They do this with a huge number of speakers, and 
little displays. Next one, please?  Okay, so this would be like one of what a little 
display would be.  So, basically you have go this text 

coming and right now you can think of doing it in terms of The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   5151how the topics are evolving in time and so, as these things come in you can cluster the topics because these topics are 
represented by a bag of words, and you can cluster those, 
and if you use some kind of online algorithm which is again, you know, there are ways to do it but not necessarily good ways, you can do dynamic clustering and 
see what is coming out over time. You can then map those to displays that are high 
dimensional, and so this is actually one which I had no 
idea what it was about, but I th
ink it is about a gecko is 
what I have been told and so people, there is a bulletin 
board or  a chatroom for people who have geckos as pets and 
this is a topic for them which I guess is the only thing on about that time of day. Next slide, please? 
So, what we would like 
to do is to be able to 
visualize what is the typical activity. Then what you can 
do is you can tabulate these posts by their length so that 
longer posts appear as bright pixels in the display. You 
can look for typical posts. Okay, so before we might look for long calls. Now, we are looking for sort of long posts or long trains of posts.  You can look for what is a typical post. You can 
look for what is a typical topic. The clustering can be The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   5252used as the display changes as you keep updating these cells and as they change. That means a new topic has come 
in or the topic has changed somewhat and what is shown in 
that  display is you pick a cluster and then you pick a 
representative phrase from that cluster. You can also do this for users. 
Next slide, please? 
Now, that is really as far as we have gotten to be honest, but now that you have these probability 
distributions at least in principle you can think about 
trying to detect interesting changes in behavior. Now, things that are subtle like Jerry said there is no, you know, it is not really going to be too easy to find it. I suppose it is too pessimistic maybe to say that 
there is no hope, but what we would like to do is to just find out when there has been an interesting change here. So, we have again this huge distribution. You have got a record.   You have pu
t it into, you know, now it has defined variables into it, whether those are topics in 
terms of clusters of words, whatever or just who did it. You have got all these variables. You can make that up into a probability distribution.  You are going to keep all the marginals and some 
of the conditionals and the first technical step that you The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   5353come into here is deciding what to keep because you can't keep everything and the twist here from maybe the usual 
data mining procedure is that what you want to do, you 
would like it to be the best possible choice of variables for each individual. So, maybe time of day is important for somebody but it isn't important for someone else, but what is the 
best possible set of variables changes a lot from one 
person to another.  So, you can't actually optimize for everyone at the same time, but you can take some large set of users and 
train from them and then what you can try to do is to figure out a set of variables which isn't too hard that is useful for a large fraction of users and then you would say 
that if is useful for a large fraction of people then you 
will keep it, but I think this is one place where things 

get a little murky, one of many, many places, but now if 
you have that you get probability distribution for what the 
person usually does say or what the topic usually is in 
this chatroom.  Now, at the same time you can have a probability 
distribution for what you are looking for. So, if you are 
looking for fraud you have some kind of training data; 
usually it is not very good training data but you have The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   5454some, and you can use that to make another probability distribution which is what is sort of unlikely under a 
fraud scenario and what is unlikely under a fraud scenario 
and you can use that to direct what is an interesting departure from normal behavior because not all departures from normal behavior are interesting. If someone always makes a 10-minute call and then all of a sudden they make a 
3-minute call well, that is 
change, but it is just not very interesting most likely. 
So, what we want to do  here is
 to direct it by comparing 
the probability distributions of what usually goes on 
compared to the probability distribution of what you are looking for. Now, if you do this in a log likelihood ratio 
then big changes in either one should be flagged here. Now, as I said, this is easy to do in a call 
record case. So, you know, just giving you a sense here 
what happens here is just plotting the cumulative log 
likelihood ratio of the positive contributions.  You don't want to put the negative ones in because there is some fr
aud superimposed over the legitimate behavior and you don't want legitimate behavior 
to cancel out the fraud.  So, at any rate that  is just 

what the phone picture is. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   5555Next one, please? So, I think that is kind of all I have to say about communication data screens, that they are large; they 
are evolving; they have incredibly complex structure, but in fact it is probably not impossible to get some useful information.  Now, whether you can detect really small signals 
I don't know, but you can certainly understand what is 
typical. You can take this information and you can 
formalize it and structure it in such a way that it is 

actually useful, but we don't necessarily know how to do it 
well. There are processing challenges. There is topic classification, evolution challenges. There are algorithm challenges for updating these things, and then for 
filtering how you decide whether something is worth showing 
to a human analyst because none of these systems as yet as 
Jerry said are foolproof, already just set off some long 
lists of actions based on an automated detection scheme. Thank you. 
(Applause.) DR. SCHATZ: Are there any questions?  We are running ahead a little bit. If anybody had any questions for Diane and we could even get Jerry back up The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   5656here I am sure if there are questions. Does anyone have anything right at the moment? PARTICIPANT:  I was intrigued by your comment 
about using sound data.  Generally we find little response; 
they feel it is uninteresting. Do you agree with that decision?  DR. LAMBERT: I think it is too harsh to say that 
it is not interesting. I think 
that when you have,  you 
know, I think for the point cloud work it is hard to find 
examples where it adds a lot of value.  I think here where there is actually text and words it may in fact help. Somehow your ear can pick out 
different words in conversations better than maybe your eyes can pick different words out of a page. So, I don't 
know whether it is an answer to anything, but I think it 
helps here. PARTICIPANT:  Let me ask a follow-up question on 
that.   This is not necessarily a question for the speaker 

but maybe someone in the audience.  My impression is that 

there is at least an order of magnitude difference between sight and sound.  That might have a significant bearing on 
the data. DR. LAMBERT: I think you don't want to replace visualization with sound but you might want to augment it. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   5757PARTICIPANT:  Presumably that would be much more 
useful.  Presumably the phone company of course would have 

conversations in English. Now can you tell from the 
patterns what certain; you know, do patterns change in different ways?  DR. LAMBERT: I have no idea. This system, quote, 
system, I wouldn't call it a system. This software we 
wrote, that Mark wrote, doesn't know anything about 
English. What it has is a dictionary, right, and then it 
has to pre-process the chat stream to get rid of things 
like pronouns which have very low content, with 
conjunctions which have very low content and some other words. Then it gets basically a bag of words and it doesn't really care whether they are Urdu words. It gets 
rid of these symbols you know and kind of the web speak 
stuff like LOL, but it doesn't really have any  sense of 

meaning, not at the moment. It probably would be reasonable 
to put that in, but we did something that is much cruder 

than that. PARTICIPANT:  I. T. Good had a suggestion years 
ago.  He was imagining the Allies in World War II built a 

broadcast tower and broadcast 24 hours a day pure noise 
except at predetermined times something came through in The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   5858something that is fairly plain text. In the modern communications era it seems to me that terrorists could 
publish noise on the Internet all the time and just 
overwhelm the detection capabilities except for at predetermined times, you know, 12:03 a.m. on Fridays there is something that is actually important and that is how 

communication happens. DR. LAMBERT:  If there is, I mean that depends. 
If somehow the nonsense is pure nonsense and the vocab 
changes, the vocabulary changes when there is something 
important to say then you have some hope, but if everything 
has been seen before then you are right. You are going to need something more sophisticated than this.  DR. SCHATZ:  A couple of other points I wanted 
to make on Diane's presentation. She made a very good point 
for our work which is the idea that a database isn't just a 
pile of stuff that is sitting there statically. There is really a very important challenge in tracking behavior over time and really trying to keep track 
of things. Some bit of data m
ay have arrived a year ago 
that is relevant today, and that is a big challenge. It is not just what came in in the last 5 minutes. The other thing which may be covered here in the conference at some point but I couldn't exactly see where The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   5959it fit in which is very important to us and might not seem all that critical to the high-end math community when you 
think of it at the beginning is data visualization tools. At the end of the day we do all of our analysis and there could be some huge algebra computation or mark-up models, who knows what is going on behind the scenes, but 
the people who are the first line customers of our 
algorithms; at our place we call them analysts, they need 
to be able to get what they need to get out of these things 
very quickly, and the data visualization aspect of this is 
critical for us, and so, I just point that out as an area 
where we might not have thought about that aspect of our work, but that presentation at the end, somebody has to act on something.  The other thing of course that came up in 
Diane's talk, a couple of points was just good old 
fashioned clustering algorithms, very important to us, and 
I think when we start talking about data sets of these 
magnitudes that we are all up against change point 
algorithms, clustering algorithms very, very important. Okay, I think we are all set.  Our next speaker 
is Rakesh Agrawal from IBM-Almaden. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   6060Statistical Detection from Communications Streams 
 Diane Lambert  At Bell Labs, records are kept about many types of 
communications, including phone 
calls and online communications. One us
eful way to analyze behavior from communications data is to derive probability distributions that indicate what a user is 
likely and unlikely to do, either of which may 
be interesting to the analyst. First, it is 
important to define ﬁtypical behavior.ﬂ Then, 
it is possible to detect
 changes relative to the baseline. 

 
A current research project at Bell Labs involves monitoring several thousand chat rooms 
in order to extract from the resulting data a 
probability distribution for each user and each room. It is also possible to devise a joint 
distribution and model it by a set of marginal 
and conditional histograms. The 
value of organizing the information this way is that we can compare the probability distribution of 
what usually goes on with the probability 
distribution of what we are looking for.  
Processing challenges include topic classifi
cation, algorithms for rapidly and accurately 
updating information, and decisions regarding wh
at information should be filtered to an 
analyst.  
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   6161Rakesh Agrawal
 ﬁData Mining:  Potentials and Challengesﬂ  
Transcript of Presentation    Summary of Presentation 
Video Presentation   Rakesh Agrawal is an IBM fellow whose current re
search interests include privacy technologies 
for data systems, Web technologies, data mining, and OLAP. He leads the Quest project at the 
IBM Almaden Research Center, which pioneer
ed key data mining concepts and technologies. 
IBM's commercial data mining product, Intelligent Miner, grew out of this work. His research has 
been incorporated into other IBM products, in
cluding DB2 Mining Extender, DB2 OLAP Server, 
and WebSphere Commerce Server. His technical contributions have also influenced several 

external commercial and academic products, 
prototypes, and applications. He has published 
more than 100 research papers and he has been 
granted 47 patents. He is the recipient of the 
ACM-SIGKDD First Innovation Aw
ard, ACM-SIGMOD 2000 Innovations Award, as well as the 
ACM-SIGMOD 2003 Test of Time Awar
d. He is also a fellow of IEEE. 
 Dr. Agrawal received the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in
 computer science from the University of 
Wisconsin-Madison in 1983. He also has a B.E. degree in electronics and communication 

engineering from the University of Roorkee, and 
a 2-year postgraduate diploma in industrial 
engineering from the National Institute of Industr
ial Engineering (NITIE), Bombay. Prior to joining 
IBM Almaden in 1990, he was with Bell Laboratories from 1983 to 1989.  
 The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   6262DR. AGRAWAL:  Good morning.  This is what I 
thought I would do.  So, this is my piece of the talk. 

Basically it is going to equal what Jerry said earlier. In 
fact, Jerry and I were going to share a cab ride and  
somehow we missed each other from the airport. It is good we missed each other because my talk is going to be like Jerry's talk in some sense.  So, my 

first feeling is that data mining has started to live up to 
its promise in the commercial world, particularly 
applications involving structure data. By structure data I mean things which can be put 
in nice relational or object oriented databases. You know, they have fields. They have columns and so on, and Jerry gave a lot of examples of such applications. My sense is that at this time we are beginning to see data mining applications in non-commercial domains and 
I guess homeland defense definitely falls into this 
category of non-commercial domain, and these applications 
involve use of both structured and unstructured data, but 
my post hoc sense is that we are just seeing the beginning of it. I am pretty hopeful that if we have further research in this particular topic we might be able to have The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   6363bigger successes in this area, and this is going to be very important as we go in future. So, what line is that? I think of somebody saying 
that you know we have off-the-shelf data mining technology available which can solve all the homeland defense problem but have got, you know, that is too much of an exploration 
at this stage, but there is promise here, and it is worth 

exploring that promise. Okay, so, this is what I 
am going to do. I am 
going to give some examples of some applications of non-
commercial data mining applications and sort of completely 
ignore all the commercial applications which you know Jerry gave a very nice introduction of that and you might have read that in two data mining conferences and so on, and I 
will sort of conclude by pointing out some of the important 
things as I see them. I like the talk to be interactive. So, we have some time. So, feel free to interrupt me at any time to ask 
questions. Next? I will begin by giving the first example of an application. So, this essentially is showing, you know, I 
guess Jerry mentioned identifying social links or linkage 
analysis kind of things. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   6464So, this is showing some person and what does this person's social network look like, and in some sense 
you mentioned about data visualization.  This is using fish 

eye kind of visualization which is showing that you know in some sense these are the people who are closely linked with this person, and this is the second layer of association 

and so on. You can sort of work it out and zoom on any person and get to see what these relationships look like, 
how these social linkages look. The interesting question is, you know, this is 
just an example we created, and the interesting question is how this was done, and basically this was just based on about the caller for about a million pages and using 
underneath it our data mining algorithm, and so let me just 
tell you what that algorithm is and then I will come back 
to this page and show how this was done. So, this is something in data mining work. You can call association rules and basically you know you have 
transactions. Transactions is just a set of literal and database construct of a set of such transactions.  So, in this particular example if you look into a page a page would be called a transaction, and you run some 
sort of a spotter on that and you find out the names in  
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   6565that particular page. So, those names would become the items of that particular transaction. Okay, so, a page is a transaction. Names appearing in that page are the items in that particular transaction, and if you are trying to find out sort of you know when ABC happens, then UVW, also, happens, and then 
there is the social support and confidence and people on 
this Committee have spent a whole bunch of time trying to 
figure out computationally what are the good ways of doing 
this. Can we do it, and I think you mentioned earlier, 
can we do this task efficiently because it  is clear it is 
kind of important to obtain.  Number of items is extremely 
large. Number of transactions is extremely large. We are 
talking in the millions or billions of pages, and number of 
items again you are talking of all the possible names that 
can become items. You are trying to find out relationships 

that might exist. So, it is a huge combinatorial effort and 
the question is can we do this thing really well and really 
fast. If you look into the data mining processes people have spent the last few years figuring out how to do this 

computation very well. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   6666So, once you have found these rules then let us go back to the previous one. This is simply a visualization 
which has been put on top of these rules of what is called 
a frequent item set. So, this is just a visualization to a known problem. So, this sort of reminds me of what Jerry was earlier saying that a lot of these problems kind of look 
like major problems but we might have things to identify 
about them. So, here is an example, and here what we are trying to do is essentially give a profile for a web site. 
What does a web site look like, and in this case this is asgonvenga.com(?). This is a site in Pakistan and what is happening here is you know these are sort of different 
characteristics that we are interested in. It has things 
like financial support, Islamic leaders and so on and the 
idea is the following that can we by looking at a site give 
quote, unquote, a profile of this particular site in terms 
of these features that we are interested in. Okay, and you can sort of see how the profile looks like from these particular sites. So, how is this 
done? Again, next slide? The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   6767This is done by what Jerry earlier was alluding to.  This has been done using classification which again is 

a technique that, you know, Jerry was one of the persons 
who initially wrote the first decision tree classification, and what it does essentially is this is how the input looks like; you know, this could be in this case records coming 
from some sort of a, you know, this is the variable. This 

is people who have high credit risk and these are the data 
and they are trying to sort of develop can we sort of 
develop rules for who are the people who are high credit 
risks, people who would be low credit risk and this is how 
a decision tree might look like, and the idea is that once you have printed this decision tree a new person comes in and we don't know whether this person is a high risk or a 
low credit risk and we again run this person's record 
through this decision tree and we are able to make a 
prediction. So, this is what people have done in the past and can we just go back to the previous page?  This is simply 

an application in the same way here. What is happening is that we got pages which are examples of pages which sort of fall into a particular category.  So, we got a good training set and once we have got a good training set we are building the classifier and The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   6868once we have built the classifier we can take any site and pump it to that, you know, sort of give the pages of that 
particular site to develop this kind of a profile. Yes? PARTICIPANT:  I am just curious whether your 
example is realistic. It brings up the question of whether 
you wanted an effective algorithm or a legal algorithm. DR. AGRAWAL: This is an illustrative example basically. PARTICIPANT:  Of course in market data that 
question will repeatedly arise in one form or another. DR. AGRAWAL:  Yes. Okay, next one? This is the third example I wanted to give which is about discovering trend and in this case I have chosen 
to show what can be done with some sort of a, you know, 
again, this is a small application built on top of database 
and what is happening is the following. So, the input here 
is on the patent applications which have been filed form 
1990 through 1994, and the idea is that you might be interested in finding out sort of specifying I am interested in this kind of a trend. This is an example of 

kind of a resurgence trend where technology was popular. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   6969Then it started losing popularity, and it is coming back into popularity again. So, the input in this case is to change your interest and the original input is all the documents in this case patents and you want 
to sort of find out some sort of a result which looks like this. Notice in this case we did not provide things like e-tools and pooling as inputs. This was something 
which was sort of figured out by the underlying system. So, what is happening? 
Next slide, please? 
In this case the essentially the underlying technology is sort of two things. One is what we call sequential patterns, and the other thing is what we call 
chip queries.  Sequential pattern the idea is that database  

consists of database of sequences.  A transaction is again 

as I said earlier a set of items, sequenced in order of 
this for transactions and you will find out all the 
sequential  patterns which are presented in this database. This lets you take these patterns and support for them over a period of time and then clearly the shift does support history for that, okay?  So, this is the underlying 

technology beneath it. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   7070Let us go to the previous page, and these things 
were essentially the sequential patterns which were found 
in the data and for these patterns of what these sequential 
factors there is a history and that is what is being shown here. Next slide? 
The next thing I want to mention is the idea of given all the web pages we certainly know the big 
communities that exist, things like AOL and so on but the 
interesting question was can we find out microcommunities 

that might exist, and the idea was that these 
microcommunities would be some of these types, if you will, 
and frequently pages are related.  Pages with large 
geographicals were not related and these are some of the 
sites that you get by looking or trying to find out these 
microcommunities, and there are things like you find 
Japanese elementary schools, Australian fire brigade and so 
on. So, I mean the labeling of the community was done outside but you could find out that there were these communities that existed. You could look at it and then  
you could provide label to it, and again underneath it if 
you think about it the input was large number of pages with 
the links on them and trying to find out these trends.  
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   7171Initially there was enough to use the standard algorithm which has been done but then a variation of it was used to 
discover these microcommunities from the web. Okay, next one? Okay, this is the third application I wanted to mention which is again a very non-conventional application 
that is similar to what Diane was mentioning earlier except 
that this is not using chatrooms but this is using the news 
group postings, and the idea was the following, that in 
some sense we were trying to sort of do the similar thing, 
can we find out from the news group postings, quote, 
unquote, pulse on a particular topic. So, the idea was that in fact a lot of these if 
you go to groups.google they have all the usenet postings. 

So, basically on any particular topic you can find for the 
last 20 years what has been posted and is available to you. So, the idea was that you take this posting and you have some of a response analyzer, and this response 
analyzer will show you the results on a particular topic 
over time, and it turns out without going into details that if you are trying to use standard data mining algorithms they don't work very well because if you are trying to let 
us say find out people who are against a topic or for a 
topic than just say let us say finding out about The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   7272immigration, how the people are feeling about it, then the positive and the negative postings tend to have almost 
identical vocabulary. So, if you use standard classifiers they won't do well. So, the analyzer works essentially just using some sort of computation of a class 
which is on the scent of 
what people and hits are doing there. Let me just quickly show you some results. This is, you know, we took some s
ort of a news group posting from State Farm and we tried to essentially see if we can 

from these news reports answer the following question. What 
do people think of State Farm's handling of claims? And you can sort of see that there is person here who doesn't like State Farm, but a lot of people, a surprising large number 
of people just comment in defense of this company and sort 
of answer every person.  We found it pretty interesting.  

You can click on any of these things, see what these people 
are saying and so on. DR. CHAYES:  Can you tell where they come from? 
DR. AGRAWAL:  Sorry? DR. CHAYES: Where these positive people come from, do they come from statefarm.com? (Laughter.) The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   7373DR. AGRAWAL:  So, clearly some of them might be 
agents, also. On the other hand 
that is the kind of the 
noise and to stress a point which was made earlier that 
somebody can use and go in and so it is a classic misinformation kind of a thing, that you can go and try to post things to confuse the thing. So, I mean that is a 

classical thing. All that you are trying to do was to sort 
of say technically can something be done, and there is a 
lot which has to be done on top of it. I mean somebody just 
takes these and tries to sort of use it, and that is going 
to be problematic. I just wanted to show you another one. State Farm decided to leave New Jersey and there was this concern how people were going to react to that particular fact, that 
they are quitting New Jersey, and again it is kind of 
interesting which was the point which Diane mentioned about 
how in these news groups you know there is a topic that lots of people respond off topic 
and so on, but you can 
sort of see that really what happened in this case it was 
very easy to see it once you went through this particular algorithm that in this instance people didn't think State Farm was at fault. It was either New Jersey they blamed or 
they blamed no-fault insurance which was just kind of 
pretty interesting to see that again, you know, it is 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   7474opinion and of course it can all 
be biased.  It can all be 
done in different ways but it was interesting to see just 
how at least by looking at it. There is a tool available 

for you that you can get a good sense of what is happening. Next? PARTICIPANT:  All these data mining algorithms we 
have seen involve large numbers. Are there algorithms where 
people can be solicited in several states and processed? DR. AGRAWAL: That is an excellent question, and 
can I just defer that question because I want to come back 
to that question?  There is a lot of interesting work that 

has happened and a lot of people are thinking in that direction exactly, but that is a very good point. So, what I tried to do 
in this part was to give you an example of some sort of interesting applications and 
I thought I would mention at least two things which I think 
are kind of important to, also, think through, and I call 
them technical taboos(?) because they might really kind of 
destruct what people think data mining can do and one is 
sort of what I broadly call privacy concern, and there is some idea of the word "privacy," in data mining that I want to mention here and the second thing is where is this  data 

going to come from. This is what Jerry was calling the The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   7575stovepipe essentially. You know how are you going to do data mining over compartmentalized databases?  I, personally, don't believe that you ever have 
one place where all the data will be collected. It just can't be done, and I personally believe it is not even desirable to do that.  So, how do we do sort of data mining over compartmentalized databases?  That is going to be an 

interesting technical challenge, and in both of these 
things, again, I try to point what people have been 
thinking and then again think of the solutions that are 

sort of meant to illustrate the direction. So, this is the area of privacy in data mining 
and there is a clue from the fact that people were sort of 
really concerned that data mining is too powerful, too 
invasive. I think Jerry mentioned the example of 
privacy.org  where what people are trying to do is not the 

best thing that should happen. So, here is a thought again. You can disagree with it, but that is okay.  
The idea here was that here is an example of one person's records. This is this person's age and this is this person's salary and here is another 
person whose age is 50. His salary is 40K and the goal is 
that using this particular data you want to build some kind The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   7676of classification model. We want to put a decision tree, and the question is can we do that particular task without 
violating individual privacy, and if you think about it 
what is really private about our being in the values, and what we tried to do here was essentially capture the 
intrusion of what happens anywhere on the web today.   Basically somebody asks you to fill out a form. People go and lie. You know, they take the age, put that 
value as an age, you know as the question, and I will pick 
a number and put that. So, we basically said, "Hey, can we 
somehow institutionalize this lying? Can we in some sense 
made the lying scientific?"  That is all we were trying to do. So, instead of you putting up an arbitrary number what you do is you take 
your true value and you add to it a random value. So, you 
throw a coin and this coin could be coming from some other 
distribution and you throw that coin and whatever value you 
get you add to the true value. So, the value seen here is extra. Okay, so this person's age was 30. PARTICIPANT:  R is positive or negative or only -
- DR. AGRAWAL: In this case this was negative.  So, 
what is going to happen is the following. So, here is an 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   7777example showing bimodal distribution once you do this randomization; you know, things might look pretty bad. So, 
you can sort of say, "What have you done?" Next, please? So, just in practice, y
ou can take this 
randomized distribution and you can factor in  how this was 

randomized and using these pieces of information you can 
try to reconstruct how the original distribution might have 
looked like. So, my idea of deconstructing distribution you are not reconstructing.  You will never be able to sort of 

reconstruct  precisely what this looked like, but you might 
be able to reconstruct the distributions, and once you have reconstructed distributions most of the data mining 
algorithms require really working at distribution levels. 
So, you can use these reconstructed distributions to go and 
build the models. Next? 
This is the reconstruction problem. You know the appropriate distribution of Y and you want this to lead to redistribution and so, I will skip down and skip this, please? I just want to show quickly that this seems to work quite well. I mean this is how the distribution will The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   7878look and this is what this might look like, and this green one is how the reconstructed distribution looked like. Next? 
And if you use these reconstructed distributions this is an example where maybe sort of showing that for a 
particular task different level 
of randomization you are losing a certain amount but you might include more privacy 
and there is this notion of how much of randomization is 
there. If you can say a value
 scheme came, the age came 
from the range here of 200 and you tell me your age is 65, I can't move through on that estimate except to say that 
your age is between 0 and 100 somewhere, and you have 100 percent privacy. That is the notion of privacy.  So, it is 
basically to say that for randomization you don't lose much 

privacy. Okay, next? 
So, I just want to sort of quickly again mention that I talked to you about how to do this for numeric data. 
This is how you do with categorical or nominal data. Here 
would be a transaction. You replace this transaction with this item, with an item which is not given in the transaction. So, this is the sort of  books you have read. 

You take a book and replace it with some other title which The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   7979is not present in the transaction. So, this is when you are doing randomization.  This is another nice way of selecting the complex randomization but it might be a slightly more complex randomization but this one addresses the problem of privacy. I look at the result based on the result and I can 
infer something more. Next, please? 
Here are some results again here that this is two different data sets, and for something like this exercise 
these frequent items are what are the things which come 
together. This is things we have taken the true data. This is how the true item sits on there. After randomization using the random data, I just say how many true positives 
you could recover.  You know, what was the number of false 

positives, and then you can see that you can still do 
extremely well and you get fairly high level of privacy. Okay?  So, once again another topic and so I will 
talk a little bit about this computation of 
compartmentalized databases. This is again this frequent travel example that Jerry was pointing out. You know, people are very frustrated with the system, that some sort 
of a frequent traveler rating model for this is going to 
come from all kinds of different sources, and I personally The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   8080believe it is not even desirable that these sources go and share the data, and you know there are lots of reasons for 
not sharing the data, and I firmly believe they should not 
share the data unless it is necessary to do it. So, whatever is necessary, so there has to be some notion of on demand minimal sharing of data which is 
needed here. It is sort of relevant to the topic that you 
have with fire walls and so, there is a bunch of data, and 
if you think about it you know the idea that I presented to 
you about randomized data kind of applies here also because 

that would be one way of sharing information by randomizing 

before we share the information. The other approach would be that each database builds some sort of local models and then you try to 
combine the models. So, you do partial computations and 
then try to combine partial results and third would be to 
do some sort of on-demand data shifting and data 
composition kind of thing.  
I will briefly point out that this can be done. I just want to sort of cite some work which is not done in IBM-Almaden, but I will try. I think it is sort of worth 
mentioning. Next one? The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   8181Here in this particular model this is for people who do cryptographic kind of stuff.  Here are two parties, 

a phone conversation here. This is a decision tree type 
thing on the union of the databases without revealing any unnecessary information. Next? 
This is a two-party p
rotocol, basically how to 
compute effects of X of Y without revealing what X and Y 

is. Next? 
And basically decision tree, the key boils down to particularly if they are using ID3 kind of classifier, the key step is to sort of compute information and sort of do this kind of computation and in this case B1 and B2 

could be coming from different sources, and using the 
protocol you can combine that information. That is 
basically what was done in that paper. The question, the challenges, you know do these results generalize and can they be applied for the data 
mining task, and there is sort of interesting work to be done here. Okay, so, this is sort of my sense of what I thought would be some interesting kind of new directions in 

data mining towards attacking these so-called "non-The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   8282conventional" problems and I just thought I would mention some of the problems which I, personally, find extremely 
hard. I really personally find it, you know, when I think 
about them I don't know how to even approach this sometimes. Most of the data mining is kind of based on the assumption that the past is connected to the future and 

what if history doesn't repeat?  History changes abruptly. 

It is not a gradual kind of change which is happening, but 
you know there are abrupt changes, and how do we sort of 

detect those changes and know that whatever models we have 
will be totally applicable here, and if you think about it this is exactly what has happened, you know, on September 11, and  since then.   The profile of suicide bombers has completely changed from the examples of the current suicide bombers. 
So, anybody who was building data mining model using the 
previous examples collected from the past was fighting an 
old war. So, how do we  learn? How do we sort of detect 

that we are fighting an old war now, and the war has completely changed? Reliability and quantity of data, this point is extremely relevant. We all know that. The kind of model 
that you are going to build depends on the quality of data The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   8383you have got, and how are we going to sort of detect which one of them is part of the data? Actually it is kind of 
interesting.  Let me give you an example of what data mining values do?  Clustering. Intelligent miner is an IBM 
product. When it was being developed basically people have 
taken an algorithm which was used in some place and trying 
to recode this algorithm and  they found out that the 

results they were getting after this reimplementation were 
different  from the results they were getting before.  So, the question arose what is happening here and they found out that the reason the results were different was that the algorithm had a bug in it and so that is one 
part of this. The interesting part of the story is the 
following, that the group which was providing the algorithm 
and more important the consultants who were using that 
algorithm in engagements with real companies insisted that 
we should put that bug back in because they had convinced 
customers that what they were getting as a result of these 
algorithms gave good results. Customers were happy.  So, 
think about that. (Laughter.) 
DR. AGRAWAL;  So, the other part is the 
following, that I personally believe that data mining The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   8484because these truths are so general can only provide first of all the information and they have to be fed into 
something afterwards. So, how do we take these patterns and 

make them actionable?  Some way we have to bring them in 
and i still don't know how, you know, principal way to bring the main knowledge into this whole process.  I still 

don't know that. I think everybody has said that data mining is like finding needles in haystacks. In fact, it is not. I 
mean most of the data mining right now doesn't find needles 
in haystacks. It finds patterns which are dominantly 
present and how do we sort of save ourselves from overfeeding in our quest for finding real nuggets? There is a huge danger that we might be just finding noise, and all the things I know of people say that 
it is about finding really the real events and generally 
most of the data mining algorithms at this stage today are 
extremely weak in finding real events. Patterns?  We can find some sets. We can find 
some sequences. I look at medical applications and there people really wanted to find out deaths or at least some sort of problem of deaths, because that is the kind of 
pattern they are looking at, and we don't know how to do 

this. Data types, I mean I have given you examples of text The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   8585kind of data, structured data, but you have much better data types on which you want to do mining, when to use 

which algorithm, you know, I just resonated with what Jerry 
said. You have a hammer and everybody looks like a nail and IBM, it was very interesting. You know, I work with a bunch of consultants. This consultant was a specialist in 
Uronet(?).  Every problem he will convert into a Uronet 

problem, right? This guy knew  accession. He will take 

every problem and convert it into accession problem. That 
was the best algorithm. That was the solution for every 
problem, and we still don't know which algorithm to use 

there, and these algorithms are tricky.  A lot of them have 
a lot of wrinkles and  you know, is there hope of getting 
this thing done without the help of something behind them 
and tuning these algorithms? Is there a hope of building 
things which in some sense go and figure out in a data 
dependent way what parameters to use for what particular 
algorithm? So, this is just a set of some things I thought I would like to mention, and this is sort of my summary slide saying that I do believe that data can be a strong ally. 
There is no doubt about that.  I do believe that data 

mining has just shown some promise. I don't think it has 
matured enough to be used. It requires lots of work, but it The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   8686has shown promise and it is worth investing in it, and if 
we do invest in it, we might be able to realize its 
potential. That is it.  Thank you. (Applause.) PARTICIPANT:  Several months ago Karen Casadar 
suggested that instead of profiling passengers for 
airplanes what one might do is profile airplanes.  It seems 

to me that you have offered an idea in another domain. I 
gather you can do social network analysis to find cliques 
and you have a very long list of cliques based on Internet 
data. The next step would be to try to characterize or profile the cliques. There would 
probably be more 
information at the clique level than at the individual 
level. DR. AGRAWAL: I cannot agree with what you just said.  Jerry and I were coming. To stop us, you know, we 

were talking together.  They had to cycle some people, 

right? Who would be the best two people, two nice people 
talking about this conference. They are going together.  
Come on, you know. PARTICIPANT:  Sometimes common knowledge points 
to people who act as a bomb or something like that.  Are 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   8787there any kind of data mining analyses to discover these kinds of common knowledge? DR. AGRAWAL: I think that is a really good point.  
I was talking to someone who was saying exactly what you are saying that, hey, you guys are looking too hard.  If 
you look for common knowledge you improve the quality. DR. SCHATZ:  Okay, thanks. 
DR. AGRAWAL: I forgot to answer a question that was raised. So, I think there is something happening right 
now. In fact, you know there is this point that we don't 
track a big model in one shop. You take some data, bring 
some models, and then refine that and that is how the model gets framed up.   DR. SCHATZ: Thanks.  A couple of points I just 
wanted to make before we break here,in Rakesh's talk, which 
is that the randomization and privacy issue I think is very 
important for us, too, and the challenges of working across 
what you are referring to as compartmentalized databases is 
a big one. It is hard to know how to get a grasp on those, 
but they are very big problems, important for us, too. Okay, we have got a 15-minute break. We are back on schedule, and we will see you her at ten-thirty-five. 
Save your questions up for Don McClure and Werner Steutzle. (Brief recess.) The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   8888The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   8989Data Mining: Potentials and Challenges  
 Rakesh Agrawal 
 There are several potential appl
ications of data-mining techniques to homeland security.  These include linkage analysis, Web site
 profiling, trend discovery, and response analyzer algorithms.   

 
Linkage analysis consists of forming a gra
ph that illustrates a person™s social network, 
storing this information in a database
, and recording ﬁassociation rulesﬂ and ﬁtransactionsﬂ for each relationship in order to
 permit the use of data-mining algorithms.  
Web site profiling uses a decision-tree-based technique called ﬁclassification.ﬂ  A classifier is built in order to classify a set of
 people and may be used to distinguish people 
who are high credit risks from those who ar
e low credit risks.  The technique of trend 
discovery is used to exploit a database of sequences by recording sequential patterns and chip queries. For example, trend discovery coul
d be used to review patent applications filed over a number of years in order to 
detect a possible resurgence of a certain 
technology™s popularity for inventions.  Response analyzer algorithms can be used to 
identify trends in news group postings on a particular topic over time. However, it is 
often difficult to distinguish between responses for and against a particular topic, given that positive and negative postings tend to have almost identical vocabulary. 
 
There are, however, several concerns.  It is 
impractical and undesirable to merge different 
organizations™ databases.  Therefore, it is important to create local models from 
independent databases and then develop techniques to combine these models into an 
overall model.  There are also concerns a
bout privacy: a known distribution can be added to a data set, resulting in a randomized dist
ribution from which the analyst may preserve 
the original distribution without knowing the original data values.  Randomized 
distributions should not affect data-mining algorithms since 
most data-mining algorithms 
just require working at distribution levels.  
One challenge facing the field is the fact that we cannot always rely on data from the 
past. For example, the profile of a suicide 
bomber has completely changed from what it 
once was.  Another challenge is that data mining requires data
 that are reliable and of 
good quality. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   9090Donald McClure   ﬁRemarks on Data Mining, Unsupervised Learning, and Pattern Recognitionﬂ  
Transcript of Presentation  
Summary of Presentation 
Video Presentation 
  Donald McClure is a professor of appl
ied mathematics at Brown University.
 The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   9191DR. MC CLURE:  Thank you. I would like to remind people of one point that Peter Bickel made at the beginning. The 
discussants are in general people who come from outside the 
areas of the main presenters in these sessions, and I am certainly an outsider to the area of data mining. It is not an area in which I have been active. On the other hand, I do have a fair understanding of problems in the area of trying to extract information 
from massive amounts of data, generally image data. I will 
mention a couple of examples of that type in the comments 
that I make, and some experience with pattern recognition.  I had no idea exactly what the content of the talks this morning was going to be. I enjoyed them all very much. I did take a peak at a couple o papers that Jerry and 
Diane had written recently. So, I had some idea of what 
their perspective was going to be. So, there are three or four points that I wanted to make that related directly to the talks. The first two 
were sort of related, but an observation that Jerry 
Friedman made in his talk that advances in the area of data mining will rely on a combination of expertise, a coordination among disciplines and things that different 
people can bring to bear on these problems, I don't know 
whether data mining is regarded as an area that is owned by The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   9292computer science or owned by statistics, and it should probably be neither. It should probably be an area that 
attempts to draw on the things that people from different 
disciplines can bring to bear. I, personally, feel that one of the challenges in new areas that are poised for advances is technology 
transfer and this works in both directions. How do we 
stimulate cross fertilization between scholarly research 
that is going on on one hand and the expertise of people 
who are designing and integrating systems on the other 
hand, and this really has to occur in both directions. I felt very strongly in my academic career that people doing scholarly research, I am an applied mathematician; so, that the applied part is part of my own 
discipline, that the research, the scholarly basic research 
benefits greatly from having an understanding of what the 
real problems are. So, there needs to be more, that the academic disciplines can benefit from a better understanding of what 
the real problems are and in the other direction when good research is done how do we then do what most people refer to as technology and see that that gets integrated into the 
systems that are being developed so that systems design and 
integration is not a process of people taking things from The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   9393standard toolboxes and assembling those to assist them but instead drawing on new advances in research. There were two remarks made that relate to a third dimension, my own personal bias relating to the  need or use of models, Jerry commented that, and I may have the words wrong. I was jotting down notes during the talk but 
one of the needs and important aspects of the way in which 
statistics might have a bearing on data mining would be in 
the area of assumption free inference. We need inference 
methods that are assumption free. I don't know if we completely agree or if we perhaps are saying the same things in different words or in different perspectives.  Diane made the comment to pick up from the comments from the talks first that behavior should 
be modeled as a probability distribution, and I emphasize 
the word "modeled," that it is important to have a model 
when we are trying to  develop decision procedures. She, also, emphasized that the models need to be non-parametric or distribution free. So, they are very 
flexible and can be adapted to all kinds of environments and I think distribution free models may be in the direction of what Jerry had in mind in referring to 
assumption free inference, models that are very flexible as 
opposed to ones that are parametric and more restrictive. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   9494My own personal bias that relates to these is that if we are looking for either a needle or a nugget in a 
haystack we need to do something about modeling the needle 
or the nugget. We need to know something about what it is we are looking for.  What can mathematics and statistics 
contribute to problems of identifying and extracting 
information from massive amounts of data? I believe that there are many contributions that mathematical sciences can make.  Let me, I know I am a 
discussant, but I couldn't resist bringing a couple of 
pictures. So, let me put up a couple of pictures to show you? This is a picture provided Yali Ami of the Department of Statistics at the University of Chicago. He 
and Donald Gieman have cooperated for several years on 
research on trying to identify generic object classes in 
digital images and still images and as a prototype of the 
problem of detecting generic object classes, not ones where 
i have a fixed rigid model for what I am looking for but where there is something that in different instances can take many different forms. For a specific problem to focus on they focused on the problem of detecting faces in video imagery. So, the The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   9595triangles up here are hits and in this image these are the faces that have been identified. This is not a particularly complicated example. It is not a representative example but their methods are really quite impressive and what they have achieved and they have relied heavily on ideas and methods from 
probability and statistical inference, and I can give 
people, I don't have titles of papers, but I can give 
people pointers to some of this work. Last Sunday morning CBS news had a segment on, the key point was the new surveillance cameras being 
installed in Washington, DC, and how were these going to be used and concerns that should be debated in public debate about the needs to balance surveillance protection and 
privacy. They commented that in London where cameras are already in very widespread use on average every person in 
London has their face on camera 300 times a day. Now, when 
we think about trying to identify faces and video imagery 
this is I think a problem of trying to identify image information from massive amounts of data.  The data rate for standard resolution, digital video, I mean like MTSE or Powell(?) video is, for color 
imagery is about 25 megabytes per second.  Now, all of that The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   9696isn't interesting, but if we are going to find anything interesting in it, I believe it is going to be based on 
having a model for what it is that we are looking for. There is a line under each face pointing at it, and in this picture it says that it is probably good at recognizing brain wave membrane ties. (Laughter.) 
DR. MC CLURE:  It is actually looking for facial features.  So, this is sort of a postage stamp that I have 
blown up in order to present it at that size. So, here is 
one that doesn't look terribly exciting in terms of 
scientific content but the problem is to find and read the license plate. This is actually work that was going on in connection with developing a system to be used in parking 
lots at Logan Airport. The work has been going on for a 
couple of year.  License plate reading is a problem in computer vision that has been studied for decades. In the sixties 
people were developing systems to read license plates. I 
took a look last week at what is available today in commercial systems, and I found something like 50 different numbers of systems on the market for reading license 
plates, and my feeling for the reason that there are so 
many systems is that none of them is really a superior The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   9797solution, and there is still room for improvement in this problem. This is a hard problem as a pattern recognition problem to find the plate and to read it. Simple instances of the problem, it is not rocket science to specify a system that is going to be able to do it, but even in this 
image we can find the plate very easily but there is a 
complication in the image and it is not -- there is 
illumination for example and a shadow creates a difficulty 
in terms of a vision problem, but the real challenges come 
from just the enormous variety of ways that this problem 
can manifest itself.  So here are some challenging license plates to read. These come from a web page, www.photocomp.com where 
there is actually a fairly interesting summary or review 
from a consultant system integrator about systems that will 
read plates. License plates as an optical character recognition problem are challenging because of the many 
different forms in which the problems can be presented. So, the small characters with large characters, this is actually pretty common if you watch plates as much as I do 
when your car is riding down the street. The graphics are 
very common on plates and license plate frames that have a The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   9898habit of invading the bottom, strokes of the characters so that we can't simply say that the characters are dark 
characters on a light plate background. License plate reading is a more difficult problem than a character recognition problem. We can report that statistical methods from statistical inference have 
contributed to a very successful algorithm for reading 
these characters.  
This is relative to the plates. This particular idea is an easy problem. It is a very easy problem to 
contrast the light characters on a dark background. It is 
not like the noise. It isn't white noise in this image. The background has structure in it, and the characters come from a fixed font, from a font specification. So, we know 
exactly what the model for a character is before we start 
trying to do the reading, but in these problems these are 
problems, these are characters that are etched on wafers 
and as wafers go through the manufacturing process things 
happen to make this a more interesting vision problem. So, there is according to the specs supposed to be clear space around the identifying marks on a wafer but the semiconductor fabs try to use every square millimeter 
of space on that wafer so they will etch over the region 
where the ID occurs.  
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   9999Now, I won't put up any more examples of this, but I will return to my general remarks for a minute just 
about how mathematics can play a role in a problem like 
this more generally how mathematics and statistics can play role in problems of extracting information from non-conventional massive data sets. In addressing this problem, an approach that we have used the problem is first of all putting on our 
statistician's hat regard it basically as a hypothesis 
testing problem. I want to decide that every location in 
this image in the whole field of view is there a character 
present at that location, character present versus character not present. There are typically 36 different characters, alphabetic characters and the 10 digits. So I can refine 
that process or that hypothesis of character into it is a 
composite hypothesis formed from the different characters 
that might be present.  So, at any rate we view this as a hypothesis testing problem and try to model what it is we are looking for and try to model the variation and try to model the probability distributions. This involves identifying in variants of what really defines what it is that we are looking for and using The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   100100distribution free methods, using non-parametric methods in order to have robust methods for forming a basis for 
decision tree procedures, articulating the model in the 
form of probability distributions, so that when we need to actually make a decision among the hypotheses we can use methods  that are based on time-honored principles of 
statistics such as like the good ratio tests in particular 
in this problem. At any rate I will conclude my comments. I found all three presentations this morning to be very, very 
interesting. 
DR. SCHATZ;  Thank you, Don. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   101101Remarks on Data Mining, Unsupervised Learning, and Pattern Recognition 
 Donald McClure  Advances in data mining rely on coordinati
on among disciplines, with dialogue between people doing scholarly research and those who are designing and integrating systems.  
Models used in data mining should be very fl
exible as opposed parame
tric and restrictive. If we are looking for a needle in a haystack
 we need to do something about modeling the 
needle. We need to know something about what
 it is we are looking for.  In problems of 
extracting information from massive data sets, 
nonparametric procedures
 in particular, we should permit robust decision-tree 
analyses that articulate the model in the form of 
probability distributions.  In that way, wh
en we need to make a decision among the 
hypotheses, we can use methods that are base
d on time-honored principles of statistics 
such as likelihood ratio tests. 
  
Several applications of data mining are being 
used in computer-vision research related to 
homeland security.  One example is finding 
and reading license plates.  Although there are many commercial systems to do this, there is
 still room for improvement in the areas 
of illumination and its resulting shadows; character size, type, and color; graphics; 

contrasts between characters and background; and the obscuring of information by 
license plate frames. In addition, data mining 
will help in the detection of patterns on silicon wafers as they go through the manufacturing proce
ss.  Although there is supposed to be clear space around the identifying marks 
on a wafer, semiconductor makers try to 
use every square millimeter of space on that 
wafer, often etching over the regions where 
the identification would occur. 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   102102Werner Stuetzle  ﬁRemarks on Data Mining, Unsupervised Learning, and Pattern Recognitionﬂ  
Transcript of Presentation  
Summary of Presentation 
Video Presentation 
 Werner Stuetzle was born on September 14, 1950, 
in Ravensburg (Germany). He completed his 
undergraduate degree at Heidelberg University and at
 the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology 
(ETH) in Zurich. Dr. Stuetzle completed a master's
 degree (Diplom) in mathematics (1973) and a 
Ph.D. in mathematics (1977), both from ETH. He studied estimation and parameterization of 

growth curves under the direction of P.J. Huber. 
Dr. Stuetzle was an assistant professor in the Depart
ment of Statistics at Stanford University from 1978 to 1983, with a joint appointment in the Com
putation Research Group of the Stanford Linear 
Accelerator Center. In 1981, he was a visiti
ng professor in the Department of Applied 
Mathematics and Center for Computational Rese
arch in Economics and Management Science at 
MIT. In 1983 and 1984 he was a research staff me
mber at the IBM Zurich Research Lab. 
Since 1984, Dr. Stuetzle has served on the facult
y of the Statistics Department, University of 
Washington, Seattle, with an adjunct appointment
 in the Department of Computer Science and 
Engineering. He was chair of the Statistics 
Department from 1994 to 2002 and spent 1999 and 
2000 on sabbatical in the Research Division of AT&T Labs. 
 The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   103103DR. STEUTZLE:  All right, I just made a couple of 
slides here.  So, one thing that struck me this morning or 

when I actually looked at the transparencies for Jerry's 
talk that he sent me ahead of time, one thing that certainly struck me is that there are very high expectations for the usefulness of data mining for homeland 
security. So, for example, when the Presidential Directive says, "Using existing government databases to detect, 
identify, locate and apprehend potential terrorists," so 
not people who did something, you know, who might do 
something in the future, that is certainly I think an extremely ambitious goal, the same way with locating financial transactions occurring as terrorists prepare for 
their attack. I mean given that it doesn't take a lot of 
money actually to commit terrorist activities and then 
finally, the use of data mining to pick out needles in a 
gigantic haystack. So, as to how realistic that all is I remember when in the late sixties, early seventies there was a 
terrorist group in Germany called the Baader-Meinhof gang. So, Germany is a very highly regulated society compared to 
the United States.  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   104104For example, the government knows where everybody is. I mean when you live someplace you have to go to city 
hall and you have to be registered. When you rent a room 

you have to go there. So, Germany has much more complete control over its citizenry than the US
 has or I am sure 
that US citizens would ever tolerate. That is point one. Point two is the bottom line is knowing who these 
people were. So, they wouldn't go looking for people who 
were going to commit activities. They had actually done 
stuff. I mean they had murdered leading bankers, 
politicians, judges and so on, blown up things and so even 
despite all these, besides those two factors, the highly regulated society and it was already known who the perpetrators were it took years to actually track these 
people down.  So that is one thing. I think that is an important thing to keep in mind.  They basically looked for 

certain characteristics.  So, for example, when landlords 

reported the rental of apartments they would check for 
certain things like how old was the individual. Do they drive BMWs or other fast cars?  Did they make the deposit 
in cash, etc. So, that is in a sense a data mining 
technique but despite all it actually took years to track 
these people down. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   105105So, I am not saying that it is impossible. I am just saying that even under very highly regulated 

circumstances when you know who you are looking for this is 
not a trivial matter at all. Okay, so then when you think about applying data mining to this problem there is first of all what I would 
call the simple although not easy.  Some of the ideas have 

the super big databanks. So, it is actually not physically 

one database. It is the collection of all information 
available so that it could be travel records, bank records, 
credit card records, previous travel patterns, demographics 
of the people, etc. So, you have properties of people and you also might have network data like who interacts with whom.  Who 

calls whom. Who sends e-mail to whom, etc., and so forth. 
So, you have this large collection of information. In 
principle you could have that amongst all the people in the 
US and then the idea is to apply data mining tools and then 
from that you estimate the probability that the person is a 
terrorist given all these properties. So, that is a little part of what one would do, and so you look at all data. You apply data mining tools 

and you basically classify people into potential terrorists 
or not potential terrorists. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   106106So, this is actually, so something related to that was what Diane was talking about.  You take the 

calling card fraud. So, that is what AT&T does to detect 
calling card fraud. They know the people who have AT&T long distance and then they collect call records of these people. For every call in the long distance network there 
is a call record which gives you the calling number, the 
number that was called, who the call was billed to, how 
long the call was, etc. They have a long record of that. 
They build up a profile for all the users and then based on 
that profile and some training data they try to make a rule 
that sort of flags people who might or who are suspected of committing calling card fraud, and that is  a much easier 
problem. First of all, you have a universe of people that you are interested in and those people have AT&T long 
distance. So, that is the first thing why it is easier. The second reason why it is easier is the consequences. So, the consequences of missing somebody or 
erroneously identifying somebody are quite different. So, if they think that somebody might be committing calling card fraud or if they think somebody is abusing my calling 
card they will just give me a call and say, "Well, did you 
really call Nigeria 15 times the last week?" And if I say, The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   107107"No," when then they are confident they have found something and if I say, "Yes," well, then that is not a big 
loss and it is different from being apprehended at the 
airport.  So, if they miss somebody they will just lose 
some money which is painful, you know, but not like an airplane that has gone wrong. So, this is a much easier problem but even that is already quite, I mean people have put a lot of work into 
that. So, now getting back to the original problem of 
estimating that someone is a terrorist given the 
properties, the problems are first of all you have a very 
small training set. Jerry alluded to that. Actually you don't have a small training set. You have a small number of bonds in the 
training set. You have 280 million zeroes and 16 ones in 
that training set. I mean one example, Ted Kaczinski and 
Tim McVeigh you don't really see the attackers. Mohammed 
Atta and accomplices, but say you have the useful data in 
the training sample. So, that is one problem. Then the second problem is what you know from anybody who has ever taken any basic statistics course knows the problem with screening. If you have a tiny 
incidence with the population which we are going to have 
you need methods with very high specificity. Otherwise all The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   108108your alarms are going to be false alarms.  So, that is 
another. So, that was something that Rakesh pointed out. You are not looking for things which are dominantly present. That is what data mining is good at, but you find out the people, that most people who buy beer also buy 
potato chips. So, that is something that is just dominantly 

present.  So, you are looking for things which have a tiny 

incidence and so unless you have very high specificity you 

get a huge number of false hits, and finally, another 
problem is that the good predictors might not necessarily 
be legal predictors. Good predictors might be if you listen in on everybody's phone calls and automatically process those, 
and you can look at everybody's e-mail, etc., and that 
might not be possible or you might not want to do that. It 
might be illegal or just infeasible because of the sheer 
mass of the data. Okay, so, even in its highly idealized form where you have this universe of people and you want to make this rule and if you could put all these databases together and run these data mining algorithms, even in the idealized 
form this is very difficult. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   109109Now, however, this is much too simplified. This is much too simplistic. First of all there is going to be a 
lot of individuals outside the system. So, the system, 
meaning the people who are in the US and are in these 
databases, well, first of all there are foreign travelers, people who come in as travelers who are basically not in 
the system of immigrants. As far as I know the US doesn't 
even know how many millions of illegal Mexicans you have. I 
mean it is a matter of millions of people that one is not 
sure about. So, it is not at all clear, but that universe  

is not clearly delineated. PARTICIPANT:  They have attempted to build a 
system in the US. DR. STEUTZLE: I don't know much. I just hear rumors that it is not that effective. I might be wrong. Okay, so then there is the other issue of identity. So, even if you had the universe of people and 
you can run that decision rule and then I show up at the 
airport then the rule says that I am not a potential 
terrorist.  Now, that only makes sense if I am really who 
the system thinks I am.  So, therefore, if you can't 
prevent identity theft that kind of system is not going to 
be very useful because you have to be sure that the person 
that you are making the prediction about really is the The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   110110person standing at the gate. If you can't guarantee that then this prediction isn't going to be very useful. Then of course there is terrorism on foreign soil which seems very hard to prevent. So, now, I am not a national security expert but realistically it seems to me what you can hope to achieve is some access control.  So, 

you can hope to deny access to some critical places, and 
places i put in quotation marks because there could be 
virtual things like access to certain machines on the 
network, etc. So, you can maybe hope to deny access to some 
individuals who are either outside of the database, so they 
are not in your universe; you don't know anything about them. You could just say, "Well, I am not going to let them do X or let them go in." 
 So, that is something you might 
realistically be able to do or you could deny access to 
people who are inside the system on whom you have data but 
you have bad indicators. So, you can run the specification 

procedure on your universe and you can try to see, well, 
you can try to make such a prediction, and of the 
likelihood of being a terrorist and if you think that is high you might deny access. So, finally, it seems to me that for any such 
thing establishing identity is critical and so it is not 

easy it seems to me and these biometric identification The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   111111methods are really crucial, really have to be a crucial part of any strategy because that is the only way to 
totally reliably establish identify. All right, that is all I have to say. Thanks. (Applause.) 
DR. SCHATZ: Don, Werner, thanks very much.  
We have a little time for discussion. I do want to comment that the biometrics problem is very important to 
us at NSA, too. We have a large group of people who have 
been studying that recently. Just to get some discussion going here, if I could take one second before we jump in at NSA we have an activity we call the advance research and development 
activity and the director of that activity, Dean Collins is 

here, and I know that no one in this room is the least bit 

interested in funded or money or anything like that, but 
Dean actually provides funding for external research, and 
if he could just take a second to talk about his program I 
think you will be interested for a number of points of view. So, Dean, would you just give us a couple of minutes here on that? DR. COLLINS:  Thank you, Jim. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   112112My name is Dean Collins, and I am the director of a very small organization called ARGA(?) and has anybody 
ever heard of us?  Oh, a couple of people, okay, my 

colleagues. (Laughter.) DR. COLLINS: So, there is a comment that I think 
that Jim is doing a very nice job of describing after each 
talk the things that NSA is interested in, and I represent 
not only NSA but our little activity is an intelligence 

community activity. So, to a certain extent I go across all 
the three letter agencies. The thing that Jim mentioned was that his customers are the analysts and so after all the data comes in then the analyst looks at it and I have been in this 
business, this particular job for a little over 2 years, 
and I have spent a lot of time with analysts, and I would 
like to tell you that a lot of the tools that are provided 
to them are not used, and so, we have only four particular 
areas we work in and one area that we are starting up is an 
area called novel intelligence from massive data, and that kind of clicks back in here, and it is hopefully of some 
interest to you not necessarily for the funding although if 
you would like to participate in the funding we would 
certainly welcome that, but we have spent about 6 months 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   113113working with analysts and saying, "What do you want?" as 
opposed to what can we give you, 
and I thought that you 
know if you have a hammer, 
you know, every problem is a 
nail. It is sort of like what are the problems in the form that you would like, and so, one of the things that we 
spent in the 6 months is a formulation of what are the 
analysts looking for, and they are quite different than you 
might think. Since I think the patriotic duty which a lot of us ascribe to in the fact that you are here you might be 
interested in looking at the, you know, what the analysts 
really want. This program is ongoing as we speak. It is unclassified. It was put out in what I used to call a 

Commerce Business Daily but it is now called Fed Business 
Ops and I will write down the URL. You can look at it. As of Wednesday there were 145 white papers. Obviously not a 
lot of people in this audience are aware of this 
opportunity and maybe you decided you didn't want to do it. I would just like to bring that to your attention but primarily from this standpoint. Look at the questions. You know, that is the important thing, you know, the 
funding put aside.  Look at the questions about what they 

are really interested in. You may get a totally different The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   114114viewpoint of what is important to an analyst, and they are looking for that rare occurrence and so that the gentleman 

from IBM I think put it 
very succinctly. That is a very 
difficult problem, and all of the work is unclassified, and 
there will be conferences involved.  So, if you don't get into the program you might like to at least attend some of the conferences. Jim, thank you very much. 
DR.CHAYES: I have got one question for you. Who are the people you are working with? DR. COLLINS:  We are not working with anybody at 
the present time. DR. CHAYES: But in universities there are people, I mean what areas are they from, math or -- DR. COLLINS:  We are problem focused not 
discipline focused specifically.  We can't tell you who we 

are working for because nobody is under contract. DR. MC CLURE:  Who is submitting the white 
papers? Where are they coming from? DR. COLLINS:  I do not know. I have not looked at 
any of them. They are just coming in and that is something I couldn't tell you if I did 
know because that would be 
interfering with the procurement process. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   115115DR. CHAYES: And this URL has the description of what you are looking at? DR. COLLINS: It refers you to an announcement for the questions. DR. AGRAWAL; Can you give us one example? DR. COLLINS: You mean one of the problems? Okay, I think that one of the problems for the analysts, and this 
is something that is a very big problem, this issue of 
passive knowledge. If you do a database, a data mining 
search and you come out and say, "Gee, there is a strong 
correlation between the White House and George Bush," this 
is not very interesting to an analyst and he is probably going to take your software and throw it in the trash.  So, 
now this is a very difficult problem but it is a very 

crucial one to an analyst. DR. SCHATZ:  Okay, Dean, thanks. 
DR. COLLINS:  I will write this down afterwards 
so I don't interfere. DR. SCHATZ:  So, I will open the discussion up 
here to anybody who would like to start. PARTICIPANT:  I thought  the issues about 
essentially screening which is what we are talking about 
were very important issues and we can apply all the 
mathematical techniques we want to but if there are only a The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   116116half dozen positive cases in a massive database you have to use your domain knowledge. You have to figure out how the 
domain knowledge, but we are also going to have to figure 
out policy and so I think that one of the things that this community should be, we are looking at the question of how to find the terrorists but we also have to bring to bear 

knowledge about, or we have also have to bring to bear 
policy issues like screening programs.  If we have the 

metal detectors that keep people from doing things, how 
does that play in?  Are we reducing the incidence of these 

things? We have to bring to bear behavioral analysis.  

Behavioral and social science research has to be brought to 
bear on this. How can we quantify that and put it into the same framework so that it can be integrated in the 
statistical models? DR. SCHATZ:  Good points.  Did I miss a question 
in there? PARTICIPANT:  It was a point that I wanted to 
make and I wanted to ask people to make comments on that if 
you would. DR. STEUTZLE: I really have got not much to say to that. I mean I agree that that is true, and that is a 
problem I think that classification procedures are not 
necessarily, it is not always so clear, for example, how to The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   117117integrate networking information into those. So, that probably would not be properties of a single person that 
allow you to make diagnosis but properties of how a person 
relates to other people in the database, and that is not always totally obvious and how you would integrate that, how you would use current methodology to do that. DR. CIMENT: I would like to hear a little bit more  from people with a vision about the future that 

relates to possibilities of using mathematics in the 
context of new architectures not just looking at the world 
the way it is today but the way the world might be in years 
to come based on for example, the proliferation of supply chains based on computer integrated systems, sort of the WalMartization of the world you might say, right?  The 

story I heard relative to 9/11 which makes it significant 
is that certain citizens understood immediately after the 
impact of 9/11 that there were certain requirements. Motorola sent truckloads of batteries for New York City with policy escort, understanding that people 
with cell phones were going to go out more because they weren't recharging them. Home Depot I think was the one that shut down 20 of its stores understanding that people were going to need 
their appliances and services and things like that. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   118118What I am getting at is the extreme events of the future which we never know what they will be. They won't 
repeat the past, but it seems like they will require all 
sort of integration, not jus
t from governmental agencies but from private sources, private organizations, industry, etc. The challenge for us in our society as Werner well pointed out that will not tolerate privacy invasion is 
to develop ideas that will preserve the privacy, allowing 
data sharing and I think mathematicians are probably the 
most suitable people to think these abstractions through 

and not worry about what the lawyers tell you you can't do, what the policy people tell you you can't do, create these models and show that there are maybe possibilities here if 
the policy would change and if the architecture would 
change, and we might have a society that preserves both 

security and privacy. DR. MC CLURE:  I would reiterate what Jim jus 
said. That is an interesting point. I have given absolutely 

no thought to this. It sounds like you have given a good deal of thought to this. So, I don't really have anything to add. DR. SCHATZ:  These are certainly critical issues, 
the privacy issue versus trying to actually do something The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   119119for homeland defense, and they are hard issues that we at NSA face every day because we go through extremes to ensure 
privacy for citizens.  We are there for the citizens and 

yet you are trying to do these data mining things. We have had more discussions with lawyers at our agency in the past 8 months than probably in the preceding 40 years, but I 
think you are right.  I mean just the randomization ideas 

that Rakesh pointed out are very important for this kind of 
work.  I mean so much of the time, especially in the 

industry setting the information people want you don't need 
to have individual names.  You are looking for trends and 

so forth. PARTICIPANT:  This is both a comment and a 
question and I think related to one of the points that Don 
McClure mentioned. This issue of data mining I think is 
sometimes too general.  Much of the action I think has to 

be at the level of domains.  A particular example he 

mentioned which is what I know about, to say, "Oh, yes, 
this is a classification problem. It gets you maybe 10 
percent of the way or 20 percent of the way," and there are studies showing that we are not suggesting taking a general off-the-shelf thing and running it. You have to look at the 
domain. There are particular questions how things are 
found, what the fusions are, what life forces, etc. It The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   120120seems to me that this theme may actually be doing a little bit of this. I just take an extreme position here, by 
forcing people to concentrate at this very broad level, 
whereas if they came down to the more specific level they might actually make more progress. DR. MC CLURE:  This relates to the point that I 
mentioned that Jerry Friedman made also about problems in 
this domain just requiring the coordination of many 
different kinds of expertise. It is the missions of data 
mining but when you get down to the specifics it doesn't 
seem like everything fits within the kind of highest level 
definitions. DR. SCHATZ:  Certainly a good general point. I 
mean at the National Security Agency the one thing we have 
that not everyone has is data and because of that it really 
forces us to, we have many conferences where we try to 
think big picture, but we have many very specific problems 

and there is nothing like very specific problems to just 
get you down to business in designing algorithms and 
pushing forward and you are right. There is only so much progress you can make at an abstract level and data mining the concept is vague and broad and so on. Yes, Peter? The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   121121DR. BICKEL:  I would like to follow up on that in 
a somewhat facetious way.  Jerry had two things. He had 

assumption free, and then he had domain knowledge. There is 

only really one assumption-free statistical model, that is that you have all of the things that you observed on certain -- I am talking unknown distribution and that 
doesn't get you very far. So, domain knowledge already 
implies that you are starting to put in structure and of 
course the more you know, the more you can put in. DR. PAPANICOLAOU:  I am George Papanicolaou of 
Stanford University, and just about the comment that Diane 
Lambert made about during the sixties the sonification of seismograms to determine whether they come from natural earthquakes for from explosions and I know a little bit 
about that problem. I would like to see how you feel about 
this issue. In fact, in the early sixties the 
discrimination problem was very much an unsolved problem. 

It was a very large community of maybe a couple of hundred 
seismologists and applied mathematicians and others who 
were involved in this, and the problem wasn't solved until about 20 years later in the eighties, and it turned out it was a very complex problem. It wasn't an issue that you 
could hear, that the seismograph people hear whether you 
could discriminate with your ear, but it was an The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   122122understanding of how waves that are generated, the surface of the earth over long distances. These are important. Yes, 
we are collecting information about seismograph activity 
down to a very small earthquake level, natural or otherwise. This information is collected. We have huge databases. International agencies are collecting. There is 
a data mining issue there, but the real issue is when you 
go and use data how do you discriminate; what is the basic 
science that goes in there that would tell you what to do 

with the data that you have, and speaking also in the 
direction of some of the criticisms mentioned earlier exposing data mining in such very broad terms hides some extremely important long-term issues in basic science like 
computational wave propagation and various other issues for 
example that have to do with the imaging in the complex 
environment, and these are very bit as important let us say 
for the detection problems that are going to nuclear 
proliferation. Very small tests are going to be made and 
have to be discriminated as to the role the data mining problem starts to extract so
me general information, some popular information and I think that that is something that 
this community, this small group here should attempt to put 
a fix on. Exactly what will the general, in order to better The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   123123fix, what will the general ideas do; how far will they go and that they are applied and that the underling basic 
science needs to be emphasized very seriously. DR. SCHATZ:  Disagreement with that?  Good point. Yes? PARTICIPANT:  We talked in an earlier session 
about techniques and terrorists changing their tactics, and 
focusing on false negatives. What about terrorists who try 
to force the system to make findings in people?  Any 

comment about what current techniques and that kind of 
thing?  What kind of techniques might there be? DR. MC CLURE: I don't know.  I think about the 
problem as it has been approached over the years of automatic or aided target recognition. It is always easier 
to try to foil the system than it is to design it to be 
effective, and I think that is a problem in this area. DR. SCHATZ: Yes, you know one of the problems about that that struck me at the Siam data mining 

conference a couple of weeks ago is that  our community of 

which we have a cross section here; we have academia; we have industry; we have the government and among ourselves we would like to share information about how we are doing 
this data mining, but in truth it is a little bit difficult 
because companies have proprietary information. They are The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   124124trying to put out products and academic folks need to be tenured and government agencies keep what they are doing 
secret, and it is all for very valid reasons. If people know how AT&T is going to detect phone fraud, they will get around that. So, it makes it difficult to exchange the science sometimes I think  because of all 

the proprietary information and that is a difficult 
situation here, but at the same time if we don't keep our 

sources and methods quiet when we need to they won't be 
effective either. DR. STEUTZLE:  Getting around things is only one 
problem and once you know how the system works then you can also flood the system so you have both options that you can flood it or get around it, you know. So, that is I guess 
why the airlines don't want to tell you exactly what they 
are looking for when they profile you at the gate. PARTICIPANT:  The reason I asked the question is 
because even with many false negatives  you feel the 

positives are still useful.  With many false positives it 

is untenable and the terrorists may force us to remove the system entirely and that is why I asked the question. DR. SCHATZ: Good point.   
PARTICIPANT:  I don't think it is a question. It 
is more of a comment. It is not so hard to find a needle in The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   125125a haystack. The point is that you often find sometimes the thing that you are looking for is a special feature that 
occurs in a population not necessarily for a single 
individual.  The project that we had with fraudulent access 
to a computer system, sometimes you can just ignore the data and look for some movements or command that is not 
typical.  Very much to what Werner mentioned your 

suspicions of the sixties and seventies looking for a 
robust method, sort of trying hard to avoid, how to evolve 
more for extreme events, sort of reverse thinking in trying 

to find these things in the bulk of the data and then from 
there on you can sort of try to find the individual.  In 
fact, even in a synthetic model if you look at Diane's data if you take Diane's data and say, "Can I detect fraudulent 
usage of phones?" having the phone bills of individuals for 
say a year or two, taking just random streams will give you 
this phone and my phone and somebody else's phone bill but 
just for a week you can observe for a week there is ongoing 
data. Could you find fraud in that type of data, and the 
answer is probably you could because like Werner said if you see calls to Nigeria that may be a good start. DR. LAMBERT:     Maybe I should say something. I 
wasn't actually trying to say that you can use these for 
terrorists. This is far beyond what we ever try to do. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   126126The other thing is maybe we are focusing too much on trying to accomplish the final goals whereas it might be 
useful just to give people a filtered set of information so 
that they have less than actually puts that by hand, which is you know it is not that we are trying to accumulate 
analysts. We are so far from that; we are not trying to do 
that at all.  Another thing is that even you know, actually 

in detecting fraud you don't have long histories on people 
because if people are going to commit fraud they don't go 
into the system that they have long distance service with 
for example.  They make a call and access somebody else's 

system where you have no history whatsoever. So, you are 
right, being able to handle people is very important, and I will have to defer to the comment about earthquakes. That 
is just some math that I had which had little symbols on 
it. I actually don't know. It could have been that they 
developed the signals and used the signal extraction from 
20 years after the original application. You do have to 
take all the information you have.  The trick is to figure 

out how do you handle it. DR. CHAYES: Just as a summary I think I am not someone who knows about any of this but what I am hoping is 
that what we are going to get out of all of these sessions 
are some questions that mathematicians can approach, and so The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   127127I have just been writing down some more mathematical questions that have been coming up. That is also one of the 
things that we want the final report 
to do, to come out 
with a list of questions that mathematicians can look at, and I guess the one that has been coming up the most is how do we focus on extreme events and what I heard from 
everybody is that we really have to know how to model 
extreme events properly. So, I am not sure how much of that 
is the mathematical question. DR. AGRAWAL: That assumes that you know something. DR. CHAYES:  That assum
es that you know 
something. So, on a general level how do you get extreme events and it sounds like we are very far away from that. Another one that Jim mentioned was if you have a lot of data how do you visualize the data and I know that 
there are people working on this. I am certainly not one of 
them. I am not sure if there is anyone here who can speak 
to the question of how do you visualize data. PARTICIPANT:  Not just visualize. DR. CHAYES:  Yes, I mean in a metaphorical sense 
how do you visualize data and then there is also the 
question that seems to me the one that we are furthest 
along on which a number of people talked about which is how The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   128128do we randomize data to try to ensure privacy along with security. However being further along doesn't mean that we 
are very far. So, it struck me that those are three areas 
that could set a mathematical agenda and if anybody has any comments on any of those? PARTICIPANT:  I have one comment. If we are 
talking about addressing terrorism are we talking about 
preventing a small number of events and data mining to 
prevent these events to make sure that you have got every 
single individual and on the other hand there are a number 
of organizations like Al Qaeda and maybe we could 
concentrate more on the structures of these organizations 
and then you are not talking about identifying every individual, identifying every possible conspiracy but 
identifying plans of the organization.   DR. KARR: I am Alan Karr from the National Institute of Statistical Sciences and I would just like to 
point out that there is a wealth of  techniques associated 

with preserving privacy in data other than randomization. 
Randomization has some well-recognized shortcomings in other cases, but I think this point is a lot broader and there is a whole area of statistical disclosure that ought 

to be brought into this. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   129129DR. LASKEY:  With these issues that have been 
brought up I would like to add one more which is combining, 
by the way, I am Kathy Laskey from George Mason University 
and combining human expertise with statistical data and that does in fact have mathematical issues associated with it because of methods where you represent the human 
knowledge and ability distributions to combine them to 
data, and there are lots of important innovations in that 
area. I would, also, like to point out on the varied events the importance of outliers of rare events have been 
mentioned a lot, but the importance of multivariate outliers, data points that are not particularly unusual on any one feature. It is in combination that they are unusual 
and in fact in the events leading up to September 11, these 
people blended in with the society, but if you look at the 
configuration of their behaviors if somebody had actually 
been able to home in on those individuals and say, "Okay, 
you know, they paid  cash for things, plus they were taking 

flying lessons, plus, they were from the Middle East, plus, this, plus," and then you discover that an Al Qaeda cell was planning to use airplanes as bombs there were enough 
pieces that could have been put together ahead of time, not 
that I am saying that it would be easy, but pieces were not The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   130130individually significant enough to set off anybody's warning system. It was the combination that was the issue. DR. KAFADAR:  I am Karen Kafadar from University 
of Denver. I think I heard someone from the FAA say that actually the airlines did identify something unusual about at least one of those.  
The response was to recheck the check level, rescreen the check level. There was another 
variable there.  They didn't know that.   DR. SCHATZ: I don't want to cut off any discussions although it looks like we are getting into the 
lunch break.  We will take a 
couple more quick ones and then I am sure there will be lots of time later to talk. PARTICIPANT:  I am trying to put together a 
couple of things that seem related.  One is that we 

classify this and we can see this and this and this, and 
that ought to be intuitively meaningful and it is 
information that ought to be the model used, but I also 
have a sense that we are looking for the kinds of things  

you can see looking back but 
not forward so easily.  In 
retrospect every newscaster would know what was coming.  
So, what is the potential for these folks who are analysts who are  in the business 
of knowing how the targets are changing?  Are we talking about being experts in real time 

participating in the development a system that might have The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   131131to change in time as well and what are the odds that the system can say, "Is this interesting?" and have them say, 
"Yes," or "No," and then the system from what the analysts 
thought of it with the perspective of the analyst looking at it Tuesday of this week instead a month ago and with all the complexity that you are not going to be able to deal in 
rules no matter how careful you are; so, is that, I know 
analysts are probably overworked like everybody else, but 
maybe you could participate in something like this. DR. SCHATZ:  We do a fair amount of analyzing the 
analysts if that is what you are asking. I get in trouble at our agency when I talk about rebuilding the analysts because they don't like that, but we do; a lot of our 
activities and algorithms have to do with on the one hand 
helping them prioritize data for them that we think they 
are interested in based on what they have been doing, try 
to predict things they should have looked at that they are 
not getting time to get to but modeling analyst behavior is 
something that we do all the time and will be more and more 
important for us, absolutely. PARTICIPANT:  The third time that a rep came to 
us and said, "Bush is linked to the White House," you know 
the system should be one because the analyst knows well 
that that is not interesting. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   132132DR. SCHATZ:  Yes, there certainly is for us again 
we enjoy a population of people to study in that regard 
that other people don't have access to, but certainly when 
we do have access to it, and we do, a lot of what we do is studying analyst behavior and trying to correlate did they pull the document; did they look at a document; did they 
act on a document and try to  maximize our advantage there 

because at the end of the day no matter how many 
individuals you have it is a minuscule epsilon number 
compared to the data size. So, what they actually do and 
act on is critically important. One more, Rakesh? DR. AGRAWAL:  It is not a question.  Many times I 
like to go and look at things, but sometimes I think I wish 
there was more computational aspect to it. So, in decisions 

and so on the interesting thing is like the combination of 
things. There is a lot of very interesting work happening 
and it is interesting for somebody in this Committee to 
understand what happened and to look at it, to understand 
the computational people and something I very strongly believe that we don't have hope for doing some of the massive common warehouse kind of things that somebody would 
pay for.  I don't have the experience to look at the kind 

of data you have they are critical for commercial testing The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   133133in the field and they can be done. So, how would you solve all the complications that you have which essentially 
assume that there is one data source but think how would 
you do all the computations you wanted to do where you have these data sources which are kind of ready to share something through a mode of computation and these are some 

of the kinds of data points here which would be useful. DR. SCHATZ:  Very relevant, absolutely. 
Okay, Andrew? 
DR. ODLYZKO: If you look at the broad technology what we have to know in the next few years is storage 

capacity.   DR. SCHATZ:  Good wrap up. Thanks, everybody. 
Thanks to the speakers for the morning. (Applause.) 
DR. SCHATZ; Twelve-thirty, here. 
(Thereupon, at 11:50 a.m., a recess was taken until 12:40 p.m., the same day.) The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   134134 Remarks on Data Mining: Unsupervised Learning, and Pattern Recognition 
 Werner Stuetzle 
 There appear to be unrealistically high expectations for the usefulness of data mining for 
homeland security.  When a Presidential Dire
ctive refers to ﬁusing existing government 
databases to detect, identify, locate, and apprehend potential 
terrorists,ﬂ that is certainly 
an extremely ambitious goal. For example, 
pinpointing the financial transactions that occur as terrorists prepare for their attack is
 difficult given that it doesn™t take a lot of money to commit terrorist acts. 

 
Using data-mining systems to combat counter
terrorism is more difficult than applying 
data mining in the commercial arena. For example, to flag people who may be 

committing calling card fraud, a long-distance company has extensive records of usage. 

As a result, there are profiles of all users. 
However, such convenient data are nonexistent when detecting people who might 
be terrorists.  In addition, errors and oversights in the commercial arena are, in general, not terrib
ly costly, whereas charging innocent people 
with suspected terrorism is unacceptable. 

 
Biometrics will have to be a crucial part of
 any strategy in order to combat attempted 
identity theft. 

 The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   135135Claire Broome ﬁIntroduction by Session Chairﬂ  
Transcript of Presentation 
Summary of Presentation 
Video Presentation Dr. Claire Broome serves as the senior advisor 
to the director for integrated health information 
systems at the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC). Dr. Broome oversees the 
development and implementation of CDC's National
 Electronic Disease Surveillance System, one 
of the highest priorities of
 CDC and the administration. 
 Dr. Broome served as deputy director of the 
CDC and deputy administrator of the Agency for 
Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATS
DR) from 1994 to 1999; as CDC's associate 
director for science from 1990 to 1994; and as 
chief of the Special Pathogens Branch in the 
National Center for Infectious Diseases from 1981 to 1990.
 Her research interests include epidemiology 
of meningitis and pneumonia; meningococcal, 
pneumococcal, and 
Haemophilus b
 vaccines; observational methods for vaccine evaluation; and 
public health surveillance methodology.
 Dr. Broome has received many professional aw
ards, including the PHS Distinguished Service 
Medal, the Surgeon General's Medallion, the Infe
ctious Disease Society of America's Squibb 
Award for Excellence of Achievement in Infectio
us Diseases, and the John Snow Award from the 
American Public Health Association. She was elec
ted to membership in the Institute of Medicine 
in 1996. She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard Univ
ersity and received her M.D. from Harvard 
Medical School. She trained in internal medicine at
 the University of Calif
ornia, San Francisco, 
and in infectious diseases at Massachusetts General Hospital.
 The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   136136DR. BROOME: Good afternoon. Let me just go ahead and get started with the afternoon's first session. I am Claire 
Broome, medical epidemiologist at the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention where I have been involved in actually getting the data that you all would like to have as part of the targets for your modeling and simulations, 
and I have worked closely with a lot of the folks working 
on bioterrorism preparedness, and I will be moderating this 
session and what we will do is go through the first 
presentations and then try to pull some of this together 
and have a more interactive session during the discussant 
time period. We hope there will be some time for questions to the presenters as we go along but that will depend on how 

much the presenters keep to time. So, the first presenter 
is Ken Kleinman from the Harvard Medical School, and he 
will be talking ambulatory anthrax surveillance, an 
implemented system. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   137137Introduction by Session Chair 
 Claire Broome  Dr. Broome introduced hersel
f as a medical epidemiol
ogist at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and said that she is involved in obtaining a good amount of the data used in bioterrorism
 models and simulations. She is also 
involved with scientists who are working on bioterrorism preparedness. 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   138138Kenneth Kleinman   ﬁAmbulatory Anthrax Surveillance:  
An Implemented System, with Comments on Current Outstanding Needsﬂ 
 
Transcript of Presentation  
Summary of Presentation 
Power Point Slides 

Video Presentation 
  Kenneth Kleinman is assistant professor in the 
Department of Ambulatory Care and Prevention, 
Harvard Medical School and Harvard Pilgrim Health Care.  He serves as the main biostatistician 

on three CDC-funded projects to implement surveill
ance of health care system utilization in the 
Boston area and nationally, and he works with the 
national BioSense project.  His interests 
include the analysis of longitudinal and other 
clustered data, epidemiologic methods, and missing 
data problems. 
 The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   139139DR. KLEINMAN: Thank you.  After the generality of this 
morning's talk I feel like this subtitle here is kind of 
grandiose, but I am a biostatistician and I am going to 
actually going to show you real data and describe a system that is running now in Boston, and there are a lot of 
people involved with getting the system running. It is 
actually a collaboration between the academic department, 
an HMO care provider and the State Department of Public 
Health. So, all these folks are involved in various aspects from those places. My two co-authors on the 
statistical part of what I am going to talk about today are Ralph Plasers and Rich Plott who are infectious disease epidemiologists. So, here is the outline for the talk. I am going to talk about why surveillance is important especially for 
anthrax and then I am going to talk about the data that we 
have and where we are, and I 
have tried to organize the talk around problems and our approaches to those problems 
that we encounter while trying to set up the surveillance system and where we should go in the future. So, why is surveillance for anthrax important? Anthrax is what they call a biphasic disease and what 
happens is you get exposed. You 
have  no symptoms for a 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   140140while. Then you have symptoms that are very non-specific and they resemble a cold or flu and that happens within a 
couple of days and actually we don't know a whole lot about 
anthrax because there have only been about 40 cases in the United States this century including last October in humans I should say. So, there is not a whole lot known about it but it is supposed that most people have symptoms within a 
couple of days and then a day or two after you have those 
symptoms you start having really severe symptoms like 
severe sweating and breathing problems and eventually 
shock, and if you are not treated then there is death in 98 percent of cases and there is even death in some cases where there is treatment. So, what are you going to do if you have anthrax? Well, nothing when you get exposed and when you start 
having symptoms you might go see your doctor and if you 
don't go see your doctor then or if you don't get diagnosed 
correctly then when you start  having the more severe 

symptoms in the second phase you probably go to the hospital and get ciprofloxacin or another approved treatment. So, there are a bunch of surveillance systems that are up and running now in the country that are based 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   141141on hospital surveillance, and what they do is they  wait 
around in the hospital and they see if there are too many 

emergency room visits or too many diagnoses of anthrax and 
what can they do if they detect anthrax?  Well, there are 
lots of people already in Phase II of the illness, and they are very sick and they are going to be arriving in the 
hospital in large numbers. So, at least you can be ready 
for them to come. So, you introduce 
some good if you do 
surveillance on that basis, but it would be better if we 
could detect people when they visit their doctor instead 
because that would be the earliest time that we would know 
about it, and also then we could just break out the drugs and prevent people from even entering Phase II and probably save them a lot of discomfort and problems and even lives. So, our data, our study, as I mentioned we are trying to do this. Our position is located between a health 
maintenance organization and a provider group and also we 
have, we are in an academic department. I am in an academic 
department. So, the people who are part of this group, this 
care group and HMO, there are about 250,000 people in a certain area of Massachusetts, and that is about 10 percent of the population in that area. So, what is very nice about this is that we can actually attempt to do that surveillance on the doctor's The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   142142visit before people get to the hospital because the provider group uses ambulatory medical records data and 
what that means is that every time you go to your doctor's 
office they actually have a PC in each examining room, and they will type in information about you including an ICD-9 
diagnosis, and that is just some coding system for a 
diagnosis if you are not familiar with it, but it is 
symptoms and confirmed diagnosis, and they are continuously 
updated. They are centrally stored by the provider group, 
and we don't have to do anything different from what they 
are already doing, and it is standard practice to record 
all the diagnoses they make for each person who comes to see them,and that includes phone calls and nurse practitioners and physicians, and the system is actually a 
commercial system. So, it is relatively easy for us to take our system which is in Eastern Massachusetts and transport it 
to some other locale where they happen to use the same 
medical records system and there are a bunch of them. PARTICIPANT:  Does this  system store all the 
medical record? DR. KLEINMAN:  It stores all the medical record. 
Things like pharmacy data and test results aren't always 
updated in the same system.  So, 
it is all the direct 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   143143patient contact between the physician and the patient. Does that answer your question? PARTICIPANT:  Lab results? 
DR. KLEINMAN: Lab results are not -- PARTICIPANT:  No, would have been a good answer 
to my question. DR. KLEINMAN:  Okay, I guess I wasn't clear 
enough on you  question.  Now, I am going to start talking 

about the problems we encountered when trying to set up the 
surveillance, and the first one is that it actually uses 
adult standard test for anthrax, and you have to get a 
chest x-ray, and I don't know enough about medicine to know what about this x-ray says that there is anthrax here, but if we actually waited for chests x-rays we wouldn't do any 
better than hospital surveillance because the physicians 
don't order chest x-rays for people who come in with cold 
symptoms. So, we can't actually do surveillance for diagnosis of anthrax, and so what we do instead is we 
define symptom clusters or syndromes, and what we do is we say that anything that your doctor might say if you came in with the first phase of anthrax problems we are going to 
try to collect that, and we call that lower respiratory 
illness or I might say lower respiratory infection later The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   144144because those are the symptoms that characterize the first phase of anthrax infections. That includes, I listed cough, pneumonia and bronchitis because about 90 percent of the diagnosis falls in one of those categories in this syndrome which includes 
about, I think it wrote it down here, 119 ICD counts go in 
there and that syndrome we actually borrowed from a 
Department of Defense product that was doing this before we 
were in a slightly different context. So, in our data set in about a 4-year period there are about 120,000 visits that found this syndrome, 
and if you think about a natural disease unlike anthrax if it doesn't get fixed the first time you go to your doctor 
you are going to go back again, and when we looked at our 
records very nearly about one-third of them  were repeat 

visits that were shortly after other visits. So, based on the clinical expertise of the MDs working with us we were able to say that if it was within 6 
weeks of a previous visit, the previous visit we weren't 
interested in it. It was probably the same illness, and so we throw those away, and what is left we call episodes of lower respiratory infection. PARTICIPANT:  How many don't visit with the same 
illness? The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   145145DR. KLEINMAN: I have no idea. This is a very small portion of the doctor's visits. I don't know that 
information. It is a completely different order of 
magnitude. I don't know the answer. So, here is actual data and each dot here represents the count of visits for their respiratory 
infection on a given day in between January 1, 1996 and 
December 31, 1999 or January 1, 2000, and I just want to 
point out a couple of interesting features here that will 
come into play later, and the first is that you can see 
that during the winter there are big peaks.   People tend to go to their doctors for 
respiratory complaints more in the winter than they do in the summer presumably because they are more likely to have 
those symptoms and the other interesting feature is that 
you can see there are two trends here, and our clinics are 
actually open on the weekends. So, this lower band is the weekend visits and the upper band is the week day visits, and finally, I don't 
know how clear this is from here but you can see these 
points, really low here in winter. That is Christmas and New Year's. So, people don't go to the doctor on holidays 
but they will go as often on the weekends, and they tend to 
go an awful lot more in the winter than they do in summer. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   146146PARTICIPANT:  What are the dots? DR. KLEINMAN: I am sorry. Each dot is the count of the number of visits for LRI on a given day. So, this is 
about 130. So, there are 130 visits among our 250,000 numbers for lower respiratory illness on I don't know what  
day this is, probably like May 1, 1999. PARTICIPANT:  Oh, I see. So, only one doctor per 
vertical slice. DR. KLEINMAN: Yes, that is right, at least in theory that is right.  I am not sure that the resolution on 

the screen is up to that, but -- PARTICIPANT:  Presumably the double banding 
begins in May? DR. KLEINMAN: Yes.  So, if can see data like this 
you might be thinking I should do a time series analysis 
and I need to include a covariant for weekend versus week 
day and maybe some kind of yearly cycle for seasons, and I 
think there are a couple of problems with this, and the 
first one is that you are kind of constrained to get a 
threshold for the whole area under surveillance, and the real big problem is you can send cipro to 2-1/2 million people. It is going to break the bank and plus there are 
bad side effects of cipro so you don't want to dose that 

many people who don't need it, and there are other problems The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   147147with dosing that many people, and the other problem is it is not very sensitive at all, and the best, I know people 
who are doing this, and the b
est that I have heard that 
they can do is, you know, if there are 10 additional cases on a day they might detect it, and that is an awful lot. You don't want to have to have 10 initial people 
if you can avoid it. So, what we do to solve the problem is 
we actually geo code everyone, and geo coding just means 
that we take their address and we find out where on the map 
it lies, and it is actually remarkably easy to do, and 
accurate and cheap. We outsource it, and it costs us, I 
don't know 4 or 5 thousand dollars to do 250,000 addresses, and it comes back within a week. So, it is pretty slick.  
We only know the billing address. So, if people are exposed 
at the place where they work we are not going to know 

anything about that. We are working on trying to solve that 
problem, but it is kind of a feasibility issue because we 
don't really know where people work. If they work for IBM they could be anywhere in the country instead of at some particular location, and that is the kind of work address that we would get is who employs them. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   148148So, the coding changes a little bit, and so it is not perfect but it is a lot better than not knowing where 
in the area they live. So, this is the kind of thing I get on a given 
day and here I took the plot of the number of people who had LRI on a given day and their location and I used some 
kind of three-dimensional smootherometer(?) or two-
dimensional smootherometer  and so, I am looking at these 

peaks, and you know there are probably one or two cases at 
this location. PARTICIPANT:  What are the axes? 
DR. KLEINMAN:  Sorry, this is latitude and 
longitude.  So, it is an arbitrary grid on space but these 
actually, if you were to look at this latitude and 
longitude point you would be able to find it in the middle 
of Massachusetts Bay.  PARTICIPANT:  Is it adjusted for population? 
DR. KLEINMAN:  This is not adjusted for 
populations, no.  This is just raw counts, but if I were 

adjusting for population the question would be then, if I got five bioterrorism I would say, "Is this point too high? Is this bump too big?" and that is kind of the job that we are trying to do now. PARTICIPANT:  This was one day? The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   149149DR. KLEINMAN:  That was just one day, yes. I have 
more slides that I could show about what happens. So, we 
have this data that is spread out in space and there is a 
whole bunch of spatial techniques. Most of them are developed for mining or for epidemiological exposures and so they don't actually think of time as an interesting 
dimension.  They tend to summarize over time and say, "Is 

there a bump somewhere near say a contaminated well or near 
some sort of a high concentrated world where they are 
looking for something in it?"  But we really need to know 

whether there is an event now as much as we need to know 
where it was, and there is a couple of so-called "special" techniques that are kind of intended for surveillance, and this touches on the same issue of the World Statistical 
Society, these two references and they are really designed 
to say, "Is there a bump right now?" and i don't think that 
either of these is really important for what we want to do 
either because they both assume that the time periods are 
similar to one another.  So, they wouldn't be able to fit a 

covariate saying that this count happened during the winter; this count happened on Monday; this count happened on Christmas and be able to adjust for that, and they are, 
also, both designed for smaller data sets although I think 
that is probably not a big problem. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   150150Now, the really big problem with these things though is that they are looking for clusters now and if you 
recall the problem that we have we are trying to say that 

we know there are clusters of flu because flu is contagious and flu symptoms are what we count. So, we know there is going to be a cluster on any given day especially during 
winter, but we know that there is going to be a cluster and 
we want to know whether the cluster we are seeing is bigger 
than the cluster we expect as opposed to whether there is a 
cluster, not whether there is a bump but is the bump bigger 
than the bump we expect based on the clustering there has 
been in the past. PARTICIPANT:  So, the difference is anthrax is 
not transmitted. DR. KLEINMAN:  That is true, yes. So, anthrax 
won't spread from person to person. So, what we have done 
here and I want to echo what some of the speakers were 

saying this morning, I am not saying that this is the best 
way to do this, but it is a way that seems to work, and 
that I was able to do and I think is easy to transport and those were qualities that I was looking for. What I am going to do is I am going to again more or less arbitrarily break up space into localities that 
make sense to me and the ones that make sense to me are The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   151151census tracts. Census tracts are defined by the Census Bureau, but they are meant to be somewhat meaningful. You 
know, they don't cross a highway in general. They are kind 
of neighborhoods as you might define a neighborhood near your house and they are actually defined by people locally, and so, what we have now is a bunch of longitudinally 
repeated data.  We have a denominator and numerator for every census tract in our area over time, and what you do is use 
the generalized linear mixed model approach, logistic 
regression, and of course I could use a Poisson(?) 
regression instead, too, but I didn't do that. It is really just logistic regression, but it takes into account the correlations of counts on the same tract on different days. So, I could fit the model using this GLIMMIX macro that actually is distributed with SAS. It is not 
officially part of SAS. So, it is somewhere in limbo there, 
but it is part of your distribution. If you use SAS you can 
find it there and that means that it is easy to explain to 
someone else how to do it and see that they get the same results you would on a test data set for example, and with this kind of data of course I am not sure, as an aside but 
I could use generalized nesting equations to fit the data 
but I would to get a separate estimate for each tract for The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   152152purposes of explaining what the results are, and just because I am a statistician I have to show some notation 
and really what I am doing is just a logistic regression. I 
am trying to model the binomial distribution for tract I in time T and I take a model with some covariates usually on the time and a random effect that applies to each census 
tract, and usually assume that those random effects are 
distributed normally in some variance. That is all I am going to show you about that really. There is a lot of validity to the model that we get 
out of it. The observations for the winter months are much 
bigger than the ones for the summer months. They are bigger on Mondays and lowest on the weekends and the observations for holidays are less. So, what we are doing makes sense 
and the random effect might be features of each tract. So, 
if there are tracts where there are more people or there is 
more people that are prone to sickness or fewer people who 
are prone to sickness we are going to find that through 
these random effects and when we test for variance of those 
random effects we find out it is not zero. There really is a variability between the communities. So, it is worth doing that in the model, and if you are interested in 
interpretation you can actually estimate the random effect The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   153153that goes with each tract and those things are the odds ratios relative to the average tract. Now, another question that was brought up this morning is what are you going to do with the data once you have got it and what are you going to do with your model once you have it, and we are working with folks at the Mass 
Department of Public Health and we want to be able to 
communicate with them when we think something strange is 
happening and what we do with that is we can actually 
invert the estimate for each census tract and turn it into 
a PHAT(?) for each census tract on each day and then we can 
calculate the probability of seeing as many cases as we saw or more and the P value for the null hypothesis of the data comes from the binomial distribution we got from the model. Now, there is a problem with that. The big problem is that we have 520 census tracts in our area and 
the estimated P value for each one each day and that means 
we have 180,000 tests each year. 
So, that is a lot. The 
folks who were talking about data mining this morning, I 
don't know enough about data mining to know whether doing innumerable tests is a problem there.  We are going to do, 
our proposal is to do a Bob Ferroni-like thing and what we 
do is actually we record the estimated number of years of 
testing required to see one P value as small as the one we The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   154154saw or smaller which is just the inverse of the number of tests we are doing times the P value that we got, and that 
is of course assuming that all the tests are independent 
which is not true, but it is better than nothing and one of the advantages of doing it this way is that when you get a big number it is bad, and we don't have to rely on people 
remembering that a small P value means something unusual. We can say that we would only expect this to happen once every 100 years. We think people will probably 
understand that pretty quickly. So, this is the point that actually we distribute it by means of a web site every day. We report the name of the town and the census tract number and I didn't mention earlier that those things are actually not determinants. 
Census tracts can bridge more than one town and of course 
multiple census tracts would be included entirely in one 
census tract. We also report the number of cases in that 
town or that census tract on that day, the number of 
insured people who live there and then the statistical -- I 
am actually going to work years between those counts and report the five most unusual counts and if it happens, if we expect those counts to happen 
once a day we just say 
that it has got a score of zero. It is really nothing to 
worry about at all. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   155155Now, .004 years is like a day and one-half. So, we found a very interesting example, but there aren't more 

interesting days than that and actually the last time I did 
it it was something like this, I think it was March 21. So, I was able to say that a week ago we had this event that happens about once every 55 days, and that was infrequent 
enough that our department of public health is very 
interested and they sent a team, but that is a motion that 
we are trying to shorten where they contact people at the 
health plan or the care provider and figure out whether 
there is something really unusual about those cases or you 
know, if they all happen to be people in the same family 
with the same cold you probably wouldn't worry about it. So, they are able to investigate that. What I really want to point out about this is that this is the number of cases we saw in that census 
tract on that day and if there are only four of them we can 
be very sensitive here. We don't have to wait for 10 cases 
to show up the way you would have to do in a regular risk 
analysis. So, I am close to the end, and what I think is a really big unsolved problem for us and I have a very easy 

solution to it, but an event can take place over more than 
one census tract, and when it does our models aren't going The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   156156to know about that and so we rely on people looking at the following plot and this is automatically generated by the 
SAS program but we can say, "I think that these two census 
tracts are close enough together that I am concerned that the cause of that disease might be the same exposure to anthrax."  It relies on someone actually looking at the 

plot every day. So, it is not a very good solution. So, now I am on to what I think are four things 
to do here and again this is a very different scale of 

importance compared to the coin toss but I think this 
question of what to do about cases in adjacent tracts is a 
big problem and I think that one approach would be to incorporate some kind of secondary initial test and I think 
that it would be easy to incorporate spatial correlation in 

the census tracts but you are not going to change the 
answer much. Flu is bad in some years and not bad in other years and it would be in theory easy to incorporate some 
measure of whether this season is a bad season for flu or a 
not so bad season for flu. Logistically it is hard to do 
that for various reasons, but I am not a cryptographer so I am sure that it is a great idea. We are using census tracts as our neighborhoods. We could use census block groups. We could use a truly The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   157157arbitrary grid on space that wouldn't take into account anything special about the boundaries and this is something 
that definitely should be assessed and I think that it 
would be good if we could figure out how to incorporate individual level covariates because when a 20-year-old person goes to their doctor complaining of respiratory 
infection it means something a lot different than when an 
80-year-old person does that. Finally, I want to disclaim any collusion between me and the next speaker but I think that the biggest 
problem is figuring out how to simulate data because there 
is really no way to test the model sensitivity right now and we need to be, what we really need to be able to do is simulate the background noise which is flu and see whether 
we can detect and kind of solve the simulated data with 
anthrax and see whether we can detect additional cases. So, 
that is the end. I just have a summary which has the -- I 

don't think what we are doing is great. I think it solves 

some of the problems that other approaches that have 
already been developed don't solve, and I think that the most important thing to do is to try to assess the sensitivity of the model and we need to simulate a 
background in order to do that. Thank you. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   158158(Applause.) PARTICIPANT:  I just want to follow up on an 
earlier question about anthrax is not contagious. It didn't 
seem that the model incorporates that knowledge. DR. KLEINMAN:  I think you are probably right. DR. BROOME:  But what the model is trying to do 
is detect an increase that is different from your 
background expected. It doesn't matter, and in fact it is a 
good model for anthrax because if you got a point source 
for leads you will see cases all 
over the place and you 
want to pick them up as rapidly as possible. It doesn't 
matter whether they have then self-propagate. PARTICIPANT:  But the lack of self-propagation is 
a significant signature that would help statistically 
distinguish anthrax attack from just a coincidental -- DR. BROOME:  If you have to wait until you are 
picking up second waves that would be the case, but in fact 
the idea is to try to pick it up from that first release. PARTICIPANT:  Oh, so, this is something I don't 
know. When people have the flu what is the cycle? DR. BROOME:  One of the problems with using flu 
for modeling is it doesn't have, you know, well, I will 
tell you what. Rather than get into all the details why 
don't we wait until we have heard from Stephen and Sally The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   159159because I think they raise a number of the issues around disease modeling and we can get back to this question which 
is interesting but I think trying to put it in the context 
of what are we trying to do with these different models would be valuable. So, why don't we move ahead? 
Any other sort of clarification questions for Ken? Why don't we try to do that at this point. PARTICIPANT:  Do you report your results to the 
disease center? DR. KLEINMAN:  We don't do any of the reporting 
ourselves, meaning when I say, we, I mean the academic department. What happens to the data is it goes on the web site and I look at the plots and I send out an e-mail if I 
think there is something interesting about the plots, and 
the people at the Mass DPH decide what to do about it. So, 
they could decide to report it to the CDC or other 
organizations at that point. DR. BROOME:  The real question is have you 
notified alerts to the health department and has anything been found that had any public health significance. What we 
are talking about here is just a statistical signal and 
assessing the meaning of that requires investigation by The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   160160usually either the health care providers or by the public health department neither of which has a lot of excess 
people sitting around waiting to investigate, and that is 
why the point Ken was making about being sensitive to small numbers of cases but at the same time minimizing the number of false alarms is really a critical characteristic. DR. KLEINMAN:  And that is, also, why we don't 
send for the false alarm model, but I understand your 
question, but the answer to your question is there have 
been several times when a relatively unusual kind of event 
happened and that once every 55 days may have been the most 
extreme that has happened since we started running this in late October.  That one may have been the most extreme but 
none of the ones that we have looked at have actually had 
public health ramifications, fortunately. So, we see about 
the number, approximately the number we expect of once-a-
month events and because they are the expected events they 
are not interesting for public health. PARTICIPANT:  The communication is actually not 
the focus indicated. DR. KLEINMAN:  The communication has flaws. You 
know that is the most difficult part because it involves 
people on both ends and it requires someone at the DPH to 
be answering their e-mail and contacting someone at the The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   161161health care provider and that person to contact someone else to get the data on individual people. So, that is 
definitely something that we are working on, but it is not 
perfect yet. DR. BROOME:  Does that answer your question? PARTICIPANT:  No. 
DR. BROOME:  What are you -- 
PARTICIPANT:  I am looking at the time that an 
incident would take place for it to reach the Communicable 

Disease Center because if you saw this happening in one 
location you might be getting information from other 
locations. So, I am interested in this time line from a suspicious event. DR. BROOME:  Well, to me that is an important 
question but it is secondary to knowing that this is 

actually useful information, and I think there is some very 

serious need for evaluation of whether this kind of very 
non-specific signal going off all the time is a useful 
thing to communicate. So, I mean we definitely want to hear 
about true signals, but in fact the critical need is to say does this have any potential real relevance. I mean just because you have got a whole bunch of flu patients who show 
up in a census tract, that happens a lot. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   162162DR. LEVIN:  So, if you are really interested in 
bioterrorism incidents wouldn't it be important to look at 
the genetic distance of the strains that are appearing from 
the conventional case from the year before because if the strains are only slight deviations from last year's in the area then it is more likely to have arisen naturally but if 
it has been an engineered strain -- DR. BROOME:  I think there is a misperception 
here. We are not trying to find genetically engineered flu. 

We are trying to detect a non-specific febrile illness 
which might be misdiagnosed as flu. So, you are trying to 
separate out an anthrax, a febrile smallpox rash from the background noise of a normal influenza season and there is a whole lot more background noise than there is anthrax.  

Is that a fair summary? DR. KLEINMAN:  Yes, obviously a fascinating 
question and one that we wouldn't be able to say anything 
about. DR. BROOME:  I think people are really engaged 
and interested. Why don't we go ahead and get our presentations laid out because I think there is some very interesting information that will help frame the 
discussion, and Stephen Eubanks is going to discuss the The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   163163mathematics of epidemiologic simulation for response planning. He is at Los Alamos National Laboratory. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   164164Ambulatory Anthrax Surveillance: An 
Implemented System, with Comments on Current Outstanding Needs  Kenneth Kleinman  Because the first symptoms of anthrax are sim
ilar to those of influenza, bronchitis, and 
other common illnesses, patients may or may not see their doctors at the onset of 

symptoms.  However, with more severe sy
mptoms occurring in the second phase of the 
disease, patients often seek treatment at a 
hospital.  Currently, there are surveillance 
systems in hospitals to tr
ack anthrax occurrences.   
 
However, if patients could be diagnosed with anthrax upon seeing their doctors with the first symptoms, they could be given treatme
nt immediately, be saved a good deal of 
discomfort, and never have to enter the s
econd phase of the disease.  The Harvard Medical School, an HMO, a care provider, and the Massachusetts Department of Public 
Health have implemented a system to detect
 outbreaks of anthrax in the doctor™s office 
instead of in the emergency room. 

 
In this system, medical records are gathered 
by the provider for every patient visit and are continuously updated and centrally stored for use by the provider and the surveillance-system operators.  The system tracks sympto
m clusters for lower respiratory illness, 
symptoms that characterize the first phase of an
thrax infections.  Of course, this includes the symptoms of other, much more common illnesses as well.   The symptom clusters are 

compared with symptom cluster records of the 
same census tract from the past to assess 
whether a given cluster is larger than what is expected.  A 
report is issued daily on the 
Internet that gives each ce
nsus tract, the number of patients who live there, and the 
number of years between patie
nt counts of the given magnitude.   For example, if a 
particular count is so common it can be expected to happen once a day, it gets a score of zero. On the other hand, if we say that we would only expect this to happen once every 100 years, people will probably understand that pretty quickly. In this way, the doctors communicate with the Department of Public H
ealth when they think something strange is 
happening. 
 
There are a few ways in which the system could be improved.  One improvement would 

be to determine whether results from several 
census tracts are really just manifestations 
of the same overall exposure 
event. Another would be to find the optimal type of basic 
geographical unitŠcensus block groups, for example, or even an arbitrary gridŠand compare it to the census-tract groupings that ar
e currently used.  It would be good if we could figure out how to incorporate individual-level covariance, because when a 20-year-
old person goes to the doctor complaining of
 respiratory infection, it means something a 
lot different than when an 80-year-old person does that. 
 
The biggest problem is figuring 
out how to simulate data, because there is still no other 
way to test a model™s sensitivity.  It is desi
gned to detect outcomes that differ from the 
expected background, so the thing to do is to simulate the background noiseŠthat is, The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   165165cases of flu and the likeŠand see whether the model detects any simulated anthrax data 
embedded in that noise. 

 The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   166166Stephen Eubank   ﬁMathematics of Epidemiological Si
mulations for Response Planningﬂ  
Transcript of Presentation  
Summary of Presentation 
Power Point Slides 

Video Presentation 
 
 Stephen Eubank received his B.A. in physics from
 Swarthmore College in 1979 and his Ph.D. in 
theoretical particle physics from the University of
 Texas at Austin in 1986.  He has worked in the 
fields of fluid turbulence (at La Jolla Institut
e); nonlinear dynamics and chaos (at the Los Alamos 
Center for Nonlinear Studies); financial market
 modeling (as a founder of Prediction Company); 
and natural language processing (at ATR in Kyoto, J
apan).  He returned to Los Alamos as a staff 
member in 1987, where he has played a leading role in development of the traffic microsimulation 

for the Transportation Analysis and Simu
lation System (TRANSIMS) and has led the 
Epidemiology Simulation (EpiSims) project.  Hi
s current interests include developing advanced 
technology for the study of large sociotec
hnical systems and unders
tanding the dynamics and 
structure of social networks. 
  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   167167DR. EUBANK:  Although I am very interested in 
providing a flu background fo
r biosurveillance I haven't thought enough about the problem. What I am going to talk about is an individual simulation that is rather different from the classical kinds of epidemiological models. I am using simulation here 
not in the sense of solving ODEs or PBEs but as a more 
agent based kind of notation. I will describe the simulation that I am building. I will talk a little bit about why we use 
simulation in the first place and then I am going to try to 
give some mathematical questions that arise not just from epidemiological simulation but from any simulations of social technical systems we do, and then I would like to 
give an existence proof for a math program that has a very 
definite role in homeland defense in particular. So, to dive right in the kind of epidemiological simulation I am talking about 
requires three components. One is an estimate of the social network of a large region.  Another is a model for the within-host progress of the disease once someone becomes infected and a third is a transmission model between people.  So, very briefly I will go over where these things come from. I am not going to spend a lot of time on The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   168168the process of simulation because once you understand what the components are it is pretty obvious how you can use it 
to build an epidemiologic simulation. The reason we have gone in this direction of individual based simulation for response planning is that we have been asked to detect anomalous patterns which means 
looking at geographic distributions of disease by time for 
demographic distributions.  With that kind of information we should be able to identify the critical path a disease takes through a 
population either geographically or demographically and if 
you can identify a critical path then you should be able to evaluate the effectiveness of countermeasures that are targeted geographically and demographically. So, we need demographic information and it just so happens that because of a transportation model that was 
developed at Los Alamos we have an estimate for every 
household in a large city, in particular Portland, Oregon, 
640,000 households and what everyone in the family does 
every day. So, this is a particular person. This parent 
takes a kid to child care, goes shopping, picks the kid back up and goes home. This is a completely trivial 
activity set. The 
actual activity sets we have are much more detailed. Since The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   169169we have this for every household in the city and there are only a limited number of locations where these activities 
can happen we can take a time
 slice in this picture and 
understand or gain an estimate of who is in contact with whom for how long, where, and what kind of activities they are doing. I can talk a little bit about where those estimates come from because I think it is interesting and 
very different from the kinds of data sets other people 
have been developing. Let me go ahead and explain the rest of the simulation models first. We have a very simple disease progression model, all we really need to know about the disease or what the effects on the individual who is sick 
are. So, this is a kind of a cartoon of viral load or how many spores you might have or something like that. It 
is time dependent. We can vary the rate to growth rates 
according to an individual's demographics and we can list 
the times what is happening to the person by place these thresholds on the disease. So, in this case someone can clear the disease completely if they don't  receive a big dose. They become 

symptomatic at some level. You can change these thresholds. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   170170You already have the thresholds around. It is very important for the actual dynamics of the epidemic and 
someone can either die or recover. This is to reinforce the notion  that this is not 
some point estimate of what the disease looks like. PARTICIPANT:  Is it true that the threshold is 
the same as the actors underneath? What is the load? DR. EUBANK: No, this is not really the actual load of virus in the body. So, if the threshold is not 
necessarily the same for entering as it is for leaving this 
is just the time rates so that  you become recovered at the 

right time regardless of what the actual load in your body is. We can assign different growth rates as I said for different people so we can get a distribution of 
effects of disease on a population.  With a representation 

like this I can add in the effects say of post-exposure 
vaccination by shifting some of the margins around. This 
particular disease has several different, well, it is 
smallpox. So for a very old major infection you could have several different presentations of the disease and one of them is an early hemorrhagic one which often involves death 
much sooner than most. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   171171PARTICIPANT:  So, I guess the water supply is 
appropriate. DR. EUBANK: That is a lake in this water supply.  
That is the social network and the disease in the host. So, there is a transmission component that is very important. The traditional models for epidemiology require something 
called a reproductive number. I will talk about this a 
little bit more in a minute but it is basically what 
happens if you introduce an infected person into a 
susceptible population. How many cases is that index case 
going to cause? The reproductive number is an output of our simulation. It is very important to understand that. The probability is that given two people are in contact and one 
of them is infected you need to know the probability that 
the other person becomes infected, and it can be a function 
o how close the contact is, how long it takes, the 
demographics of the people involved, what kind of activity 
they are performing. Now, if you go talk to an epidemiologist they are 
going to want to know what this is in your simulation. They is quite a body of research into what that number should 
be, but if you talk to a clinician or more importantly if 

you talk to a patient this is what they want to know. I The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   172172want to know when I can send my kid back to school if he is 
still infectious. Should I go get a chickenpox vaccination, 
something like that? Then you compare a little bit more from these two approaches. Traditional epidemiological models, the next speaker may correct me on this but I class them all as basically coupled rate equations.  The attempt to break 

down a population into very coarse groups, subgroups based 
on one or two demographic variables, and here I have shown 
age, and we assume some sort of mixing  between these 

subgroups which is not really very well understood and then 
you make this assumption  about the number that you have so 
many susceptible and so many infected, it is the rate. I am going to argue that reproductive number is -- DR. CHENEY:  Why are they broken up? I mean this 
is a basic question but why are they broken up into those 
age groups?  What if you broke them up into different age 

groups, would it not be -- DR. EUBANKS: I picked these completely at random without looking at traditional models, but for a flu model, for instance kids may transfer flu among themselves more 
rapidly than older people. PARTICIPANT:  The mixing rate is simulated? The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   173173DR. EUBANKS:  The mixing rate would be, yes, how 
many times infected kids have an influence on the parents, 

but that means you know something about the structure of 
the population and how many times kids are in contact with older people. The reproductive number, it really involves two different things. It is person-to-person transmission 
characteristics and the disease and social mixing patterns, 
and you can't observe it in isolation. You can't go to a 
population and just say, "What will the reproductive number 
for this population be?" without an understanding of how 
the population mixes. So, in contrast to this approach what we are doing is to represent individuals each of whom carries some 

set of demographics which is much more finely resolved than 
in the other models. We are estimating contact rates 
between the individuals and the whole population and what 
may or may not be fairly important here is that these 
contact rates are estimated independently from the disease 
spreading problem. So, in the traditional epidemiological model you could say that we will fit the mixing rates and we will fit 
the reproductive numbers and we will reproduce a given 
epidemic that we have data for and generalize from that. 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   174174These contact rates were estimated for a transportation problem which means that the 
validation and verification issues are very different, but most importantly the 
reproductive number emerges as it does in the real world 
from transmission characteristics between individuals and the mixing of those individuals. PARTICIPANT:  If I have a disease that only gets 
transmitted by kisses, I don't -- DR. EUBANK: There are 
some diseases this won't work for. This is not very good for HIV, but for something 
like influenza, colds and so on.  I will tell you where the 

contacts come from and then you can make your own judgment about how well they represent the disease. PARTICIPANT:  But I thought that this model would 
get at others. That was my question. The contact rate must 
depend on the disease. DR. EUBANK: Transmission during the contact depends on the disease. DR. LEVIN:  But what constitutes a contact? 
DR. EUBANK: That is what I am about to tell you. What constitutes contact depends on the disease. Very often it depends on duration and proximity of physical contact. The next few slides are actually fairly apropos of the previous session's data mining, I think because they The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   175175illustrate a way to take data from very disparate sources and build some information of use to other processes like 
epidemiology. So, this is a description of where we get our 
contact patterns from. We take census data down to the block group level and we build a synthetic population. The 

property of this population that is important is that if 
you were to do a census on the synthetic population you 
would match the results of the actual census in an actual 
city. Also, there are no real people in our population. We have no problems with privacy because we don't have any real people to complain about it. If you did have, say, the NSA had data on everyone's movements during the course of a day and maybe 
we could get German data on everyone we could plug that in 
here just as easily, but we felt that it wasn't politically 
acceptable for Los Alamos to go tell people they wanted to 
know what they did all day. The next piece of data we used is activity surveys that cities tend to collect on their population. They send out diaries and ask people what they did every 
day. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   176176We have about 2000 activity surveys for Portland, Oregon. We use those as templates and we matched households 

to households in the activity survey to find out which of 
the templates we want to use for that household. A template might be something like that cartoon I showed at the beginning of the talk. We remove from the survey all geographic information because 2000 templates is not enough to tell us 

where everyone is going. So, we make the assumption that 

transportation infrastructure constrains how people move 
through the city. It seems like a fairly reasonable 
assumption. We take travel time
 estimates for the 
transportation network and generate possible locations for each of these activities to be carried out.   The final step, what we set up then is a game. Everybody in the simulation is trying to minimize their 
travel time to fulfill all the constraints that their 
activity structure imposes on them, but they don't know 
what everyone else is doing except that everyone else is 
trying to minimize their travel time. So, we play this game on the computer and we simulate the traffic and results 
which updates the travel times which can update the 
activities and certainly update the routes that people 
choose. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   177177When all this settles down we have an estimate for the contact panels.  So, we put all that together and 

take the census data activity surveys and network the 
infrastructure data and we produce epidemic curves. Whether the curves are realistic or not depends on the assumptions 
we put in about the disease transmissions. This particular 
one shows vaccination response. We vaccinate people who are 
known to have been in contact with infected people. We can 
get rates of vaccination, numbers of people you would need 
to go around giving vaccinations, numbers of people you 
would need to go around as contact persons,numbers of 
people who become infected on a daily basis, all those kinds of things that you would expect have epidemiologically. DR. CHAYES: So, how come the vaccination is bimodal? DR. EUBANKS: That is probably just a reflection of the incubation period. The disease has about a 10-day 
incubation period.. In addition to those kinds of traditional responses and results we can produce a demographically distributed picture. So, for instance this is the 

probability of distribution with age, given that you were The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   178178infected during a specific week after an incident occurs, and this doesn't tell you as much as you might think. It is saying that in the first week the age distribution depends directly on exactly what the release scenario was.  We happen to have a scenario where we 
release at a shopping mall. So, there are not many school-
age kids there. There are some infants and there is a bunch 
of people you might expect to be at a shopping mall, and 
the distribution itself is relaxing as the weeks go by to a 
marginal distribution for the population, but there are 
some interesting question you could ask about this.  One is what is the rate  at which this 
distribution is relaxing and is it the same for all the different initial conditions. That would tell you something 
about when it is possible to apply these mixing models and 
just ignore all this detailed simulation. You could say that within 4 weeks the simulation is indistinguishable from a model assuming uniform mix here 
of the population and that gives you a good time 
development on use of the simulation. We are, also, hoping to use this for targeting strategies for vaccinations, and it is not clear yet 
exactly how you would do that. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   179179So, I won't spend more time on the simulation. I will briefly go through some of these points.  Why is it 

that we are doing the simulation aside from the fact that 
my group is called basic and applied simulations lab. I think it is a very natural thing for homeland defense in particular. If you are talking about defending critical infrastructure you are really talking about having people 
and resources and interactions among people and resources 
are local.  Even given telecommunications somebody has to 

interact locally with their telephone on their desk in 
order t o place that call to someone else. People move around and the resources often move with them and moreover defensive actions can change the way 
people move. So, what you really need to know of social 
networks is where the resources and people are and the 
function of time, possibly in hypothetical circumstances. So, just going out and measuring the way things are today is not going to help you understand what might 
happen if someone takes your advice and institutes a policy for defending the infrastructure. Another reason to use simulation I think is that it is a way to fuse, you know everyone knows about the data 
fusion problem, but there is another problem of fusing The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   180180information that is completely different in time. I am thinking here of something like demographic tables with 

procedural constraints that could be very vague like 
quality of life influences the decision or fairly specific like vehicles aren't going to physically pass through each other and it needs to take into account things that are 
completely asymmetric, irregular. The only reason for them 
being the way t hey are is some, it is contingent on some 
completely unknown past history. As an example I use the development of the social network that I went through briefly before. Suppose you 
have these demographic data tables and you had a land use network. I would like to know what the implication of this constraint that vehicles can't pass through one another is, 
and I really don't know of any statistical modeling 
technique that can tell you that.  It is because the 

representation of the problem isn't quite large enough 
whereas this individual based simulation is a very natural 
representation and I can tell you that instead of the, like 
this represented the unweighted demographic tables. This represents the transportation infrastructure and the implication of this is that that person is going to arrive 
at a particular place at a particular time. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   181181Of course, it is not exactly clear what that means and so this is a simulation and that person doesn't 
exist. Simulation is really a deductive process that lets 
you untangle the entailments of hypotheses you make that may seem to be very unrelated. It is a very powerful technique, not in the statistical sense but in the sense of 
just what it can do, but the nature of the estimation that 
it makes is not so clear. What does it mean that that person on simulation arrived at that place at that time? I don't know. I think 
this is a very interesting mathematical question and what I 
would like to describe for you briefly is a few other interesting mathematical questions that arise in this simulation and then a program that attempts to address some 
of them. So, in addition to that kind of philosophical question about what simulation means there are very 
specific problems arising in our simulations of 
sociotechnical systems that I would  to just very briefly 

mention. The first is we get questions in the form of well, here is what, you guys know what the social network 
looks like. Here is what the disease looks like. Tell me, 
how am I going to prioritize vaccination?  To me that means 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   182182I have got some graph or network, and I need to identify 
the critical paths on this graph, and analyze what happens 
if I cut those patterns. I tell that to my computer scientist friends and they say, "Oh, that means this particular problem that I know about in computer science, although I don't know 
exactly how to apply it to your network." So, then we have 
to have a little discussion about how to take results that 
he knows about and produce something that is relevant to my 
needs. On the theoretical side if you think computer science is too much to worry about but I would like to know about results about very structured random graphs, we have a long history of theory on random graphs that have say a 
Poisson degree distribution where you pick links at random 
to turn on and off, and recently there has been a lot of 
work on small world methods that have power law degree 
distributions and these arise in places where first order 
clustering statistics are very important. The graphs that I am working with have a very 
different degree distribution, number of neighbors of each. This is a log-log plot and there is certainly some 
structure there but it is not structure that people have 

studied before. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   183183So, now, very briefly I am going to describe a math program. This is my existence. The first thing we had 
to understand was an axiomatic framework for what a 
simulation is. We derived a three-element object which is local functions on a network with a particular order of evaluation of the functions. So, we went through the whole network evaluating this. There is a computational theory associated with this 
and I am just glancing over this because again, like the 
other speakers have said I am not proposing this as the end 
all and be all of mathematical science. I am just trying to give you the flavor of a math program that has a very direct influence on homeland security. The kinds of research that go on in this program 
are characterization of dynamical systems, deriving 
morphisms between different dynamical systems, between 
different objects, inductions from one to another, 
algorithm development, specification simulations and 
extensions to other things as required by the applications 
that we are developing. One reason I agree on this point is that the morphisms and the relative relations between simulations is 
that it is very hard to go about validating these kinds of 
simulations and what we are trying to do is approach it at The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   184184a more basic level, understanding when two simulations are the same even if you are exploring different parts of the 
phase base.  These things operate in huge dimensional 

probabilities bases and you can't possibly generate enough instances to explore the space base. So, you need to understand something about the structure of the simulation 
itself before you can examine your validation. So, focusing between the systems allows you to address knowledge and also to generalizability. The 
mathematical underpinnings let us know when it is even 
reasonable to suspect that we can build a simulation to do 
some of the things we want to do. A lot of our sociotechnical development depends on composing different simulations like the traffic simulation with an 
epidemiology simulation. We can understand something about the process of composing simulations with this approach, and it ha direct 
applications to some of the network and drafting problems 
that I mentioned. I think I am completely out of time. I can give you a long list of applications and theory to go with it but just to reassure you that 
it is possible to do this kind of work and not be completely shunned by the 
mathematical community this is a list of where we publish The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   185185SDS papers but I would like to mention on the computer science side and the math side we have papers come back 
from a journal saying,"That is a wonderful paper, great 
results. Please remove all reference to applications."  And 
if you want my opinion as to what mathematics can do for 
participating i homeland security change the culture a 
little bit. Math and society can have something to do with each other but the research must be driven by application, 
and those speakers before me have commented if you are just 
doing research in a vacuum it is not ever going to work, 
and the results have to be communicated back to people like me who can understand what the implications of your research are for very applied problems. Thank you. 
(Applause.) DR. BROOME:  Any quick clarification questions? Thank you, Stephen, and I think that certainly the point of this workshop is to try to get some discussion 
amongst both mathematicians and those who might use their research. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   186186  Mathematics of Epidemiological Simulations for Response Planning 
  Stephen Eubank   An epidemiological simulation can be used to 
detect anomalous patterns. It requires three 
components: an estimate of the social networ
k of a large region; a model for the within-
host progress of a disease once someone beco
mes infected; and a m
odel of transmission 
between people. Dr. Eubank then spoke about each component of his simulation dealing 
with disease spread in Portland, Oregon, em
phasizing the uniqueness of the transmission 
model that he uses. 
  
Dr. Eubank and his colleagues essentially inherited the first componentŠa database of the 640,000 households of Portland, Oregon, with estimates of what everyone in every 
family does every dayŠfrom a transportation m
odel that was developed at Los Alamos.     
For the second required component, the res
earchers have a very simple disease-
progression model that incorporates essentially all they really need to know about the disease or what the effects are on the indivi
dual who is sick. Thresholds that can be 
varied according to individuals™ demographi
cs include pathogen-growth rates in the 
hosts, whether or not they clear the disease (if the dose is small enough), at what point 
they become symptomatic at some level, and whether or not they ultimately recover or 

die.  
  
The third componentŠtransmission between pe
opleŠis quite different from traditional 
models for epidemiology, which require as 
input a ﬁreproductive number.ﬂ This number 
quantifies what happens if you introduce an in
fected person into a susceptible population: how many cases is that index case going to cause? 

  
The reproductive number is an 
output of the simulation. Th
e reproductive number 
involves two different thingsŠperson-to-person transmission characteristics of the 
disease and social-mixing patternsŠand the latter
 can™t be determined in isolation. So in 
contrast to the traditional approach, researchers are estimating contact rates between 
individuals and the whole population, and what may or may not be
 fairly important is that 
these contact rates are estimated independe
ntly from the disease-spreading problem. 
What is important is that the reproductive number emerges as it does in the real worldŠ

from transmission characteristics between
 individuals and the mixing of those 
individuals. 
  
Dr. Eubank noted that while the simulation 
he™d been describing obviously has a very direct influence on homeland security, it is al
so a vehicle for research. The elements of 
this program are characterist
ic of dynamical systems, and from the program can be 
derived morphisms between different dynami
cal systems, between different objects, 
reductions from one to another, algorithm de
velopment, formal specifications of 
simulations, and extensions to other things
 as required by the applications being developed. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   187187  In closing, Dr. Eubank noted that he and his colleagues have had papers returned to them 
from mathematics and computer-science journa
ls: ﬁ ‚This is a wonderful paper, with great results,™ editors would say. ‚But please remove all refere
nce to applications.™. . . So if you want my opinion as to what mathematics can do for homeland security,ﬂ he said, 

ﬁchange the culture a little bit so that it™
s not bad to have applications. The speakers before me have also said that if you are just
 doing research in a vacuum, it is not ever 
going to work.ﬂ  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   188188Sally Blower 
  ﬁPredicting the Unpredictable in an Age of Uncertaintyﬂ  
Transcript of Presentation  
Summary of Presentation  
Power Point Slides 

Video Presentation 
 
 Sally Blower, Ph.D., is a professor of biomathem
atics at the University
 of California at Los Angeles. She is a mathematical and evolutionary
 biologist whose research focuses on developing 
models of transmission dynamics. She uses thes
e models as health policy tools: to design 
epidemic control strategies for a variety of infectious diseases, to understand and predict the 
emergence of antibiotic and antiviral drug resi
stance, and to develop vaccination strategies. The 
main focus of her research is to develop the study 
of infectious diseases into a predictive science. 
Recently her work has focused on HIV, tuberculo
sis, and genital herpes. She has also pioneered 
the application of innovative uncertainty and sens
itivity techniques (based upon Latin hypercube 
sampling) to the analysis of transmission models. These techniques enable transmission models 

to be used to predict the future with a degree 
of uncertainty and to identify which parameters are 
critical in determining which futu
re outcome will actually occur.  
  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   189189DR. BLOWER:  Thank you.  So, I have been told to 
stand rigidly behind here and not move an inch. Okay, so in overview the material I want to cover 
then is to say a little bit about transmission models and their uses and to spend most of the time talking about uncertainty and sensitivity analysis to explain to you what 
it is, what it can be used 
for, some examples from work 
that we published on HIV and then to talk about the problem 
with risky vaccines, again, some work that we have done on 
HIV identifying vaccine perversity points, and you will 
have to wait to find out what those are and then talk a 
little bit about how that is related to smallpox, as we have a somewhat similar problem as we have currently a risky vaccine to deal with smallpox, and then I will go 
through as far as I know the complete literature of 
mathematical bioterrorism which is four publications at the 
moment. Next? 
So, what is a transmission model?  It is a series 
of mathematical equations that specify the transmission dynamics of an infectious agent, and you can use either 
stochastic and obviously have probabilities in that versus 
deterministic, and both are useful. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   190190You can either have simple or complex and also one person's simple is another person's complex. The only 
thing to remember is that a complex model should always 
reduce down to a simple model. 
So, you end up with more 
results when you have a complex model, but they shouldn't be totally different results. So, the way that I use models in my group at UCLA is basically as health policy tools, and what we do is we 

predict the future with a degree of uncertainty by using 
uncertainty analysis. So, mathematical models can be used 
to look at the effects of current treatment conditions. PARTICIPANT:  Could you speak a bit louder? DR. BLOWER: Okay, right, I will pretend I am talking to my children. So, to look at current treatment 

conditions and to look at what if conditions. So, what if 
we did something and what if we had a vaccine?   Second use of them is to define perversity thresholds based upon drug resistance.  When you treat 

individuals you get drug resistance. So, treatment has a 
good effect. It reduces drug sensitive strains. It has a bad effect. It increases drug resistance. So, you can look at trade-offs, and that is essentially  what I mean by 

perversity thresholds when you make things worse than 
before you started. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   191191So, you can look at changes in treatment and risk behavior and also risky vaccines, and then we can, also, 
identify the most effective prevention strategy for an 
epidemic by using sensitivity analysis. So, models can predict the future and mathematicians can write down equations fairly easily with 
a great deal of certainty. The problem becomes for all of 
these models we need specific parameter estimates and once 
you start to actually go to the literature and to talk to 
your infectious disease friends that is when you realize 
there is a problem and there is 
a great deal of problem 
with parameter estimation uncertainty even with diseases that we have been studying for hundreds of years like tuberculosis. So, when it comes to new agents there is going to be even more uncertainty.  So, how we can deal with this is 

by using uncertainty and sensitivity analysis based upon something called Latin hypercube sampling and this allows 
us to predict the future with a degree of uncertainty, and 
I will show you some examples, but essentially all you need to know about this is the parameter -- can we go back?  The 
parameter estimation uncertainty is being translated  into 

prediction estimation uncertainty, okay? The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   192192So, just to talk a little bit about models and perversity thresholds when  you are using treatment or 

vaccines there are approved by the FDA because they will 
help individuals. So, they work at the individual level but you can have individual good but population level harm and this is just referring to a paper that was published in 
1996 in Science looking at tuberculosis and drug resistance 
and showing that the more you treat, 
if you have a high 
degree of drug resistance which actually happens in some 
parts of the world you are actually making things worse. Next? 
Another thing to be aware of, another trade-off is basically risk behavior and perversity. Again, this is another paper I published with Angele McLean in 1994, in 
Science and a paper we published in  2000 in Science, both 

looking at HIV and trade-offs between if risk behavior 
increases and you have got treatment or vaccine how you can 
actually end up making the epidemic worse. So, you need to have your epidemic interventions coordinated. So, what is uncertainty analysis? Uncertainty analysis is used to assess the variability which you can also call prediction imprecision in the outcome variable that is due to the uncertainty in our input parameters. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   193193So, uncertainty analysis can be based upon Latin hypercube sampling. So, the question becomes what is Latin 
hypercube sampling, and that is a type of stratified Monte 

Carlo sampling. So, it is a statistical sampling technique that allows you to simultaneously vary all of the values of all of the input parameters.  So, you don't just vary one at a time as with traditional methods or keep them all constant. You can vary 
everything at once and Latin hypercube sampling was first 
proposed by McKay, Conover and Beckman in 1979, to aid in 
the analysis of nuclear reactor safety. So, they were 
concerned with a problem of nuclear reactor meltdown, obviously a very important problem and they had very large 
models and the parameters were uncertain, so, a somewhat 
similar problem to what we are thinking about today. PARTICIPANT:  When you mention hypercube and 
matching the color, is that the same thing? DR. BLOWER: Exactly but in hyperspace. So you just think in more dimensions. It is exactly the same 
conceptual principle. So, what is sensitivity analysis? We then couple the uncertainty analysis with sensitivity analysis and use 
it to identify the parameters in the model that are The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   194194increasing the outcome variables 
that we are most 
interested in. For example, if you are looking at the probability and the severity of an outbreak that is our 
outcome variable, and then by doing a sensitivity analysis we could tell which of the parameters are going to increase 
this. DR. CHAYES: Can we ask you why would you be using a Latin hypercube because in a Latin hypercube you don't 
want to have the same color occur in -- DR. BLOWER: Exactly. 
DR. CHAYES: -- direction. What does that correspond to? DR. BLOWER:  It is actually a very efficient way 
of sampling the parameter space. So, instead of doing a 
full factorial in which you look at all the possible values 
of all the parameters and all the possible combinations it 
allows you as Latin squares does to do a much fewer number 
of simulations but makes sure that you have sampled the 
entire parameter space, and if you just did it randomly you could have very funny subset.  So, it is a stratified random sampling method, 
okay? Could we go back? The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   195195So, to talk then about some specific examples so you can get a more concrete idea of this one thing that we 
have done is to predict the probability and the size of an 
outbreak occurring, and basically this is based on the basic reproductive number or R zero or R naught depending what side of the Atlantic you are from and so we have done 
an uncertainty analysis of R zero for HIV and basically if 
R zero is greater is than one an epidemic outbreak occurs 
and obviously for HIV this has already happened. So what we have done is basically the reverse of this saying that if we had enough treatment and could we 
actually make R zero less than one,. So, it is basically the same principle, okay? So, to do this uncertainty analysis we first of all used an HIV transmission model. You write down 
equations for the transmission of HIV. Then you analyze 
that to calculate an analytical expression for R zero. Then 
you estimate probability density functions for all of the 
parameters in the model. You basically get maximum and 
minimum upper and lower bounds for them. You then use Latin hypercube sampling and then calculate 1000 values for R zero and therefore you then have a measure for R zero as an 
uncertainty estimate. Next? The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   196196And this shows you what is on the  Y axis here. 
So, on the Y axis is the value of R zero that we calculated 
and this is for three different conditions and these are 

box plots. So, the line in the middle shows you the median and then the main part of it is 50 percent the predicted 
data and then the whole thing is the 100 percent of it. So, you end up with an estimate of the outcome 
variable, but you can see exactly the prediction 
imprecision, the uncertainty in your estimate. Okay? Then we did sensitivity analysis to determine what is driving the value of R zero, and in this particular example it is the change in risk behavior is the most important parameter in the model. So, again the Y axis is R 
zero, the value of it and on the X axis this shows part of 
the sensitivity analysis. The parameter here is the change 
in risk behavior and you can see as that increases and 
decreases the value of R zero changes and that this is 
again uncertainty analysis. So, you have basically got a 
predicted cloud of data. Next? So, another example for you to see how uncertainty analysis can be used is what we did here is the 
title of the paper was predicting the unpredictable, the The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   197197transmission of drug-resistant HIV, and we published that in Nature Medicine last year. The idea here is that currently combination antiretroviral therapy is being used widely to treat the HIV epidemic in the United States. There is, also, a lot of drug resistance arising. At the moment there are very few data sets to actually say what is actually happening and so we did a 
model to predict what is likely to happen and therefore 
called it predicting the unpredictable. So, we predicted a variety of things, the number of HIV infections prevented over time, the number of new cases of drug-resistant HIV arising over time, the prevalence of drug-resistant cases over time, overall 
prevalence and then the number of infections prevented per 
drug-resistant case that arose. So, this is sort of a 
biological cost/benefit analysis, how many things that you 
have done that are good, the number of infections prevented 
versus sort of the number of things you have done bad which 
is generate drug resistance. So, you can use these models to work out biological cost/benefit, and then obviously you could add 
economics on top and do an economic cost/benefit analysis. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   198198So, to see some of these results, this is the result showing number of HIV infections prevented if you 
started treating an HIV epidemic. So, on the Y axis is the number of new HIV infections that are prevented. On the X axis is the fraction that you treat and it is the uncertainty analysis. 

So, this parameter is an uncertain variable parameter and 
we allow this to vary between 50 and 90 percent, and 
therefore  we predicted 1000 different epidemics over time. The blue predicted data are after 1 year. The yellow are after 5, and the red 
are after 10 years, and  
here you can see the more you 
treat, if you go along the X axis, the more HIV infections you prevent, and since it is an uncertainty analysis you get again the predicted clouds 
of data. This shows the predicted transmission that we predicted going from 1996 up to 2005, for what we predicted 
how much drug resistant HIV would be arising and as I said 
there are no data sets, no published data sets. We did this 
for San Francisco, and the red lines are the median. The predictions are box plots. So, you can see 50 percent of our predictions lie in the rectangles.  After we made these predictions there was one datum point that arose which is the green. So, that The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   199199actually occurred after we had made the prediction. So, you could say that this made the predictions look fairly good, 
but there is only one piece of data, but it was collected 
afterwards. Anyway, next? This then shows again uncertainty analysis predicting the prevalence of HIV. Again, the treatment rate 
is an uncertain parameter varying between 50 and 90 and 

this is what would happen if you treated an HIV epidemic 
after one year of combination antiretrovial therapy. The drug sensitive strains come down, the white data at the top. The drug-resistant strains come up which are the red strains at the bottom, and it is a function of treatment and you can see these predictions are with 
uncertainty. This is what happens after 5 years. You can see that the treatment rate has the same effect but more so 
over time, and then finally after 10 years. Next? 
And actually this is what we are predicting the HIV epidemic will be like in the San Francisco gay community in 2005 which is pretty bad. Okay, this shows predictions for the prevalence of the HIV prevalence again as a function of the treatment The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   200200rate and you can see again what happens over time, year one, after 5 years, after 10. Then these are the results of the biological cost/benefit analysis in which we have predicted what would be again the effects of combination antiretroviral therapy treating an HIV epidemic, the number of HIV infections you 

prevent for each drug-resistant case you generate, so 
basically a trade-off, a biological trade-off, and these 
effects change over time. So, these are our predictions from 1996 to 2005. So, then the other part of this was to do the sensitivity 

analysis and this uses the results of the uncertainty analysis that we generate and then we calculate partial correlation coefficients and this basically shows that one 
of the key factors in increasing the amount of drug 
resistance was the treatment rate which is not surprising.  This shows the unadjusted 
data but the partial correlation ren(?) coefficient is .9. So, these are the 
unadjusted data and then the other key factor revealed by 
the sensitivity analysis was the actual biological fitness of the drug-resistant strains and again these are the predicted unadjusted data. When you adjust this statistically for it then you get partial ren correlation coefficients of about .9. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   201201So, how good does a vaccine have to be? If we are worried about smallpox and other biological agents we can 
fairly easily, this is sort of a classical result in the 
literature, fairly easily work out how good a vaccine has to be, and the three important components are the vaccination coverage, how many people you need to vaccinate. The E is the efficacy of the vaccine, how good 
is it and R zero is the basic reproduction number.  So, 
basically how severe is the problem; how severe is the 
epidemic? So, if you have good estimates for those or again you can do an uncertainty analysis on it and work out for 
the size a basic reproduction number how good the vaccine has to be and what kind of coverage, how much, what 
percentage of the population do you need to get to take the 
vaccine. Live attenuated vaccines are actually used, what we have available for smallpox, polio and measles. They 
have many advantages. They generate a very high protective 
efficacy because they are essentially generally the same 
pathogen but attenuated. They are low cost and they are simple immunization schedules.  So, live attenuated vaccines are very nice and 
are used a lot, but let us just think about some of the The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   202202problems for that.  The problem with risky vaccines, live 
attenuated vaccines is that they can actually cause the 
disease in some people. Therefore they have a benefit in 
which they are very, very effective, but they also have a risk.  So, these type of vaccines, we call them risky vaccines because they are risky, and they can  under some 

circumstances do more harm than good which is why people 
are worried about the smallpox vaccine at the moment. If  

you use mass vaccination with a smallpox vaccine there 
would be some very detrimental effects in large numbers of 
immunocompromised individuals, HIV infected individuals or immunocompromised because they have cancer in many of the urban centers, and there are hundreds of thousands of the 
people in the United States. So, it is a big problem. We looked at this in terms of HIV vaccine and this is a paper we published in PNAS last year looking at 
live attenuated HIV vaccines. Basically this is an ordinary 
differential equation model and allows us to look at the 
effect of a vaccine that would be very effective and protect against infection but in some people because they are vaccinated will actually cause AIDS though at a much 
slower rate than if they had gotten infected with the wild 
type. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   203203So, if you had this live attenuated HIV vaccine would it be a good thing to use in a public health 
campaign? This was the question we addressed and you could 
actually, we have got web bush(?) into this model running and it is very user friendly. My children can actually run this, and so if you want to you can go to our web site and 
put in parameters and see how the model behaves for 
different coverage levels and different safety levels. So, 
that is something you may want to do. What we did is predict what would happen in Zimbabwe where there is a very severe HIV epidemic; 25 
percent of the population are currently infected and in Thailand where very much fewer, much less severe epidemic and compare and contrast between these two countries using 
exactly the same hypothetical HIV vaccines to see what 
would happen. So, again, we used time-dependent uncertainty analysis and we specified the parameters such as efficacy, 
such as coverage levels by probability distribution 
function and then we made some predictions. If you actually look at analytical results, and 
we also looked at analytical results what you find is that 
all of the, we tested 1000 different HIV vaccines 
theoretically and on the computer. We tested them and found 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   204204if you looked at it analytically all of these thousand vaccines would lead to HIV eradication, and it would be a 
two-step process. You would replace the virulent strain, the wild type with the avirulent vaccine strain and then you would have to stop the vaccination program and you would have eradicated HIV.  So, that is what you find out if you look at it 
analytically, and so equilibrium results are very important 
but it is important to look at the transient dynamics, too. So, we did that, and we found something that we have called the vaccine perversity point. Now, the vaccine 
perversity point is defined in terms of the vaccine safety level. So, in the case of HIV this is the fraction of vaccinated individuals who progress to AIDS as a result of 
the vaccine strain. So, it would be the same thing if you 
were looking at a smallpox vaccine. At the vaccine perversity point then the annual AIDS death rate with a live attenuated HIV vaccine in place 
is equivalent to the annual AIDS death rate without a live 
attenuated HIV vaccine and this shows our predicted results for what would happen if you put an HIV vaccine out in 
Thailand. On the Y axis is the total annual AIDS deaths for 
8 per 100,000. On the X axis is the safety of the vaccines 
that we were looking at for HIV for them causing anywhere The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   205205between 1 percent and 10 percent of the vaccinated individuals to progress to AIDS in 25 years. So, these are 
fairly safe vaccines, and then again it is an uncertainty 
analysis. So, you have got predictive clouds of data. Sorry, can you go back? So, at time zero we start off with the sort of light green data, after 10 years the pink data and then 
after 50 years the yellow data and 200 years turquoise. We 
have just plotted the 200 years to show you that basically 
you are almost at the equilibrium after 50 years. Things 

don't change that much. What you can see here is there is 
very clearly a vaccine perversity point that is the vaccines that cause 5 percent or more of vaccinated individuals to progress to AIDS in 25 years actually raised 
the death rate. They make things worse. So, these vaccines 
in Thailand if you used them would actually make the HIV 
epidemic worse. If you had live attenuated vaccines that 
were 5 percent or less they would actually reduce the death 
rate and be a good idea. The same vaccines in Zimbabwe as you see there is 
no vaccine perversity point. The time zero data are much higher. We have a much more severe AIDS epidemic in 
Zimbabwe and these vaccines behaving in exactly the same 
way actually because the epidemic is so severe, their risky The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   206206effects basically aren't seen and therefore they are just seen to be beneficial, though obviously the safer the 
vaccine the more you lower the death rate, but there is no 
perversity point. You can't make things, frankly, any worse in Zimbabwe than they are already. DR. REINGOLD:  Are you assuming this for now? 
DR. BLOWER:  Yes, but you could also put it at 
any point and do the same analysis. DR. REINGOLD: So, you could make the epidemic worse without treatment over, without vaccine over time? DR. BLOWER: You can, yes, definitely. This is just to assess the effects of the vaccine. So, in Zimbabwe none of the vaccines resulted in perversity. In Thailand vaccine strains that caused more 
than 5 percent of vaccinated individuals to progress to 
AIDS in 25 years led to perversity and if you just want to 
think about testing these vaccines, HIV vaccines in 
clinical trials that is an enormous problem. So, whether or not a vaccine will cause a perverse effect will be situation specific and depend upon the  risk of becoming infected and this really then is the big 
problem with small pox.  Since we have a risky, dangerous 

vaccine, if it was used now in a mass vaccination campaign The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   207207in the United States, it would obviously do more harm than good.  I think everyone is in agreement about that. It should only be used basically if there has been a major release of small pox and we are convinced that the number of death, therefore, are going to be greater than the number of deaths that would occur without using 
the vaccine. So, to go through the mathematical bioterrorism literature, actually the first paper is back in 1760 by 
Daniel Bernoulli.  I think it is little read paper.  It is 

written in French, but you can get a translation.  I 

haven't read it in the French.  I have read it in the 
English. So, it is an attempt at new analysis of the 
mortality caused by small pox and of the advantages of 
inoculation to prevent it.  So, Bernoulli was very 

interested in doing health policy research back in 1760 and 
outcomes research and all the buzz words that are now used.  

The idea was to use a model 
to actually show that using 
vaccination against small pox was worthwhile. So, we are basically now doing -- it is always worthwhile to look back in the literature. The next paper that I came across -- there may be more out there, but these are the only ones I am aware of -
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   208208- is in 2001 by the CDC, Modeling Potential Responses to Small Pox as a Bioterrorism Weapon.  Then there are two 

more papers.  The paper by Ron Brookmeyer and Blade in 

Science in 2002, Prevention of Inhalation Anthrax in the U.S. Outbreak, and a recent paper that just went on line in PNAS 2002, looking at early statistical detection of 
anthrax outbreaks by tracking over-the-counter medication 
sales. So, just to summarize, even in an age of uncertainty, I believe prediction is possible. [Applause.]  
MS. BROOME:  Clarification questions for Dr. 
Blower? MR. KAPER:  I am Hans Kaper, National Science 
Foundation. You haven't given any specifics about your models, but I gather they are systems of ordinary -- DR. BLOWER:  Yes, they are systems of ordinary -- 
and if you want actually any of the papers, they are 
downloadable from my web site and all the papers have the equations in them. MR. KAPER:  The reason why I am asking is that in 
the mathematics community there is quite some experience The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   209209now that large systems -- I was wondering whether anything 
has been applied to your models? DR. BLOWER:  To my models?  Maybe Simon knows 
about that. MR. LEVIN:  The person I would turn to Mac 
Kliman(?) because otherwise I haven't seen anything like 
that applied to any of these models. MR. KAPER:  It seems to me that there is a 
fruitful area for applied mathematics to get involved. MR. LEVIN:  I have a question, Sally, which is 
when you are looking at these cost benefit tradeoffs in 
terms of -- is there any notion of discounting them in terms of how long in the future you push the -- or how late in one's life? DR. BLOWER:  I think that is very interesting and 
actually there was some work done actually by Hans Waller 
back in the seventies, who worked for the WHO until he got 
fired for doing some of those such things.  But basically 

then you have to decide -- I mean, the reason I keep away 
from economics is you have to say basically how much life is worth, first of all, and then you have to discount, and future people are worth less than current people. So, you definitely could do that.  But we haven't 
yet done that. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   210210MR. LEVIN:  Not just future people, but maybe 
delaying to later in one's life when the death occurs. DR. BLOWER:  Oh, increasing life expectancy. 
MR. LEVIN:  Yes.  You may have the same number of 
deaths, but it may be when people last longer and die -- DR. BLOWER:  We have looked at that, that 
basically that you avert because, yes, you don't prevent -- 
basically in the Science 2000 paper for HIV, you can show 
that you avert AIDS deaths and that that is a significant 
effect and, therefore, very worthwhile, as well as the 
number of infections prevented. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   211211Predicting the Unpredictable in an Age of Uncertainty  Sally Blower  Mathematical transmission models, whether dete
rministic or stochastic, can be valuable 
in predicting the dynamics of an infectious 
agent. Dr. Blower and her group at UCLA use them as health-policy tools in two basic 
ways: to assess the effects of particular treatments and vaccines on current or what-if conditions and to define ﬁperversity 

thresholdsﬂ beyond which the use of a nominally beneficial technology actually makes 

things worse, as in some cases of drug-cau
sed drug resistance. In the latter circumstance, 
you can have individual good but population-level harm. 
 
For all these models, mathematicians can write 
down equations fairly easily with a great 
deal of certainty. But there is a problem with parameter-estimation 
uncertainty even with 
diseases that we have been studying for hundreds of years, like tuberculosis; and with new agents there is going to be even more uncertainty. 
 
Analysts deal with this situation by using uncertainty analysis and sensitivity analysis based upon something called Latin hypercube sa
mpling, which is a type of stratified Monte Carlo sampling. Essentially all you need
 to know about this technique is that parameter-estimation uncertainty is being translated into 
prediction-estimation 
uncertainty. 

  
Dr. Blower described some applications of 
these techniques in her group™s work on HIV infection.  These include determining the proba
bility and size of outbreak, the prevalence of disease and of drug-resistant cases, and the perversity point of a live vaccine under different circumstances. 
  She summarized her talk tersely: ﬁEven in an age of uncertainty, I believe prediction is possible.ﬂ The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   212212Simon Levin   ﬁRemarks on Detection and Epidemiology of Bioterrorist Attacksﬂ 
 
Transcript of Presentation  
Summary of Presentation 
Video Presentation 
  Simon A. Levin is the George M. Moffett Professor 
of Biology and was the founding director of the 
Princeton Environmental Institute at Princeton University.  
 Dr. Levin is a member of the National Academ
y of Sciences and the American Philosophical 
Society and a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and the American 

Association for the Advancement of Science.  
 Dr. Levin has also served as president of the 
Ecological Society of America and has won its 
MacArthur Award and Distinguished Service Citation.
 He was the founding editor of the journal 
Ecological Applications
 and has edited numerous journals and book series. He is past chair of the 
board of the Beijer International Institute of Ec
ological Economics and is also a member of the 
science board of the Santa Fe 
Institute and the vice-chair for ma
thematics of the Committee of 
Concerned Scientists. 
  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   213213 MR. LEVIN:  I will say, Sally, that the one thing 
that I was amused by was the notion that user friendly was 
something my kids could do on the computer because that was 
by far no guarantee that it would be something that I could 
do.  What I would like to do, if we can get the slides on, 

is to first of all touch on some of the points we heard, 
review them and put them into context, maybe try to identify some challenges, including some topics that haven't been hit and finishing up with sort of a pet hobby 
horse of mine, which has to do with system level aspects, 
indeed, the notion of developing a system level immune 
system. As we have heard, especially in the last two lectures, there is a large classical literature in 
epidemiology and, indeed, in much of mathematical modeling and infectious diseases, the focus has been on the sorts of things that Sally just talked about and we have talked 
about before that; namely, developing predictive models 
that will help us to understand what the spread of an 
infection will be once introduced into the population. There are some model aspects of this part of the problem that are associated with bioterrorism.  You have 

also heard -- this is sort of the classic framework, the The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   214214compartmental approach, in which the population is broken into classes, such as susceptible, infected, recovered and 
then maybe into age groups or risk groups. Some compartmental analysis, but as you also heard, one can develop individual-based models.  The unique 
aspects are that in the case of bioterrorism, one may not 
be dealing with a single introduction.  Typically, we would 

ask what happens if a disease is introduced at low levels 
in a particular environment.  What is the potential for 

spread, et cetera?  But if bioterrorism could involve 

multiple introductions several different places, it could 
also involve the introduction of multiple agents.  Diseases 
that might interact with each other might affect our response capabilities by moving resources one place and 
then hitting the system with resources somewhere else. So, one is going to have to extend these approaches to the modeling of multiple agents.  Indeed, 

they don't even have to all be infectious disease agents.  

It could be different kinds of terrorist attacks coupled 
with bioterrorism.  So, these are different sorts of 
notions that is in the same framework, but involves our 
understanding much more complex systems. But as we have been hearing, especially in this afternoon session, prediction is not the only thing that we 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   215215need to be concerned about.  There are all sorts of 
challenges for mathematical models, from dealing with 
either chemical or biological threats, ranging from 
prevention to detection, from prediction to what we do after an introduction, remediation.  How do we respond? So, I will identify at least four different categories dealing with infectious disease modeling and I 

am sure there are others, most of which we have heard 
about, but they relate to how do you detect the 
surveillance systems about which we heard this morning, 
prediction.  The response systems once a disease appears in 

the population and tracing, that is, how do you trace back to identify where the source is, something which we have seen doesn't work very well in the case of the anthrax 
attacks, but has been used, for example, in the foot and 
mouth disease in the U.K. to trace back to what were the 
original sources. That introduces inverse problems, sometimes very simplistic inverse problems, but imagine anyway that you have a model for the spread of a disease, how do we run it 
backwards to try to identify the sources or can we do that?  
Is that a much harder problem? Now, all of these things and I will focus here briefly on prediction, at least two different aspects, what The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   216216I will call a priori and a post priori, namely, there are things that you could do in advance to prepare you before 
there has even been an attack and these would include 
running scenarios using mathematical models.  A very 
important use of mathematical models is in exercises like Tupoff(?) or Dork(?) Witter(?), which have been exercises 
in which one uses a model to drive a theoretical epidemic 
and allow people who in response systems to do what they 
would do if there were a real attack. It is like a flight simulator.  It is a learning 
experience by which you learn about where the weaknesses 
are in the system and you give people experience with responding to it.  So, models 
not only are going to be useful when there has actually been an attack, but they can 
be extremely useful in training people or helping you to 
identify where you ought to be putting the resources and 

what is the best way to set 
up response systems.  There 
have been a few exercises of that sort, but not a lot and 
typically the models that have been used have been fairly 
unsophisticated in driving the epidemics in those systems.   So, detailed models such as Steve told us about, for example, could be extremely useful in these training 
exercises.  Then there are ones after the fact.  The 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   217217difference between single threads and multiple threads or single focus and multiple ones, I have already mentioned. I will just shove these in after listening to Sally because first of all, I wanted to emphasize what is sort of a central concept of the use of models of this sort and then to identify some of the particular new problems 
that we may need to be thinking about.  Sally talked about  
r0.  That is the number of secon
dary cases per primary case in a naive population.  Notice 
I called it r-naught.  I 
speak British. So, the criterion usually here is that r0 is 
greater than 1, then the introduction will spread and, therefore, to control it, as she showed us, you are going to have to reduce r0 below 1.  In the 
sorts of models that she talked about, r0 typically can be broken up into the 
mean, infectious time per individual, multiplied times the 
average number of secondary infections per unit time while 
an individual is infectious.  So, one can look at this.  

Beta would be the probability of transmission per 

individual and it is the population size.  Nu(?) would be 
with death rate and gamma would be the recovery rate and, therefore, understand that there are various ways to 
control the disease by focusing either on improving the 
recovery rate -- you could also increase the death rate, 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   218218but that is probably not a good way to do it, but some sort of removal rate that would reduce the infectious time per 
individual.  Isolation would be one way to do it. Secondly, to reduce the mean infectious transfer per individual.  For example, we do that with sexually 
transmitted diseases by the use of condoms and other ways 
by isolating individuals who are infectious and in itself 
is important, that is, the population size is important and 
one way we get at that is through vaccination to reduce the 
size of potential infectious individuals. But this very useful concept has some problems associated with it.  It is a deterministic concept.  So, 
for stochastic models, it is only an approximate threshold.  
If there are heterogeneities in the population, it may be 
only an estimate and in particular if there is 
heterogeneity in terms of the number of infectious 
transfers per individual that -- if some individuals are 
more sexually active than others or more likely to transmit 

the disease, then every individual in a sense has her own 
r0.  Some individuals are much more likely to spread the 
disease and, therefore, where you introduce the disease becomes important. This is an average quantity and how to deal with that in a heterogeneous population, such as Steve told us The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   219219about, is a challenge.  Another challenge in the 
individual-based models, which relates to this question is 
how do you reduce the dimensionality of the system?  Can 

you take that large individual-based model and collapse it through some sort of moment closure or other techniques, through a system of equations that can be dealt with 
analytically. So, that is another mathematical challenge, which is to take these large scale, individual-based models and 
try to develop essentially a statistical mechanics that 
would allow us to do some analysis. MS. CHAYES:  Are you looking at non-stationary, 
as well as stationary r0 there?  You said that r
0 need not 
be constant, that it can vary from one individual to the 
next. MR. LEVIN:  Absolutely.  It varies spatially and 
it varies over time.  That is certainly the case. MS. CHAYES:  So, you study non-stationary models. 
MR. LEVIN:  Non-stationary models are studied and 
are -- the people who do this sort of modeling study -- but certainly the predominant literature focuses on the computation of one r0, but you are absolutely right.  There 
are many examples of diseases which have been introduced 
and didn't take, depending on the season.  So, r
0 is very 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   220220much a function of when the introduction takes place.  In 
the case of vector diseases, for example, ones that are 
transmitted by mosquitoes, r0 depends a great deal on the 
season of the year and whether the mosquito population is at high density. The classic example or a classic example is the introduction of mix(?) mitosis 
into Australia to control rabbit populations, which didn't take for a number of years 
and then suddenly after a number of wet years, it just took 
off and spread and temporarily wiped out the rabbit 
population.  So, r0, certainly can be temporarily -- Now, in addition to the spread of infection over time, there is also the problem of spatial spread and there are two dimensions to that.  One is the spread of the 

agent.  For example, in the case of anthrax, there are lots 

of models that have been used, essentially variance on 
calcium plume models for how an agent with particular 
characteristics could be spread. But secondly there is the sort of spread that we 
have heard about today, which has to do with the infectious transfer of the disease, not applicable to anthrax, but to 
many other diseases, from one individual to the next.  Most 

of them, near as I can tell, most of the modeling of 
spatial spread that is in use in our response agencies has The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   221221to do with the first element here, the spread of agents, the transport of materials in the environment. But there is obviously great potential for understanding the temporal and spatial spread due to infectious transfers.  There are a couple of different 
dimensions to this.  For example, in the case of foot and 

mouth disease, which has been a current hot topic for the 
last year and a half in the U.K.  Issues of spread relate 

both to the spread of the agent, the possibility that the 
agent itself could be spread by airborne methods over very 
large distances and, secondly the spread due to the 
movement of individuals, due to the movement of cattle or sheep around the country, therefore, cutting down -- therefore, spreading the disease. The first thing that goes into effect when a new case is discovered is or would be shutting down movement of 
animals around the country because it is that rapid 
movement that spreads it.  So, understanding spatial spread 

is crucial.  That has multiple scales to it and the same 

explanations may not be true on all scales. For example, influenza typically could be approximated by a kind of diffusive spread once it is 
introduced into a particular community, but as the Russian 
Rovotchev(?) and Irolin Jenie(?) and others showed some The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   222222years ago, entirely different models would be needed in order to understand the spread among cities and that would 
relate on the airline traffic.  Once one built that model, 

it might be useful for other sorts of diseases that would spread. You have got to keep updating that model as airline schedules change, however.  So, there are multiple 

scales of transmission. That was prediction.  We heard a good deal about 
detection methods, largely statistical methods in which 
they are involved, surveillance and how to discriminate a 
signal from the background.  The use of inverse methods, 
tracing, how do you run models backwards, as I said, in order to identify, for example, what the sources are or in 
order to identify, as we have heard in the talks this 
afternoon, there is also the problem of identifying what 
the parameters are, which brings me to response and some of 
the -- as I said, the hobby horses I have. Again, these are responses that can be done before the fact or after the fact, but, in particular, in dealing with the responses to terrorist attacks, we need to 
recall that we are not dealing with the same sorts of 
problems as we are with accidental introductions.  We are 

first of all dealing with a game theoretic problem in which The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   223223the terrorists are trying to outsmart us and understanding what our strategies of a response will be. Obviously, even work such as this that we are talking about that gets done informs potentially terrorists.  So, it is really a game theoretic situation in 
which you are dealing potentially with multiple agents 
about which -- whose introduction may be unpredictable and, 
therefore, it is crucial to develop responses to have 
systems that are adaptive, that have the capability to 
respond to unpredictable attacks. In other words, to develop essentially an immune system for the whole system.  So there are a whole class of 
operations research questions that relate among other things to how do you deploy individuals, how do you respond 
to the system, how do you seal it off.  For example, 

modularity is an important part of the transmission system.  

We heard about small world networks.  The particular 

typology of interactions has a great deal to say about the 
potential spread.  How do we reduce modularity?  Could we 

do targeted vaccinations, et cetera? Can we reduce contacts in certain places in order to make the system less susceptible to propagate an 
unexpected attack? Why don't I stop there. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   224224MS. BROOME:  Thank you.  I think we are trying to 
stick more or less close to time so there will be some 
opportunity for further discussion. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   225225Remarks on Detection and Epidemiology of Bioterrorist Attacks Simon Levin   There are many challenges for modeling di
sease prevention, detection, prediction, and response in the case of bioterrorism. Typically, we would ask wh
at happens if a disease is introduced at low levels in a particular envi
ronment. But in the case of bioterrorism, one 
may not be dealing with a single introduc
tion. Bioterrorism could involve multiple 
introductions in several different places, and it could also involve the introduction of multiple agents. Indeed, they don™t even have
 to all be infectious-disease agentsŠ
different kinds of terrorist attacks could be coupled with bioterrorism. These diverse 
possibilities are all more or less in th
e same framework, but they require an 
understanding of much more complex systems. 
One important tool to prepare for an 
attack is running scenarios using the mathematical models. In this way, they 
are like flight simulators. These are 
experiences by which you learn about where the weaknesses are in the systemŠ
where to put resourcesŠand they can be extremely useful in training people. 
Particular areas that should be studied include these:  1. Spatial spread, related to the spread 
of disease over time. Most modeling 
of spatial spread involves modeli
ng the spread of the agent, although 
analyses and actions relating to the 
mobility of individuals have proven effective in such epidemics as foot and mouth disease 
 
2. Outbreaks related to terrorist attacks as opposed to accidental 
introductions. These are game-theoretic problems, in which the terrorists 

are trying to outsmart us. 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   226226Arthur Reingold ﬁRemarks on Detection and Epidemiology of Bioterrorist Attacksﬂ 
 
Transcript of Presentation  
Summary of Presentation 
Video Presentation 
 Arthur Reingold, M.D., M.P.H
., is professor of epidemiology and head of the Division of 
Epidemiology at the School of Public Health, Univ
ersity of California, Be
rkeley (UCB). He holds 
concurrent appointments in the Departments of
 Medicine and Epidemiology and Biostatistics at 
the University of California, S
an Francisco (UCSF). He has devoted the past 20-plus years to the 
study and prevention of infectious diseases in the 
United States and in various countries in Africa, 
Asia, and Latin America, initially at the Center
s for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) for 8 
years and at UCB since 1987.  
Current activities include directing the National
 Institutes of Health-funded UCB/UCSF Fogarty 
International AIDS Training Program, now in
 its 14th year, and co-directing the CDC-funded 
California Emerging Infections Program, now in 
its 8th year. Dr. Reingold's current research 
interests include prevention of transmission of HI
V in developing countries; the intersection of the 
HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis epidemics; malaria in 
Uganda; emerging and reemerging infections in 
the United States and globally; sexual transmiss
ion of hepatitis C virus; vaccine-preventable 
diseases; and respiratory infections in childhood. 
 The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   227227DR. REINGOLD:  Thank you.  We are going to go 
from power point to slides, back to overheads. I am going to actually focus my comments primarily around the context in which Ken is doing the work he is doing about detection of bioterrorist events and outbreaks.  This is a topic that I first had the 

opportunity to think about and work on when I was at CDC 

working with Claire and we were thinking about how to 
detect meningitis outbreaks in the meningitis belt as soon 
as possible in order to rush in with vaccines and reduce 
morbidity and mortality. The first point I would make, I think, is that detection and rapid response to outbreaks is more or less the same whether or not the outbreaks are naturally 
occurring or intentionally introduced.  At least from an 

epidemiologic perspective, most of the issues are the same. What I would like to do in the few minutes I have is try and give you some context for the complexity of what 
Ken is trying to do in Massachusetts and what others are 
trying to do.  You may have seen the picture of George Bush 
looking under a microscope in Pittsburgh a couple of weeks ago, looking for outbreaks in Pittsburgh.  This is a 

challenging thing to do for a variety of reasons. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   228228So, let me just first of all give you a quick definition of surveillance in terms of what we are trying 
to do in terms of detecting diseases or illnesses.  Those 

of us in public health generally refer to surveillance as a systematic ongoing collection analysis and dissemination of health data with findings linked to actions in the 
decision-making process.  The implication here fundamentally in terms of bioterrorism is we would like to have a system in place 
that would permit us to detect illnesses quickly and then 
be in a position to respond rapidly to keep morbidity and 
mortality to a minimum.  Now, in terms of surveillance 
needs for bioterrorism, there really are two phases, I think, one can look at.  One is pre-event and the other is 

post-event or release.  In the case of pre-release or pre-

event, obviously, what we are talking about is can we 
detect the event and can we detect it earlier than we would 
have in the absence of our system. Then, of course, in terms of post-release, there are some important issues around being able to map the event and guide the response, make projections about the numbers that will be affected and other things of that 
kind.  Now, the reality is most of the emphasis has been on 

the first phase of this, the detection of the event.  I am 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   229229going to spend most of my time talking about that, rather than about the second. Now, I think it is worth pointing out since many of you are not physicians and not working in public health, how it is we in public health generally do detect outbreaks in the absence of fancy systems and computers and software 
and hardware.  The reality is that generally we detect many 

outbreaks because an astute patient or family member 
notices that, gee, aren't a lot of us who ate at the church 
supper or who all went to the same wedding all vomiting 
more or less at the same time. It doesn't take an enormous lot of smarts to figure that out and frequently the health department learns because someone calls and says I think we have an outbreak 
here among people who were in such and such a place or 

participate in such and such an event.  Similarly, we 

learned a lot of outbreaks from an astute clinicians, who 
recognize the one or more cases of an illness are more than 
they should be seeing and they are smart enough to let the 
health department know about that. If you could say, there
 is an intrinsic 
comparison of what the expected is, but it is primarily 
because that individual or that individual and someone they 
talked to on the elevator come to the conclusion that they The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   230230are seeing too much of something that this whole process has set in motion.  Sometimes it happens because an astute 

laboratorian looking at specimens in a clinical 
microbiology laboratory notices the same thing. On rare occasions, it is actually those of us in 
public health who are collecting and analyzing surveillance 
reports or laboratory reports, who detect outbreaks that 
otherwise had not been detected yet or might have gone 
undetected.  Clearly, what we would like to do with these 

fancier systems we are developing is see if we can be a 

larger part of this detection process, as opposed to 
waiting for clinicians and patients to tell us about the problem. Now, I want to point out, this is the epidemic curve.  These are the cases.  The 
X axis here is the date.  
The Y axis is number of cases and for epidemiologists this 
is what is called an epidemic curve, showing the cases of 
anthrax from last fall. What I would like to point out is a couple of things about this actual bioterrorist event that we now have experience with.  The first is that these cases were 
primarily brought to our attention by astute clinicians; 
that is to say, a doctor was able to look at a patients and 
say I wonder if this person has anthrax based on the The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   231231clinical diagnosis and then report that to someone and collect appropriate specimens. I am sorry to say that I think the systems that many people are building to try and detect various syndromes would never have detected this particular outbreak because there was one case here and one case 
there, because in this case, the cases were related to 
mailing of letters and the anthrax spores ended up in 

various places.  So, if you are looking to detect increases in patients with febrile illnesses, this outbreak probably 
would never have been detected by that kind of system.  I 
think it is fair to say that a lot of the activity around detection of outbreaks in terms of anthrax in particular is 
assuming that some plane will fly over New York or 
Washington, release a cloud of spores or an individual with 
small pox will walk through Washington Dulles Airport and 
infect various people and then a whole thing will unfold 
and large numbers of people will become ill. This particular event obviously had different features, which would not have been readily detectible by the systems that many people are building.  So, what are 

the various approaches people are taking to improving 
surveillance to detect bioterrorist events?  Well, 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   232232obviously, as Ken has already said, one approach to this is trying to monitor visits to health care providers and while 
we do a lot of that already through hospital admissions for 
various diseases, many people are trying to add a component that looks at outpatient visits and intelligently doing it in places like HMOs, where people already collect and enter 
these data, where the hardware and software things you need 
to add to the system are minimal or non-existent. People are interested in looking at energy department visits, clinical microbiology laboratories, 
indicators, things such as 911 calls, over-the-counter drug 
sales, absenteeism at work and at school.  Some people are 
even considering direct monitoring of samples of the population through Nielson rating type setups, in which 
people are routinely answering questionnaires over the 
Internet, a whole host of different, creative approaches.  

I think we need to give some attention to the question of 
how likely is it that these kinds of systems will actually 
improve our early detection of bioterrorist events. Well, Ken has already referred to the fact that one of his problems is influenza and these are the kind of monitoring data we have on influenza and have had for a 
number of years.  This just simply looks at the number of -

- the proportion of all deaths due to pneumonia and The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   233233influenza in the 121 largest cities in the United States and you can see here that that fluctuates with season 
because influenza is a seasonal disease. Now, one thing I would take issue with Ken a little bit about is influenza is not our only problem in this regard.  There are many other viruses that can cause 

similar illnesses, parainfluenza, adenoviruses, 
microplasma, which is a bacterium.  So, it is not just the 

problem with influenza, but there 
are many things 
perturbing the background that we can monitor, but 
certainly will make it more challenging to detect something 
like inhalational anthrax at an early stage or small pox 
before the rash erupts. This is also just to point out that, in fact, we currently do have surveillance systems in place and have 
had for a long time for influenza, not just on what 
proportion of deaths are due to pneumonia, but an 
outpatient visits to sentinel physicians and to a number of 
other indicators that all pretty much tell us that 
influenza is a seasonal disease and that all tend to peak at approximately the same time. I would really like to point out and you may not be able to read this very well is people in France a number 
of years ago were interested in the question of how well do The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   234234these various indicators allow us to say when an outbreak of a febrile respiratory illness is occurring.  So, what 

they looked at here, what we epidemiologists call the 
sensitivity, the specificity and the predictive value of a positive of these various indicators to say when has an 
influenza epidemic occurred. They were looking at everything from emergency visits to sick leave reported to the National Health 
Service, sick leave reported by companies, visits to 
general practitioners, hospital fatalities, a whole host of 
drug consumption, many of the things that we are 
considering looking at now and measuring how sensitive, specific or the positive predicted value.  By sensitivity 
we mean of all the outbreaks that occur, what proportion 

will be predicted by this indicator.   By specificity we mean of all the times there is 
not an outbreak, what proportion of the time will the 
system tell us there is not an outbreak and most 
importantly, the predicted value of a positive of all the 
times the system tells us there is an outbreak, what proportion of the time is it right and there really is an outbreak. That is important because if we envision rushing in with vaccines or very labor and time and other intensive The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   235235things in response to some indicator, we would like to be doing it in response to a real problem most of the time, 

rather than response to a false alarm. You can see that, in fact, some of these various indicators have reasonably good sensitivity and specificity and predicted value positives and others don't.  I think 

these are the kind of indicators that we need to look at as 
we are trying to judge how good a job our detection methods 
are doing. So, when we think about detecting outbreaks, these, it seems to me, are the things we need to think about.  I have mentioned three of them.  The sensitivity of 
the system to detect a bioterrorist event, the specificity in predicting a bioterrorist event, the predictive value of 
a positive, what kind of response will we make to a false 

alarm.  What I would point out to you is if you set up 

these systems in many counties or many parts of the 
country, in any given county, in any given week, there will 
be zero bioterrorist attacks.  Therefore, every positive -- 

everything above the baseline that stimulates a response, if all you are looking for is bioterrorist events, a hundred percent of the events you detect will be false 
positives in most counties most of the time. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   236236So, response you are going to make requires a lot of thought because most of the time it will be response to 
something that is not the bioterrorist event.  The 

timeliness is obviously critical because we want something that will tell us about something sooner than we would learn about it otherwise and I think that is the real 
challenge in this.  Certainly cost used to be an issue.  

Maybe it is not so much anymore. So, let me just end -- I think this is the last 
one -- there are a lot of things 
we need to think about in 
figuring out how to affect bioterrorist events.  Ken has 

referred to monitoring people who have a febrile respiratory illness and that is how things like anthrax and small pox will present initially.  But botulism and a host 

of other things would present with different things.  So, 

we need to consider what syndromes to monitor, not just 
febrile respiratory illness, but possibly other syndromes. What kind of case definitions to use, in order to 
determine who does and doesn't have the illness, whether we 
are looking at inpatient or outpatient or other kinds of data.  Who will enter the data may 
be less of an issue in 
an HMO, but it is a big issue in other health care provider 
settings?  How will the data be transmitted to people like 

Ken in order to analyze them?  How often will the data be 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   237237examined?  What statistical parameters will be used to 
signal a possible event and what actions will be taken in 
response to that signal? So, I think these are all some of the complexities that we need to, those of us working in public health need to think about and have to have some pretty 
concrete answers for it.  So, let me stop there so we can 

proceed to general questions and discussion. MS. BROOME:  Thank you. 
Any clarification questions for Dr. Reingold? 
[There was no response.]  
We can then open the session for more general discussions.  I would like to just remind folks that the 
overall session was on detection and epidemiology of 
bioterrorist attacks.  So, even though Ken and Art have 

focused on the detection issue and I think there is a 
number of threads there that we could pursue, I do hope 
that we also pay attention to the epidemiology; that is, 
what is the distribution of an outbreak once it occurs and 
what is the strategy and effectiveness of the response to that outbreak.  I think some of 
the work that Steve and 
Sally discussed are relevant in that area. So, I would like to direct folks thinking to both how can mathematics be useful on the detection side, but 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   238238also what are some of the contributions that we get from simulation and modeling in these other areas. So, let me see if we have some general comments or questions for the panel or among the panel.  I know you 
all have been thinking about this a great deal. PARTICIPANT:  The question is, I guess, for 
Sally. To what extent are the models that you are constructing -- what kind of data is there that can  
actually -- DR. BLOWER:  For the HIV models -- 
PARTICIPANT:  Yes. DR. BLOWER:  For the HIV vaccine models, all we 
can do is make sure that they fit the current data because 
there are no vaccines out there and nothing has been done.  

So, those you can't test and those models are used more as 
what could happen and this was not to show whether it would 
be a good idea or not. For the HIV ones, we are actually just finally getting some data from San Francisco.  They have been 
collecting it, but they haven't actually analyzed it or released it.  So, we will actually be -- I am working with 

Rob Weiss at UCLA.  He is, you probably know, in 

biostatistics and his thing is longitudinal data analysis.  
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   239239So, we will actually be fitting the models to data and trying to do so using new statistical methods, not just, 

you know, minimize squares and things.  So, we haven't yet 

done it because of the data. PARTICIPANT:  Also a question for Sally. In your sensitivity analysis and uncertainty analysis, how large are your systems and how many 
parameters do -- DR. BLOWER:  How large are the systems -- I am 
not quite -- the system, there are about five to eight, 
depending on which model we are using, ordinary 
differential equations and they have probably about 12 parameters.  Obviously, the different models have different 
numbers of parameters.  When we do a sensitivity analysis, 

we put all of the parameters in.  What you generally find, 

though, are two or three parameters that are driving the 
whole system. PARTICIPANT:  This is a question for Steve.  In 
social network theory, one of the key difficulties they 
have always had with that literature is a goodness of fit test to determine whether or not the models that they have had for social network formation are, in fact, adequate 
descriptions of the data.  It 
seems to me that what you 
have would be a true or empirical goodness of fit The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   240240evaluation that could be useful for them and then also useful for evaluating whether or not those sort of simple 
models can be applied to the -- structures that -- disease 
spread in populations.  Would that be something fun to do? MR. EUBANK:  Yes.  Basically, I agree.  It is not 
just epidemiology.  As I mentioned we can take the 

implications of the network structure that we have, things 
like traffic or mobile communications or energy use, all 
these different areas and validate against them all. One slide I was going to show, but didn't was showing the results of the traffic simulation, which 
estimates traffic counts you would observe on different -- on particular streets in the city.  We can verify those 
against collected counts or just do simple hypothesis 
testing.  Does our traffic look like observed traffic?  But 

it turns out that depending on what we constrain for, we 
can fit to -- we can have a better fit or a much looser 
fit.  So, we could fit to traffic counts.  Works fine, but 

we might not fit to demographics of the people who are 
traveling down those roads or it might not fit to the purpose of the trip, the data that is also collected. Part of the problem we have though is the observations are so difficult to come by.  In the case of 

epidemiology, for example, I would love to work on flu and The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   241241get a typical background of flu season in the city, but the reporting requirements on flu are loose and then we need a 
model for who went to a doctor, who even let it be know 
that they had flu to anyone. It is kind of hard to convolve all that into the validation of these models. PARTICIPANT:  I have a question both to you and 
to the panel in general. When you had your contact graph, you compared it to the random graph and to the social network graphs.  We 

know how to -- general random graph.  We also know how to 

generalize the social network graphs, using -- attachment.  
We don't really have good mathematical models, it seems, to generate this kind of degree distribution for your contact 
graph.  So, my question is, one, are there ideas how one 

could generate those and, two, would it be of any use for 
antiterrorism to do so? MR. EUBANK:  To answer your second question, yes, 
I think there would be a big use for antiterrorism to do 
so. How do you generate them?  I think what I would 
need to do is understand what structural properties in the 
network are important.  Maybe it is not even a degree 

distribution that is important, but something else.  Then 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   242242turn the mathematicians and figure out to generate those kind of graphs. For instance, for the small world graphs, Strogatz and Watts decided to look at triangles, numbers of triangles in a graph compared to what you might expect in a random graph.  Once you have done that, it is easy to 

understand how to generate particular kinds of small world 
structures. PARTICIPANT:  So, what would be the structure? 
MR. EUBANK:  I don't know yet.  But that is an 
open question that I would hope mathematicians would be 
able to give me some advice on. MS. CHAYES:  You would probably also be very 
interested in some type of vertex cover because if you had 
a vertex cover, then you could go in and knock out the 

disease at those points and wipe it out.  Right?  So, that 

would be a minimal -- the cheapest, most effective way of 
wiping it out. MR. EUBANK:  These graphs -- because we have both 
people and locations, they are bipartite graphs.  If you 
could find a cover of the locations, that would guarantee you caught every person in the city or every person who was 
infected, it would be wonderful. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   243243MS. BROOME:  Although I think one of the issues 
is also separating out the different modes of disease 
transmission.  If you have got a common source outbreak 

where you have got contaminated food or contaminated water, you know, there are some diseases where a person-to-person spread and contact is important or respiratory droplet 
spread is important, but there are a number of others where 
that is not the issue. I have a question for Ken.  I was interested -- 
you know, you are applying your aberration detection tool 
to influenza-like illness and there is an obvious reason 
for that and you also do have a lot of historical comparable data.  But another approach that is taken for 
early detection is to try to pick markers that might be 
more specific.  For example, somebody who shows up in an 

emergency room with a high fever and has a blood culture 
taken might select for more high probability, more specific 
likelihood that this is at least a severe disease.  There 

are lots of other things that can present that way, but it 
might increase the yield. But obviously, you would have much less substantial background and I wondered how good your 
statistical approach was, you know, in trying to pick up 
other types of signals. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   244244MR. KLEINMAN:  Actually, I presented the talk as 
if all we were doing was anthrax surveillance.  We also 

actually run a very similar system for upper respiratory 
complaints and upper and lower gastrointestinal complaints and we get a lot more visits for upper respiratory complaints than for the lower respiratory and a lot fewer 
for either of the gastrointestinal things.  My sense is from looking at the way the models worked in the past six months when we have been running it, 
that it doesn't work as well 
for the rarer events.  The 
events that you are talking about would be rarer still.  We 

have some ideas about how we might do that kind of surveillance anyway, but they haven't been tested yet.  So, 
I don't want to say anything more about them. MS. BROOME:  But I mean I do think as a general 
statement the issue of what types of aberration detection 
approaches will be useful is going to be highly dependent 
on, you know, what you are looking for, the specificity, 
the kind of -- basically the historical data if you are 
doing time series or other sort of signal to noise ratio issues. So, you know, we have had a lot of success with detecting a particular kind of food borne disease due to 
salmonella, but in that case we actually have a bacterial The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   245245fingerprint of the particular outbreak organism and we digitize it and we can look across a national database to 
say there is an excess of that particular organism.  That 

is sort of the opposite, where you are taking a highly specific signal, even though you are trying to pick it out from a huge background. MR. KLEINMAN:  Yes.  We made the decision to 
focus on less specific traits because the turnaround time 
is so much faster.  We could wait for a lab analysis, 

assuming a lab analysis was going to be done on many people 
who showed up, which is not the case.  But we could make 

the decision to wait for that, but then we have to wait for the lab to process the data and if they have a different data entry system, we have to wait for them to actually 
enter the data.  Then it gets back 
to us.  It is three days 
after the visit.  By then, many, many more people are in 

Phase 2 of anthrax.   So, we could tailor the system to work that way, to be more sensitive. MS. BROOME:  But the test orders are in some ways 
also attractive because the timeliness may be there, but there are a lot of issues that are concealed behind all of 
the good data that you showed. Yes. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   246246PARTICIPANT:  I wanted to comment that the social 
networks graphs and the kind of distribution of 
connectivity that you show in your graphs is very closely 
related to the kind of linkage you see in the worldwide web pages and there is a heuristic that motivates that that applies to the same kind of situation you are trying to 
model.  So, it is something to go on line to look at, I 

think.   But there is a question I wanted to ask really was I work more in information security.  So, when I was 

listening to this talk, these talks, I was trying to cast 
them in the light of how can I take what you guys are studying and abstract that away and apply it to the situation of spread of infection 
among computer systems.  
This has been attempted by several people in the literature 

and I see some differences of how some of the assumptions 
and some of the things you have to deal with simply don't 

carry over, like the geographic context.   It doesn't really carry over in computer systems.  
Basically everything is connected to
 everything from our 
point of view, but there are lots of other things that do carry over and this is the thing, I think, that 
mathematicians are particularly adept at doing is trying to The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   247247abstract a way and see what commonality is there between these situations. But think about it.  It is a very similar problem 
that is also based in probably homeland security.  But, of 
course, the rate of infection spread is -- MS. BROOME:  Yes. 
PARTICIPANT:  I wanted to just take a step 
backwards and ask about the social organization of a 
concerted effort to work on some of the very difficult 
problems that I think arise in this context.  We have been 

having meetings of this type for several months now.  What 

is clear from these is that the epidemiological and surveillance questions pose serious methodological questions that have to be dealt with and I think that they 
largely have to be dealt with by interdisciplinary teams of 

researchers.  At least that is my impression. And that to really get started, you have to think about how these teams are going to be put together and 
whether it is, indeed, feasible to have people who are 
doing very successful research on their own topics, have them break away from that for awhile and work seriously on this very important issue or do we think that perhaps going 
on doing business as usual with individual researchers The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   248248communicating sort of by e-mail and phone will be sufficient to meet the challenge. Where I am coming from is the fact that what I have seen is a lot of communication like this, but no urgency to move forward and really put something together fast if it hasn't happened right away.  So, I just want to 

hear from the panel and from, indeed, the rest of the 
participants how we might begin thinking about getting 
something really going and what structures we might try to 
work on. DR. BLOWER:  I mean, I think that is very 
interesting and I do think there are lessons from -- Simon was talking about foot and mouth that occurred in the U.K., that the British Government response was to get scientists 
involved and to have teams and different teams involved 
directly with the government and focus on that. Obviously, you don't want to do that once small pox is actually happening. MR. EUBANK:  There is some problem with time 
scales.  My group is 
computer scientists, mathematicians and whatever I am, some sort of applications engineer, I 
suppose.  But the mathematicians cannot work on a 60 day 

turnaround. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   249249MR. LEVIN:  Well, in fact, there has been 
discussion of something of that sort.  There is an Academy 

report that will be coming out in a week or two and there 
is likely to be some mention of the development of new structures for that.  But I am n
ot -- that is not going to have a very mathematical focus to it.  But, I think, 

indeed, there is a need to take people out of their usual 

context and put them together for a Manhattan Project 
approach. MS. CHAYES:  But there are some structures for 
that on a small scale, like the new Bampf Research Center 
has focused research groups, where people, you know -- something on the order of five or six people can come together for a couple of weeks and work together away from 
their institutions, if you can manage to get away from your 
labs and your students and your families, but, you know -- 
which is obviously a difficult thing, but there are 
structures in the research community now, I mean, there is 
the infrastructure to respond to that in a way that there 
wasn't a few years ago.  So, maybe with the impetus of 
September 11th -- MS. KELLER-McNULTY:  Let me chime in here.  I am 
Sally Keller-McNulty on the board and also chair of CATS.  

I want to follow directly up on what Tom said.  Part of the 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   250250goal of this workshop is to get exactly at that question is that, you know, these are important problems and, you know, 
this morning we heard in the data mining session that there 
is a lot of proprietary work that is going on clearly and for good reason and things that are going on in different sectors and how do we share, but if we really want to 

energize the mathematical sciences community to try to help 
address the homeland security problems and vice-versa, we 
have to begin to address exactly what Tom said. How do we do this quickly?  You know, how do we 
find and mobilize the people to try to do these problems 
and to pull them away from their really successful research?  So, anyway, so hopefully, during the course of 
this workshop some good ideas will come out. MS. BROOME:  I would like to suggest that the way 
the research -- the workshop is set up has the potential in 
terms of you brought in folks like me, who are not 
mathematicians, but I actually spend a lot of time thinking 
about what do we need to have an effective surveillance and 
response infrastructure. But I must say this is only going to work if we, I think, think about cross disciplinary teams but think 
about what are the most likely questions or challenges to 
set them where there is likely to be a payoff.  I will pick 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   251251one where I tend to doubt it, the suggestion that maybe we do inverse modeling to find out the source of an outbreak.  

You know, to an epidemiologist, that is an intriguing 
thought, but I would much rather send out a team of epidemiologists to interview a bunch of people and find out what is going on.  We do that and we generally find the 

answer. I am not saying that -- 
PARTICIPANT:  [Comment off microphone.]  
MS. BROOME:  Talk to the FBI.  I don't think 
modeling is going to do that one either.  On the other 

hand, I have heard some -- you know, there is clearly a 
whole area around detection aberration, detection issues that Ken is addressing, but there is, as I was trying to 
indicate a much broader range of possible syndromes, as Art 
laid out, which are going to have different challenges, let 
alone as was alluded to in the data mining session, you 
know, you have got to have the data to apply these to.  So, 

there is some highly applied questions in having data 
available electronically so that these wonderful tools can be used. We are sort of working on that side by trying to get down to the nitty-gritty with clinical information 
technology systems to say what data can we get tomorrow The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   252252that then might be used for these kinds of -- to validate 
how useful these different approaches might be.  I think, 

obviously, Sally has given a very concrete example of how 
policy decisions on vaccine usage could be approached with modeling.  There is a very active debate on the use of small pox on the vaccinia vaccine or other new vaccines that 
benefit from that kind of a quantitative approach.  So, 

those are just some things I would throw out as focus areas 
that are -- you know, would benefit from -- MR. TONDEUR:  I want to return to the idea of the 
infrastructure for this and I want to say two avenues within the Division of Mathematical Science.  One is 
focused research groups, which are specifically to address 
such issues and the other is an institute we plan to fund 

attached to the American Institute for Mathematics, which 

is specifically targeted to have group focused workshops, 
which actually do the work, where you can assemble teams 
from different disciplines. MS. CHAYES:  I have got one more area, which kind 
of came up, I think, in Simon's talk, which is games theory.  What I have seen happening in network research is 

that for awhile people were just looking at the structure 
of networks like the Internet or the worldwide web and now The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   253253they are overlaying game theory on that.  So, some cost 
benefit analysis or some protocol analysis on top of that 
and if you want to try to implement some of the things that 
Sally is talking about, you might want, rather than just looking at the differential equations, to take one of Steve's networks and then, you know, put on a game theory 
functional that would give you some cost benefit analysis 
on top of that and see how that -- what the results of that 
are. I think that that is an area of mathematics that 
people are just starting to look at for networks for the 
Internet and the worldwide web and it would probably also be very useful in this context. MR. LEVIN:  The fact that the networks are  in 
some sense adaptive, that as you make interventions, the 
networks will change in some of the directions.  So, for 

example, if you remove a focal vertex that in the case of a 
sexually transmitted disease or prostitute another note 
becomes crucial.  MR. TONDEUR:  When you say games theory, I sort 
of -- if I were a terrorist, I would do the following game theoretic approach.  I would say how would I achieve the 

maximum damage.  But then that means we should probably 

play that same game and say, okay, so if I were a The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   254254terrorist, how would I achieve the maximum damage, then how can we protect against. PARTICIPANT:  They don't always think that way.  
Remember, the main thing, how do they achieve the maximum terror, not the maximum damage.  There is a difference 
between those. PARTICIPANT:  That could be a measure of damage. 
MS. CHAYES:  It is a different function. 
MR. LEVIN:  I just don't want people to think 
about this problem in just the way, you know, how many 
people are going to die.  That is not the only way -- MS. CHAYES:  Right.  Well, the anthrax certainly 
didn't kill a lot of people, but it terrorized people, but that is just a different -- I mean, if you want to model, 
that is a different functional for your game theoretic. MR. LEVIN:  That is right, but the point I was 
making is that for either side, the point would be how do I 
achieve the maximum damage or terror given that the 
response is likely to be this.  Do I assume that -- or how 

do I, if I am interested in response system, create a response system based on the fact that the terrorists are going to respond to my response system.  So, those are the 

-- what makes it a game theoretic problem. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   255255DR. BLOWER:  I think the thing -- if somebody 
said that they had released small pox and alerted all the 
news media that Washington and New York and San Francisco 
had now been contaminated and the cases were going to -- that could bluff the government into doing a mass vaccination campaign that would do more harm than good.  

So, they wouldn't actually have to do anything, just alert 
the media and the response could be worse than -- I think 
this needs to be thought about. MR. MC CURLEY:  I would like to ask one other 
question on the detection, only speaking about detection at 
the level of people getting sick.  There are more automated 
systems that are looking at more pathogenic agents.  We can 
feed into the data mining thing.  I don't know how 

practical it is.  My understanding was at the Olympics that 

we did have some sort of detectors going for anthrax and 
other things. MR. KLEINMAN:  I know the Department of Defense 
is doing that sort of thing.  They have sniffing machines. MS. BROOME:  I think, again, it comes back to the 
specificity and the predictive value of a positive.  I 
mean, just during the Gulf War, there were enumerable 
alerts of gas that worked as false positives.  You know, I 

think there are some fundamental parameters defining the The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   256256characteristics of these tools that we have to pay tremendous attention to. MR. MC CURLEY:  -- way of merging the first 
session on data mining -- get rid of these delays. MS. BROOME:  There is a lot of interest in that 
and I think a lot of research ongoing, but it is actually a 
real challenge.  I mean, in many of these settings, as has 

been noted before, you basically have to have a specificity 

of a hundred percent to have a useful tool. MR. EUBANK:  If I could make a comment about the 
practicalities of getting mathematicians involved in these 
research areas, we have a curiosity-driven research model.  
So, that means that my goal is trying to convince mathematicians that the problems we have are interesting for them to work and that they should be curious about 
them.  But if there is some way to drive research based on 

our problems, I think it would be worth exploring because 
it is not -- I think the problems are interesting, but I 
don't always get agreement from the people I am trying to 
convince. MS. BROOME:  Okay.  We are over time.  I am 
looking at folks in terms of -- take a couple more 
questions?  Need to break?  Quickly. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   257257MR. MC CURLEY:  I wanted to ask how many people 
here have a degree in mathematics? DR. BLOWER:  Mine is in biology. 
MR. MC CURLEY:  So, this is a question that you 
are really -- how do you get mathematicians to interact.  
This is actually very rare for mathematicians to interact 
this way with other scientists. MR. TONDEUR:  [Comment off microphone.]  
[Multiple discussions.]  
MR. AGRAWAL:  [Comment off microphone.]  
MS. CHAYES:  Those are the things you -- that is 
the mathematics you want to look at. MR. AGRAWAL:  [Comment off microphone.]  MS. CHAYES:  Collaboration of whom? 
MR. AGRAWAL:  [Comment off microphone.]  
MS. CHAYES:  Surveillance. 
PARTICIPANT:  [Comment off microphone.]  
MR. AGRAWAL:  [Comment off microphone.]  
MS. BROOME:  I think one of the issues that Art 
and I could spend a lot of time talking about is the complexities and the varieties of surveillance.  For 
traditional public health surveillance because it includes 
individual identities, it doesn't lend itself to wide open, 
although certainly the project that I am managing actually The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   258258is just getting us on the web for doing traditional surveillance and interfacing with hospitals.  But there are 

also other applications where we do, for example, we are 
looking at doing kind of survey stuff we do over the Internet so that there is group participation. Then there is some fairly substantial data sets that are put together, for example, of pharmacy data that 
is de-identified.  But most of these are -- you know, they 

rely on a number of collaborators.  I don't think it is the 

sort of mass computing platform you are thinking about. MR. AGRAWAL:  [Comment off microphone.]  
MS. BROOME:  We have thought about trying to -- 
for example, for our web site, trying to also have two-way communication, where we can record incoming information 
from physicians or the public.  So, you know, I think there 

is a lot of interest in seeing what could be done with 
that.  But, again, there is complexities when you get down 

to individually identifiable data that we have to be very 
conscious of. MS. CHAYES:  Do you want the ten minute break 
now? MS. BROOME:  Okay. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   259259MS. CHAYES:  Also, one other thing, everyone who 
is giving a presentation, please give us a copy of your 
transparencies or your power point presentations. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   260260Remarks on Detection and Epidemiology of Bioterrorist Attacks   Arthur Reingold    Disease surveillance is a systematic ongoing collection, analysis, and dissemination of 
health data, with findings linked to actions in the decision-making process. With regard 
to bioterrorism, Dr. Reingold and his colleague
s would like to have a system in place to 
permit them to detect illnesse
s quickly and then be in a position to respond rapidly to keep morbidity and mortality to a minimum. 

  
While the 2001 anthrax attacks generated a lot of concern about detection and rapid 
response to outbreaks, the public-health commun
ity comes to bioterrorism detection and 
response with a good deal of relevant experience. Generally, it detects outbreaks because an astute patient or family member notices th
em: ﬁGee, aren™t a lot 
of us who ate at the church supper all vomiting at more or less 
the same time?ﬂ Similarly, the community 
learns a lot about outbreaks from astute clinicians who 
recognize they™re seeing more 
cases of an illness than they should be seeing and are smart e
nough to let the health department know about that. 

  
However, public health workers rarely detect outbreaks. Therefore, the goal is to see if 
they can be a larger part of this detection process, as opposed to waiting for clinicians and patients to tell them about the problem. 

  
People are working in various ways to improve
 surveillance for the detection of bioterror events. One approach is to mon
itor visits to health-care provi
ders, particularly outpatient visits, emergency-department visits, clini
cal-microbiology laboratories, and indicators 
such as 911 calls, over-the-counter drug sales, and absenteeism at work and at school. Some people are even considering direct m
onitoring of samples of the population through 
Nielsen rating-type setups, in which a large group of individuals is routinely answering 
questionnaires over the Internet. 
  
Three criteria will help us 
judge a proposed system:  
   Sensitivity. Of all the outbreaks that o
ccur, what proportion of them will be 
predicted by this system?  
 Specificity. Of all the times there is not
 an outbreak, what proportion of the time 
will the system tell us there is not an outbreak? 
 The predictive value of a positive. Of all the times the system tells us there is an 
outbreak, what proportion of the time is it right? 
  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   261261Roberta Lenczowski
 ﬁIntroduction by Session Chairﬂ  
Transcript of Presentation  
Summary of Presentation 
Video Presentation 
  Roberta E. Lenczowski is technical director, National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA), in 
Bethesda, Maryland. Ms. Lenczowski earned her B.A.
 in philosophy from Creighton University in 
1963. She completed her M.A. in philosophy from
 St. Louis University in 1970. In November 
1977, Ms. Lenczowski began her professional care
er with the Defense Mapping Agency, now the 
National Imagery and Mapping Agency. She has held numerous technical and supervisory 

positions before her appointment as technical director in 2001. 
 The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   262262DR. LENCZOWSKI:  To try to get this session started, albeit 
a little bit late, but I know that the discussions have 
been very enthusiastic, very, very interesting. One of our speakers, Dr. Rabiner, has to leave by 
quarter to 6:00.  So, I don't want to do a whole lot of 
introduction with respect to my background.  Suffice it to 

say, I am from the National Imagery and Mapping Agency.  As 

a result, I have a very vested interest in understanding 
imagery analysis. So, based upon the short abstracts I have read for each of these speakers, I know that things they are 
going to say will be very relevant to work that we do 
within the agency.  So, I will introduce each of the 
speakers.  I will give you a little bit of an insight, a 

tickler, if you will, in terms of what their topic is. When they have completed then, of course, we will open this to a discussion and an exchange. Our first speaker is Dr. Malik.  He, in fact, 
received his Ph.D. in computer science from Stanford 
University in 1985.  In 1986, he joined the faculty of the 
Computer Science Division in the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at the University of 
California in Berkeley, where he is currently a professor.   The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   263263For those of you who are not familiar with his background, his research interests are in computer vision 
and computational modeling of human vision.  His work spans 

the range of topics in vision, including image segmentation, in grouping texture, stereopsis, object recognition, imagery-based modeling and rendering, content-
based imagery querying and intelligent vehicle highway 
systems.  He has authored or co-authored more than a hundred research papers on these topics.  So, he is an 

incredible asset to the discussion as we continue.   I need to point out that in my own background since the very early eighties, I have been following the work that has gone on in the community that I am 
predominantly from, that being the mapping side of the 
National Imagery and Mapping Agency and have watched as we 
have attempted to have insights in terms of some of the 
research issues of automatic or what we refer to now as 
assisted feature recognition or automated or assisted 
target recognition. So, one of the things that Dr. Malik plans to talk about in terms of recognizing the objects and the actions is 
analyzing images with the objective of recognizing those objects or those activities in the scene that is being The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   264264imaged.  As we get into some of the later discussion 
period, hopefully I will have an opportunity to provide 
some more descriptive information about why this is so 
relevant to the business that we are in and how that, in 
fact, is of great support with respect to the core topic here of homeland security. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   265265Introduction by Session Chair 
 Roberta Lenczowski 
 Dr. Lenczowski introduced herself as a scientist from the National Imagery and Mapping 
Agency who has a very vested interest in understanding imagery an
alysis. Recognizing objects and actions means analyzing images
 with the objective of recognizing those objects or those activities in th
e scene that is being imaged. 
Such analysis is important 
with respect to the core 
topic of homeland security. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   266266Jitendra Malik   ﬁComputational Visionﬂ 
 
Transcript of Presentation  
Summary of Presentation 
Power Point Slides 

Video Presentation 
  Jitendra Malik was born in Mathura, India, in
 1960. He received a B.Tech. degree in electrical 
engineering from the Indian Institute of Tech
nology, Kanpur, in 1980 and a Ph.D. degree in 
computer science from Stanford University in 1985. 
In January 1986, he joined the University of 
California at Berkeley, where he 
is currently the Arthur J. Ch
ick Endowed Professor of EECS and 
the associate chair for the Computer
 Science Division. He is also on the faculty of the Cognitive 
Science and 
Vision Science groups. 
His research interests are in computer vision 
and the computational modeling of human vision. 
His work spans a range of topics in vision, including image segmentation and grouping, texture, 

stereopsis, object recognition, image-based modeling and rendering, content-based image 
querying, and intelligent vehicle highw
ay systems. He has authored or 
coauthored more than a 
hundred research papers on these topics. 
He received the gold medal for the best graduati
ng student in electrical engineering from IIT 
Kanpur in 1980, a Presidential Young Invest
igator Award in 1989, and the Rosenbaum 
Fellowship for the Computer Vision Programme at 
the Newton Institute of Mathematical Sciences, 
University of Cambridge, in 1993. He received 
the Diane S. McEntyre Award for Excellence in 
Teaching from the Computer Science Division, Univ
ersity of California at Berkeley, in 2000. He 
was awarded a Miller Research Professorship in 
2001. He serves on the editorial boards of the 
International Journal of Computer Vision
 and the Journal of Vision
 and on the scientific advisory 
board of the Pacific Institute for the 
Mathematical Sciences. 
 The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   267267DR. MALIK:  Thank you, Dr. Lenczowski. Let's begin at the beginning.  How do we get 
these images and what do I mean by images?  So, the first 

thing to realize is that images arise from a variety of sources and they could be volumetric images, just 2D images, images over time.  So, of course, we have our 

economical example of optical images, which are getting to 
be extremely cheap and extremely high resolution.  There 

are going to be zillions of these devices everywhere, 
whether we like it or not. But I also wanted to mention other modalities, which are for their own advantages.  So, x-ray machines so 
when you walk through the airport, but those are not tomography machines, but they increasingly will be and thus 
they will give access to 3D data.  This may be of great 

relevance and automated techniques for detecting weapons, 
explosives and so on.   There are rain sensors, which give you not just information about the brightness coming back, but also 
directly depths.  We refer to this as 2.5(b) data, because 
it is not the full volume.  You could have infrared sensors 
and no doubt many other exotic techniques are constantly 
being developed.   The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   268268I won't talk about the reconstruction part of the problem.  I assume that we have the images and let's 

process them further.  So, this is the coal problem.  We 

start off with -- it is just a collection of big -- with some attributes and some spatial, XY, XYZ, XYZT, whatever.  
But we want to able to say in -- and I am going to use 

examples from optical images but many of the techniques do 

carry over.  That is a problem.  How do we do this? That is a recognition problem.  So, when we look 
at this image, we all recognize it.  Maybe it is because 

you have been to the Louvre.  Maybe
 it is because this 
image is splattered over a zillion places.  But probably 
you have not seen him before.  S
o, I wish to argue that -- to identify that something is a face, doesn't rely on you 
having seen that specific face and, of course, you have 
varieties.   So, the key point to note is that recognition is at weighting levels of specificity.  There is at a category 

level, faces, cards.  There is specific process, Mona Lisa, 

or it could be a specific person in a specific expression. The second key point and this is a very important 
one is that we want to recognize objects in spite of 
certain kinds of radiation, radiation such as changes in 
pose.  You can look at the person from different 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   269269viewpoints.  Changes in lighting and -- images, you would 
have occlusion.  There would be clutter and there will be 

objects hiding each other. This is why just thinking of it as a traditional 
statistical classification problem is not quite adequate because in that framework, some of these radiations due to 
geometry and lighting, which are very systematic, which 
result from the -- of physics, they are treated as noise 
and that may not be the right thing to do.  So, that is 

about objects.  But we can talk about action recognition as 

well, particularly when we have video data, whatever. Just a collection of common English words that are really associated with actions, so you can read the 
list there.  They involve movement and posture change, 

object manipulation, conversational gesture and moving the 
hands about, sign language and so on.  Certainly, we can 

recognize these as well.   So, how shall we do this?  So, what I am going to 
do in this talk is sort of -- our way through this area and 
at a later part, I am going to mostly talk about work and approaches taken in my group, but I wanted to make the survey sort of inclusive.  So, initially, I am going to 

talk about face recognition.  I want to mention -- why do I 

pick faces?  Faces are really just another class of object.  
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   270270So, in principle, the same techniques apply.  However, it 
is a very special and very important domain.  It has been 

argued that a baby at the age of one day -- and there have 
been experiments which have argued that at age 15 -- can distinguish a face from a non-face.  It may, in fact, be 
already hard-wired into the vision system. There has been a lot of work in the last ten years and the implications for surveillance and so forth 
are obvious.  So, it is worth taking that specialty.  So, 

this is work from Carnegie Mellon University.  So, there 

are now pretty good techniques for doing face detection.  

That has to be the first problem.  You start out with some 
image and you want to find that set of pixels, which are -- to a face.  So, that is the face detection problem. I am sure they picked apropos examples here.  You 
can try this detecting yourself.  You can select any 

photograph you like and see the results of the algorithm.  

I think this is currently the best algorithm in the 
business because it works for faces and a variety of views 
and does it reasonably well. This gives you sort of an idea of what the performance is like.  So, the performance is 94 percent 

detection rate on this with false detection every two The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   271271images.  This is the current state of the art.  No doubt 
things could be improved. Okay.  So, that is what you can do to try to find 
faces.  But now you want to 
say whose face is it.  Is it 
Nixon's face or Clinton's face?  So, here what I am going 
to do is to just report 
results from a study, which was 
carried out a couple of years ago and the person who did 
this study or was a leader in the study is Jonathan 
Phillips, who is actually back in the room.  So, any 

detailed questions, he is the one to ask. This -- become commercial, which unfortunately always complicates things because now scientific claims get mixed up with commercial interests and so on and so forth.  
Anyway, here is a study, which -- systems from different 
vendors.   So, the key issue here is you will take some picture of a person at some time.  You are not going to act 

when you finally try to identify that person in a crowd.  

The person is not going to obligingly present his or her 
face in exactly the same pose, exactly the same lighting with exactly the same hairdo, with exactly the same state of wrinkledness or lack thereof.  So, you have to consider 

this recognition in spite of these variations. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   272272So, here the experimenter -- a gallery of 200 people.  So, even though you can have exactly the same 

pose, at which point the accuracy -- pretty good.  You can 

see that the face is slightly angled in each of these.  At 
25 degrees -- performance has dropped to 68 percent.  And 
at 45 degrees, it is at 30 percent.  So, basically it is 

useless at this stage. So, basically what we are 
talking -- radiation 
plus, minus, 20, 25 degrees.  This is starting from frontal 

views.  People at CMU(?) have done a -- they tell me that 

the results from side views are even worse.  The degree for 

the variation that you can tolerate becomes even smaller.  
So, this is the reality and the reason is that the techniques are primarily two dimensional.  So, they don't 

deal with a -- variation in any serious way. PARTICIPANT:  How about if you have -- 
DR. MALIK:  If you have multiple views.  Yes.  
So, the CMU people claim that -- because the frontal view 
is actually the most generalizable view.  That gives you 

this essentially 45 degree cone.  From the side view, the 
generalization cone is smaller.  We can get into in more 
detail later. So, this is a question about illumination radiation and here again there is a drop here, from 91 The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   273273percent to 55 percent with different kinds of lighting.  
This is radiation -- distance, but let's move on. So, here, this is sort of a summary slide, which 
shows how the performance -- so, this is performance, how it drops with radiation and pose.  Radiation and indoor 
versus outdoor lighting, different differences and then the 
same person over differing time intervals.  You know, the 

same person -- one year, two years. So, I think the moral of the story is that face recognition is not a solved problem.  If any propaganda had 

told you, so please disabuse yourself of this notion.  But 

there has been concrete progress, without quantifiable measurable results, but the issues of generalization, in 
particular, generalization to -- pose, dealing with the 
quality of data you might expect with surveillance cameras.  

These are all real issues and there is plenty of scientific 
work to be done on this problem.  It is not a solved 

problem yet. Okay.  Let's move on.  So, 
now I want to talk about general object recognition and this is, again, a huge topic and I am going to use the typical caveat, which is -- approach and not necessarily the final approach, so on and 

so forth. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   274274Okay.  So, here is the philosophy first.  How do 
we deal with object recognition?  I think the key issue is 

dealing with shape availability.  That is the bottom line.  

How do we recognize an object?  These are -- faces -- or 
fish.  We identify them as the same category, even though 
they are not identical.  The person who -- and now how do 

we think about this.  There is a standard statistical way 

of thinking about this.  You construct a feature vector.  

You have some training examples and then you sort of model 
the variation.  So that would require that you -- the 

problem into that framework, which means you take shapes 
and make them into feature vectors. This is not necessarily a good thing because you are losing the -- structure of the problem and you will 
come up with some feature vectors, like moments or whatever 
and they will often not capture all the aspects of the 
problem.  There will be arbitrariness. How should we think about this?  D'Arcy Thompson, 
nearly a hundred years ago, had a very good insight about 
this problem and he said that while it may be difficult to characterize shape, variability and shape may be easier if we think of it this way, that there is this grid here and 
what this grid is supposed to indicate is that there are 
spatial transformations, which transform one of these The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   275275shapes to this other shape.  You can see that with the 
face.  And this transform is obviously a non-linear 

transform.  I mean, you could imagine simple rotation and 

translation, but we have to go beyond that.  Now, this 
transform could be -- we then considered this variation model in terms of transformation and when we want to say is 
this possibly the same -- in the same category, we put 
probability distributions on the space of transformations. These will be around an operating point, which is the -- shape and this gets us out of this fundamental issue 
of how do we define shape in this general way.  Now, I 

think mathematicians have studied shape for quite some time, but they basically have this notion of equivalence plus and we really need this notion of similar but not the 
same.  That needs a fair amount of work. MS. CHAYES:  So, what are the kinds of 
transformations that you allow?  I mean, obviously, you are 

not allowing everything. DR. MALIK:  I will talk about it. 
So, this actually -- so, this philosophy is broadly called the deformable template philosophy and there has been a fair amount of work on it and -- has sort of 
pioneered this approach, but in his work, there are two 

issues in all of this, which is one -- statistical The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   276276efficiency, optimality estimation.  There are questions 
like that.  There are questions of geometry and -- 

questions of computational efficiency and algorithms.  All 

of these need to be sort 
of factored and tracked at the same time.  Otherwise you don't have a workable approach. So, a key issue here is the issue of correspondence.  If I want to estimate a transformation, so 

these two A's are the same, but to estimate the 
transformation, I must know what each point was.  How do I 

find that out?  Okay.  So, that is the so-called 

correspondence problem and that -- if we can do that, then 
the second problem is this transformation problem. So, the first problem essentially is more a discrete -- algorithm kind of problem.  The second problem 

is a more traditional continuous mathematics kind of 
problem and this is often the case that there is this 
mixture of discrete type stuff and continuous type stuff 
and we have to play in both these games. PARTICIPANT:  It is not clear to me that you have 
to -- I mean, I might be wrong, but tell me why -- why 
can't I just say I look at such information such that the image -- is that --  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   277277DR. MALIK:  Computationally it could be -- 
basically you will wind up doing gradient -- space, which 
is non-convex and you will get stuck at a local minimum. Suppose we represent a shape by a collection of -- I basically won't tell you how we do this, but it ultimately comes down to attaching to each point some 
descripter which sort of captures a relative arrangement of 
the rest of the shape with respect to that point and then 

trying to -- so, shape is essentially relative 
configuration of the rest of the points with respect to you 
and two points are to be matched if they have similar 
relative configurations.  So, you can sort of formalize 
that in some way. Based on what is called an assignment problem or a bipartite matching problem and we will skip the details 
here.  Okay.  So, let's say we 
have done that.  Now we talk 
about the problem of estimating the transformation.  So, 

here is where -- now I can answer your question.  So, 

estimating the transformation, the transformation cannot be 
arbitrary.  You basically wanted to -- you wanted to be 
plus but not an arbitrary -- you want to somehow penalize ones which are non-smooth and -- but that smoothness has to 
be --  MS. CHAYES:  So, there is a cost -- 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   278278DR. MALIK:  Yes.  So, the next slide will tell 
you what the cost function is.  So, essentially what we use 

is a templex(?) prime model.  So, there will be some set of 

points at which you know the correspondence and now which -- how do you interpolate?  Well, a very natural model is a 
tenplex prime model, in which case there is a certain cost 
function, which is -- energy and you can solve this in a 
fairly natural way. So, the next slide actually will give you an example of this.  So, here is what I am trying to do.  I 

have this unknown shape.  I don't know what it is.  My rule 

is going to be if I can take one of my model shapes, which 
I know.  I know that kind of fish.  I will try to deform it 
to line up with this.  If I succeed, well, then I am 

probably working. MS. CHAYES:  How sensitive is this to the cost 
function?  If I change the cost function, will I -- a 

little bit, will I dramatically change the output or -- DR. MALIK:  There is continuity, yes. 
PARTICIPANT:  How do you know to choose the 
model? DR. MALIK:  I will try each model in turn and 
then whichever one will match the best is what I would The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   279279declare to be the result.  You don't want a linear search 
through all the models.  But I won't get into that now. The grid here is trying to indicate the transform.  The grid is like a gauge figure to show you the 
transform.  It is really two steps.  One is a discrete -- 
step.  One is a continuous transform estimation step.  As 

you see in the  
-- you can see that it essentially stabilizes effectively 
of the formed shape to be like this one. PARTICIPANT:  So, is it corresponds that you 
should match, that two points should have the same --  DR. MALIK:  No, it is a bit more complicated than 
that.  You don't want it to be just an XY thing.  You want 
it to somehow be more in some way between geometric and 
topological but that is a meaningless statement, I can see. MR. AGRAWAL:  [Comment off microphone.]  
DR. MALIK:  No, that separation of the -- and you 
can do it in either version.  You can essentially define a 

local frame from the direction of -- and you can orient 
everything with respect to that.  But that will be with a 
middle reflection problem, but it will be with small rotations. We took this approach and -- with this approach we showed that we can do this for a variety of different The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   280280domains and this is important because, again, the tradition of object recognition work has been that it takes a lot of 
engineering and hard work to really make it succeed in any 
domain.  So, digit recognition, you work on it for ten 
years.  You want to do printed circuit board inspection, 
the same thing. Now, this is not a scalable solution because if we want to approach the level of 10,000 objects, hundred 
thousand objects, you really need one general technique, which you could then clean up with appropriate data to work 
in many different settings.  This approach seems to have 

that characteristic. Digit recognition is a classic problem in this domain, that people have worked on it for, you know, many 
years and there is this data set where every technique 
known to man or at least to statisticians has been tried.  

We had nothing special on this and we -- an error rate 

which is probably not significantly better but at least as 

good with a completely -- technique and I think tuned for 
digits with much less training data. These are actually all the errors and if you look 
through them carefully, you will find that some of these 
even you as a human will get drunk.  This data set is 

digits written by high school students and -- two sets.  
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   281281There is a subset from USPS employees and a subset from high school students.  The USPS employees, everybody can do 

them.  It is the high school students who create problems. Here is how to do 3D 
objects.  A crude way of 
doing it is to store multiple views and do the matting.  
There are techniques by which you can select automatically 
how many views that you need.  Here the performance can be 

judged this way.  The tradeoff is between having many 

views, in which you can do the problem easily and having 
few views and yet having a good error rate.  The point is 

that even with an error rate with -- with those full view 
for objects, we could get an error rate of 2.5 percent. MS. CHAYES:  How come that is not monotone? DR. MALIK:  Well, there is some sampling issue 
there.  There is some stochastic processes involved in the 

selection of the view. So, here is an example in a more difficult type of domain.  So, now we are moving towards talking about 

action recognition.  You want to identify people and what 

action they perform.  Now, identifying people really -- if 
you have enough resolution on them really implies knowing their body parts, meaning knowing all their drugs.  So, on 

this figure you want to -- you want to be able to -- right 

shoulder, left shoulder, et cetera, et cetera.  If you can 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   282282do that, then you can -- it turns out that the same approach works, except that you must use an appropriate 
information model. This shows some results and this is from a -- this is from a Japanese, this tradition of comic books.  
So, they have these -- a variety of causes -- these artists 
to copy from -- a stick figure model from a single image 

and the reason you can do this is because of 
anthropometrical strengths.  You know all the names of the 

body parts, essentially provide you an equivalent of a 
second view. This is an example of -- if you move the mouse -- so, this is a sequence of -- what is being done in -- a stick figure is being identified.  This -- the question of 

recognizing actions.  This is what we mean by action 

recognition. I want to point out that actions are -- the -- action is in a very early stage.  I mean, there has been 

work done by others in the community, but usually you do 
distinguish between two classes of action.  Actions are to  -- a hierarchy and this is an area which really needs to be explored.  Think of the action of withdrawing money from an 

ATM.  It is in fact a sequence of steps, but the sequence 

of steps need not always be executed in exactly the same The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   283283order.  It is really there is a partial order plan, which 
is -- here and multiple agents could be involved in this. So, this is very relevant because if we want to talk about situation assessment, that is really this -- I want to just remind you that the problems are actually quite isomorphic.  More or less -- idea really applies in 

space time as well as in space. The cues are both static as well as dynamic.  So, 
in some sense the -- and the dynamics and when you want to 
recognize action, this is all just based on the movement of 
my body but what objects are manipulated.  So, object 

recognition and activity recognition is coupled.  The fact 
that I am writing with a pen -- so, the philosophy that we can try to do this by recovering -- I will conclude here.  

This is my final slide. So, it should be obvious that there are zillions of challenges for mathematicians and statisticians in this 
business.  It is a fundamental problem.  Thirty percent of 

the brain is devoted to -- it has evolved through a million 
years.  There is an arms race between animals, trying to 
camouflage animals, trying to detect and break through camouflage. Just a few of the problems.  Shape, modeling 
shape radiation.  Shape is a fundamental problem.  The 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   284284field of geometry and mathematics is all about shape.  But 
here is a question that is similarity.  How do we define 

similarity in that.  This is our fundamental problem.  The 

statistician viewpoint together with the algorithmic viewpoint because, for example -- had a great -- construct 
on how to think about -- because you claim that you have a 
optimization problem and then you can't solve it.  Doesn't 

get you too far. I should, again, return to my -- I should return 
to the beginning.  I -- optical images, but that is not the 

only imaging modality.  The more exotic imaging modalities 

you have more fundamental questions of how to produce -- 
the question of reconstruction.  Thank you. [Applause.]  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   285285Computational Vision
  Jitendra Malik   Recognition by computational vision may be carried
 out at varying levels of specificity. It 
can involve searching for any face, a type 
of face, a specific person™s face, a specific 
person with a specific expression, or a person performing a certain activity.  Major 
challenges in recognition relate to detecting objects despite ﬁradiation,ﬂ which includes changes in pose, hair, lighting, viewpoint, distance, and age.  
These are two approaches to the problem of 
shape variability.  One 
possibility would be to divide a particular shape into com
ponents and perform comparisons between two 
shapes component-wise.  A second would be to view the two shapes of interest as shapes 
on a basic grid that indicates spatial transformations and determine if there is a 
transformation mapping one 
shape to the other. 
 
For the future, researchers are moving toward
 the problem of acti
on recognitionŠthat is, identifying people and the action they are performing. Current approa
ches draw from the above techniques, but the work is in a very early stage. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   286286Ronald Coifman   ﬁMathematical Challenges for R
eal-Time Analysis of Imaging Dataﬂ  
Transcript of Presentation  
Summary of Presentation  
Power Point Slides 

Video Presentation 
 Ronald Coifman joined the mathematics and computer
 science faculty at Yale University in 1980. 
His research interests include nonlinear Fourier analysis, wavelet theory, singular integrals, 
numerical analysis and scattering theory, real 
and complex analysis, and new mathematical tools 
for efficient computation and transcriptions of
 physical data, with applications to numerical 
analysis, feature extraction recognition, and denoising. He is currently developing analysis tools 
for spectrometric diagnostic
s and hyperspectral imaging. 
Dr. Coifman is a member of the American Ac
ademy of Arts and Sciences, the Connecticut 
Academy of Science and Engineering, and the Natio
nal Academy of Sciences. He is a recipient 
of the 1996 DARPA Sustained Excellence Award,
 the 1996 Connecticut Science Medal, the 1999 
Pioneer Award of the International Society fo
r Industrial and Applied Science, and the 1999 
National Medal of Science. 
Dr. Coifman was the Phillips Profes
sor of Mathematics License en
 Sciences Mathematiques in 
1962 and received his Ph.D. from the University of Geneva in 1965. 
  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   287287DR. LENCZOWSKI:  While we do the conversion to 
the next speaker's presentation, let me introduce Dr. 
Coifman.  He is the professor of -- the Phillips Professor 

of Mathematics at Yale University.  He received his Ph.D. 
from the University of Geneva in 1965.  Prior to coming to 
Yale in 1980, he was professor of Washington University in 
St. Louis, one of my alma maters.  So, great regard for his 

work. Professor Coifman is currently leading a research program to develop new mathematical tools for the efficient 
transcription of physical data with applications to future 
extraction, recognition and denoising. He was chairman of the Yale Mathematics Department from 1986 until 1989.  Today his topic, the 

mathematical challenges for real time analysis of imaging 
data, is caught in the first statement of his abstract, 
where he points out that the range of task to be achieved 

by imaging systems designed to monitor, detect and track 
objects require a performance comparable to the perception 
capabilities of an eye.  Such vision systems are still 
beyond our capabilities. A couple of days ago, I had a couple of contractors come in and we were doing a briefing and 
describing the fact that despite all the work we have done The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   288288with knowledge management and knowledge engineering and artificial intelligence, that to date, even best computer 

is only comparable to the brain of a cat.  So, clearly, you 

have the challenge. DR. COIFMAN:  I would like to actually describe 
an experiment that I am involved in but -- and raise and 

describe the various mathematical challenges that come 
along the way.  You will see that most of what we discussed 

this morning about data mining occurs immediately in the 
context of imaging and understanding imaging and trying to 
extract features from the images.  Images you might think 

of are just what the camera gets but they are really as we have seen in the preceding talk are really quite a bit more complex. So, as we heard, I mean, what we really want to be able to do with an imaging system is to detect objects, 
track them, monitor for objects and basically we want to do 
what we do with our eye.  Unfortunately, a camera is not an 

eye, as I said.  A camera measures something for each 

individual pixel.  Then you hand it on to a computer and 
the computer would -- hopefully you will have a decent algorithm to get something out of it. This is really not what we do with our eyes and I will indicate a system that allows you to resemble more to The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   289289an eye than to a camera and the system is basically mathematics converted to hardware.  That is, I think, 

another challenge that will happen. I think that future 
devices will have the mathematics much more integrated in them because of existence of new technology like MEMS(?), which allows you to control on a micro level analogue data.  

So, we will see.  We will get to that. The main obstruction to everything is what we heard this morning, but I would like to maybe describe a 
little bit the mathematical problems or basically our 
inadequacy to handle the kind of data streams that we are 
collecting.  So, problem No. 1 is we really don't have any 
tools to describe in any efficient fashion high dimension 
geometric structures.  So, we heard this morning about 

having a variety of parameters, which have to be looked at 
as a multivariate system of parameters and then we want to 
have a probability distribution describing probabilities of 
various events, but we have no tool to describe the actual 
support of those probability distributions or just have an efficient way of describing the geometry underlying that. In fact, we don't even know what the word "geometry" means.  You know, just a few years ago it was 

Komolgorov, who made the observation that there are other The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   290290objects in traditional geometries, which are very useful.  
In fact, I think our task is really to follow that path and 
identify structures as they arise in nature as we confront 

them and the structures are not that simple. The second problem -- the second issue is that it 
might seem a little silly, but we really -- all the 
algorithms that we have are really exponential in their 
dimension.  So, if you are already in Dimension 10, you are 

dead.  We deal with things, which are much higher 

dimensions. Even simpler than that, we don't know how to approximate ordinary functions, which are given to us as empirically, as functions of some parameters.  So, to give 
an example, you have a blood test.  You will get ten 

chemicals being measured and you want to approximate the 
function, which tells you the state of your health in any 
sort of way.  I am not aware of any mathematical algorithm 

capable of doing this efficiently and giving you any sort 
of information. What we need is, of course, structuring clusters, a structural clustering tool.  We have to know what the 
word "structure" means and I will try and indicate how we 
get into that.  Again, what I just said, in notions of 

geometric structures are really limited.  Our imagination 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   291291is rather dull and we have to have nature sort of inspire us. Last but not least, probably the most important part of this at this point in terms of practical application in order to take those ideas and have them work is we need to have efficient digital representations of the 
massive data sets that we have been talking about.   So, what I would like to -- there is just one idea I want to convey today in some sense.  That 

compression, which is basically an efficient representation 
of data is a key ingredient in everything that one wants to 
do.  I mean, you may think of compression as something that 
multimedia people do in order to transmit something on the 
line, but actually compression is basically an outcome 
razor-type principle.  If you can compress and describe 

data very efficiently, you have a model.  Having a model 

means that you basically are way ahead of this. So, a good test is actually -- so, in many cases, right, the fact that we cannot store the data is really an 
indication that we are just -- we just don't understand it.  
It is a real paradigm -- it is a real guidance.  Over the 
last few years we have seen a lot of -- there have been 
many developments about trying to represent objects with minimum complexity. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   292292David Donoho recently wrote a beautiful paper showing that if you have a minimum complexity description 
of a set of data, it provides you essentially an optimal 
statistical estimator.  So, the two things are tied.  
Complexity is -- good compression and noise and denoising are very tied together.  Noise is a generic problem 

everywhere.  The problem is that, of course, this is just 

nice goals.  We need to know how to reach them. So, let me describe -- so, the next few slides, some of you may have seen them, but they sort of fit the 
themes that we are describing here.  It is basically a way 

of taking a complex structure and starting to -- trying to orchestrate it the way you would orchestrate a piece of music, as a collection of scores, which describe the effect 
of each instrument.  Here, the structure is an image. So, you may have seen this.  One of my favorite.  
So, here is a complex image, which has a lot of stuff in it 
and just trying to compress it, immediately unravels it as 
a combination of different structures, which are layered one on top of the other.  So, here, this is just 
compressing it with basically taking one-third of 1 percent of the number of parameters and what you see happened is 
that it is blurred.  It looks like a water color painting 

of the same thing.   The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   293293All of the hairy features have disappeared, but all the coloring information, which may be useful for a 
given task, say, for example, then the color might be all 
we need in order to determine the age or the state of health of this particular mandrill and then that is fine.  
We don't need the rest of the stuff. This is a residual between the original image and the ones that we had.  So, it looks like a lousy 

impressionistic thing.  So, we took this residual and now 

we compress it by painting -- taking the best description 
mode of it.  Now you would have a Van Gogh type 

impressionistic image.  Right?  It means it has been 
synthesized with brush strokes essentially. The other one was water colors.  But bear in mind 
there is no human intervention in this business.  You will 

see -- and this is a residual, okay, which is completely -- 
so, the original image is the sum of those three layers set 
upon each other, each one synthesized with a different 
instrument and it is completely like an orchestration for 
music.  I mean, each musical score corresponds to an 
instrument.  The score is given by a collection of -- by a 
sort of alphabet or language that describes it.  Exactly 

the same thing has happened here. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   294294Bear in mind this guiding principle that I have described is a principle of just complexities.  The ability 

with the tools we have at our disposal to actually just 
compress this object to some accuracies, so to speak, and it gives a pretty decent compression, much better than if you were to do it once directly without -- but it is an 
indication that a lot of the things that we are trying to 
measure or assess are really the result of a super 
possession of structures, one on top of the other.  If we 

had the ability to see that somehow or to unravel it into 

those structures, in other words, lift it to higher 
dimensions in order to do that, we are really doing a substantial job. So, let's return to the eye topic.  We heard in 
the proceeding talk what kind of processing and how 
difficult it is to actually do very simple operations that 

we won't even think about them, seeing that there is a face 
down here. So, how does one deal with that directly without having to measure each individual pixel, make up an image and then start to fool around with the pixels and do things.  In other words, we want to really proceed as an 

eye.  The eye that I am involved in building at this point 

is an eye, which is -- should be superior to our eye.  It 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   295295is designed to not only see the colors of the image, but 
actually measure the spectrum, the electromagnetic 
spectrum, the absorption at different, at maybe a hundred 
frequencies or 200 frequencies, the point being that this would allow you to detect a chemical plume. This would allow you to tag, to look at somebody 
if you want to tag or track him.  You will look at the 

spectral signature and you don't have to worry about shapes 

and stuff like that.  Then you measure and you follow.  We 

know that it is much harder to do any operation on a gray 
level image than it is on a color image.  If I want to 
discriminate object by color, it is much easier.  When I 
look at the -- looking for a green spot here, I find it on the spot.  I don't have to measure -- these are in green 

there or there or there.  I can just look at it and my eye 

immediately goes to that location. So, the question is how can we do that and what is the role of the mathematician in doing that?  So, 

problem No. 1 is how does one integrate the processing with 
the actual measurement event?  So, you don't want to 
measure each individual pixel.  You just want to extract 
some maybe potentially global information and you want to 
analyze it in some fashion.  Okay.  So, the analogy, it is 

just like the guy -- like we heard this morning, if I am The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   296296looking for a needle in a haystack, if I have a good magnet, I bypass a lot of image processing. So, here the magnet is to do the spectroscopy in 
some sense, I mean, and just look at the color cubes.  I 
will indicate how you integrate the computation or the mathematical number into the measurement.  So, first of 

all, just the fact that understanding the -- or measuring 
the spectrum, and here is an example of spectra, is very 
important information about the material component of 
ingredient that you are looking at.  You see, there is a 

camouflage nest over there and grass and -- and you see 
that those curves are different. So, to each pixel now you have associated a full curve.  So, now we are getting into the data mining glut 

here.  It is a vector, which may have hundreds of 

components and if we wanted to do -- by the way, everything 
I am telling you has been around for 50 years.  Hyper-

spectral imaging has been around.  The reason it is not 

commonly used by everybody here is mathematics and data 
glut.  I mean, you can't deal with the monster amounts of 
measurement that you are capable of measuring if you are capable of measuring it. So, each pixel, you may have hundreds of data.  
So, it does give you a beautiful signature, but if I am The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   297297looking in a scene for some chemical spill or maybe for the presence of some camouflaged object or somebody, which is 
really different from the environment or maybe it is 
melanoma on my skin, then the issue is how do I find this on the fly, so to speak. So, I will give you a recipe in a second.  So, by 
the way, this is something that the people in the U.S. 
Geological Survey are doing.  This is an image of the 

Nevada Desert.  What you really want to do is find out what 

minerals are present at various locations.  What you want 

to do is get this image. That tells you exactly what is present at various places.  Unfortunately, this takes a long time to do.  You 
can collect an image and it can take you days or months to 
actually get this kind of analogy, depending on the image.  

You may want to look at vegetation, see if it comes here or 
not or you may look at tissue and see if it helps.  Or you 

may want to track somebody and discriminate that somebody 
from everybody else in the environment. So, please go to the next one.  Mathematics and 
the tools being used are very primitive.  Most people -- 
what most people do is this is the nine first -- the first 
nine components of a hyper-spectral image of the arm in 
which what is being done is they do here a -- analysis of The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   298298the maybe a hundred components that they measured and then display the first three components in red, green and blue, 
the next three in red, green and blue, the next three in 
red, green and blue.  So, you get those blurred images, 
which may or may not be useful.  But you have now taken 
everything and mixed it altogether and done what most 
people do is use single -- composition and use that to find 
your coordinator, which is not really the -- a particularly 
good tool for that kind of activity.   So, let me tell you about the -- so, the camera we have is based on a digital mirror array.  This is a 

device that Texas Instrument manufactures for projectors.  
It is an array that has half a million little mirrors.  
Each one of the mirrors has an on and off situation.  It is 

being used usually to project on the screen by aiming the 
pixels that need to be aimed onto the screen and 
eliminating for a length of time corresponding to the 
intensity and running a color -- what they have in their 
hand is a computer that they are using as a paperweight 
essentially. The point is that you can take -- and this is just an example of how more smarts can use this device.  

So, you have an image here, which is this red plume over 

there and behind the missiles, you image the whole scene, The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   299299if you wish, on this square array of mirrors and you ask yourself is there any red spot in that region.  So, the way 

it goes is you aim all the mirrors in the region 
everywhere, all of them together, into a special analyzer, which is also run by mirrors. So, because it found a red spot, the question is where did it find it.  Well, it found it -- it breaks it 

into four quarters and checks for each one of them and then 
keeps on doing and in a few measurements has a binary 
coordinates of the location and did not do a lot of 
measurements.  So, the next few slides will show you -- we 

took a chemical plume and we tried to find it exactly doing that.  So, this is just an image of the mirror system and 
this is the image of our camera.  So, this is not just 

science fiction at this point. That tells us how this spectroanalyzer goes.  
Light comes in and then it is being -- goes through a prism 
or something .  Different colors go to -- this is a mirror 

array up here.  Different colors will go to the mirror.  

You can select any combination of colors you want to measure whether they are present or not and then going to your detector. So, you both analyze spectrally and physically with the same thing.  So, this is a scene in which there is 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   300300a chemical plume in which we measured for each individual pixel, whether we could detect a 
plume or not.  But the 
level of the plume is so faint that the pixel was not 
capable of actually seeing anything.  So, on the other 
hand, there is a method of multiplexing the light called Hadamard multiplexing, which allows you to actually detect 
the plume as you can see it.  As you can see, it is quite 

noisy and the plume is rather faint, but in order to 
achieve that, we needed to do 250,000 measurements because 
that is how many pixels you have. If you follow the scheme I just described, well, in the white squares you find it.  In the black ones, you 
don't.  You keep doing it until you are finished.  So, 
basically in 20 measurements you did it, as opposed to 
measuring the whole thing and then analyzing -- first of 
all, measuring the whole thing was garbage anyway.  It was 

below the threshold of the system. Secondly, we really needed to combine the intensity of light coming from different locations in order 
to get this thing to work.  So, this is just a tiny example 
of what you can do with this combined spectral -- combined spatial spectral mix and the switching of the mirror.  So, 

the mirror operates as a computer, basically doing 
mathematical operations on the light as it comes in before The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   301301it is being converted to digital as opposed to the usual way, which is you convert it to digital.  You are dead and 

that is it, I mean, basically because you have too much 
data.  PARTICIPANT:  [Comment off microphone.]  DR. COIFMAN:  Yes, I mean, this particular system 
of GI would go up to 2 1/2 microns.  That is because they 

have a cover plate.  If we change the cover plate, you can 

go all the way up.  The cover plate is not letting the 

light go through it. So, the point being that I think this is going to be a paradigm for a lot of the sensing systems that are coming and DARPA has -- in fact, the mathematics of DARPA have a serious program in pushing it forward and that is 
that you really want to -- if you want to reduce the data 
flow that comes into a system, you really have to do it as 
you measure it, which is really what a biological system is 
doing.  We never collect everything and then -- I mean, 

this kind of -- this sort of forces the issues because if 

you wanted to do this in video -- for a real time thing, you are going to collect for each image several megabytes of data if you are lucky, if you already reduced it. It just won't flow through the system.  It 
doesn't really matter.  The transmission is a problem.  The 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   302302storage is a problem.  Computation is also -- so in all of 
that, where does mathematics enter?  It enters in -- doing 

this sort of -- the data mining of the spectra, which is 

very similar to the data mining occurring, say, in gene 
expression, for example, the same kind of activity if there 
is a dictionary going back and forth between the two 
activities. The issue is -- understanding the internal geometries of the spectra as they relate to the spatial 
distribution, this is critical if you are looking at 
objects of a given size.  Say it is an artificial object in 

the natural environment or if you are looking at somebody, for example, who has makeup on his face, you will be able 
to immediately recognize that or basically you want to just 

track and object. Again, there are lots of theoretical issues and a lot of practical issues and I don't think you can separate 
one from the other. [Applause.]  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   303303Mathematical Challenges for Real
-Time Analysis of Imaging Data  Ronald Coifman  Researchers would like to develop an imaging 
system that will detect objects and track 
themŒnot pixel-by-pixel, as in a camera, but 
how we do it with our eye.  One challenge 
includes the fact that researchers don™t have tools to describe, in any efficient fashion, high-dimensional geometric structures.  In 
addition they do not know how to approximate ordinary functions, which are given to us empi
rically, as functions of some parameters.  
Also, in order to make data-mining technique
s work, researchers need to have efficient 
digital representations of mass data sets. 

 
Dr. Coifman is currently involved in building 
an eye not only to see the colors of the image but to actually measure the electrom
agnetic spectrum, which could enable the 
detection of, say, a chemical spil
l, a melanoma on the skin, or the presence of particular 
vegetation in the Nevada desert.   Looking at 
the spectral signature eliminates the need to 
look for shapes, and we can perform mathema
tical operations on light as it comes in as 
opposed to storing the information in digital form. 

 
With too much data, transmission is a problem
, storage is a problem, and computation is 
a problem. For that reason, the data-mining of
 the spectra, which is very similar to the 
data-mining occurring, say, in gene expression, 
is going to be a paradigm for a lot of the 
sensing systems that are coming. 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   304304Larry Rabiner
  ﬁChallenges in Speech Recognitionﬂ 
 
Transcript of Presentation  
Summary of Presentation 
Power Point Slides 

Video Presentation   Larry Rabiner was born in Brooklyn, New York
, on September 28, 1943. He received an S.B. and 
an S.M. simultaneously in June 1964 and a Ph.D. in 
electrical engineering in June 1967, all from 
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
  From 1962 through 1964, Dr. Rabiner participat
ed in the cooperative program in electrical 
engineering at AT&T Bell Laboratories. During this 
period he worked on designing digital circuitry, 
issues in military communications problems, and problems in binaural hearing. Dr. Rabiner joined 
AT&T Bell Labs in 1967 as a member of the techni
cal staff. He was promoted to supervisor in 
1972, department head in 1985, director in 1990, and functional vice president in 1995. He joined 
the newly created AT&T Labs in 1996 as director
 of the Speech and Image Processing Services 
Research Lab and was promoted to vice president of research in 1998, where he managed a 

broad research program in communications, com
puting, and information sciences technologies. 
Dr. Rabiner retired from AT&T at the end of March 2002 and is now a professor of electrical and 
computer engineering at Rutgers University and the 
associate director of the Center for Advanced 
Information Processing (CAIP) at Rutgers. 
  Dr. Rabiner is coauthor of the books 
Theory and Application of Digital Signal Processing
 (Prentice-Hall, 1975), 
Digital Processing of Speech Signals
 (Prentice Hall, 1978), 
Multirate Digital 
Signal Processing
 (Prentice-Hall, 1983) and 
Fundamentals of Speech Recognition
 (Prentice-Hall, 1993). 

  Dr. Rabiner is a member of Eta Kappa Nu, Sigma Xi, Tau Beta Pi, the National Academy of 
Engineering, and the National Academy of Sciences
 and a fellow of the Acoustical Society of 
America, the IEEE, Bell Laboratorie
s, and AT&T. He is a former president of the IEEE Acoustics, 
Speech and Signal Processing Society, a former vi
ce president of the Acoustical Society of 
America, a former editor of the Associ
ated Students of Seattle Pacific™s (ASSP™s) 
Transactions
, and a former member of the 
IEEE Proceedings
 editorial board.  
  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   305305DR. LENCZOWSKI:  The third speaker in our session 
this afternoon takes us beyond the issue of the visual to 
the issue of the sense of hearing.  Dr. Rabiner is an 

individual who has an experience base in the private sector.  He received his Ph.D. from the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology in 1967, but he created or moved to 
the newly created AT&T labs in 1996 as the director of 
speech and image processing services research lab.  He was 

promoted to the vice president of research in 1998, where 
he managed the broad research program and communications, 
computing and information science technologies. He retired from AT&T at the end of March 2002.  
Now he has pioneered a number of novel algorithms for digital filtering and digital spectral analysis and in the 
area of speech processing, he has made contributions to the 
fields of speech synthesis and speech recognition. I am not sure what many of your personal experiences are with speech recognition systems, but I 
recall being assigned to a lab in 1981, where we have the 
first system with a computer-based activity that was to allow us to some speech recognition so that we could give commands to the system for some of our mensuration work. It was my experience that voice recognition did not work very effectively.  In fact, the only time that I 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   306306knew that we truly had voice recognition was whenever we were scheduling tours in the lab.  Somehow the equipment 

always knew, recognized the term "tour" and we invariably 
would have crashes.  So, that is my background experience. Now, what Dr. Rabiner is going to talk about today is the maturing, in fact, of our speech recognition 
to the point where it is not -- now it is very widely 
applied to a broad range of applications. However, as he points out, although the technology is often good enough for many of the current 
applications, there remain key challenges in virtually 
every aspect of voice recognition that prevent this technology from being ubiquitous in every environment for every speaker and for even broader ranges of applications. DR. RABINER:  Thank you.  You took away my entire 
introduction. Actually, the question that people ask me a lot is after 40 years of working in this field, you know, isn't 
this a solved problem.  You know, you can actually -- there 

is actually a system we put out in 1992 does 1.2 billion recognitions a year for operator services and it is essentially flawless.  It is about 99.8 percent accurate, 

but it only works on a five word vocabulary over the phone. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   307307It actually works in the environments you are in.  
But the whole problem is that it is very task specific.  It 

is very environment specific.  It is very well-trained to 

what it can do.  It just can't get to where we want to go. So, what I am going to try 
to use is the next 
half hour to tell you what are the current challenges in 
speech recognition.  Now, for the most part, the services 

people talk about are broader than just automatic speech 
recognition.  So, I will concentrate on that first box in 

what we call the speech circle, 
but in order for you to 
maintain a real service, a real voice-enabled service with 
a customer or with somebody who wants to use the system, you have really got to go around the whole circle.   So, the first thing is, you know, the customer speaks something and I should recognize the words.  That is 

a tough problem and we will talk about what are the 
challenges there. But even when you get the answer, I dialed the wrong number, in order for you to do something with that, 
okay -- this is a customer care application -- you have to go out to the next level, which is spoken language understanding and get the meaning. Now, I dialed the wrong number might mean I don't want to pay for that.  But it might also mean could you 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   308308please help me get to the number.  Something is wrong or 
there is something going funny here.  What do I do?  So, 

meaning, which is something that is completely unclear 
because the exact same input has lots of meaning.  Okay?  
Once you try to guess at that meaning, you have got to go do a dialogue management, which means take some action. Okay.  So, you might have to do a database dip.  
You might have to go out and look at person's records and 
you have to do spoken language generation, create some 
message to get that, to keep this speech circle working.  

Then you might want to say what number were you trying to 
dial.  Okay.  So, I can give you credit so that when you 
dial that number, you don't get charged twice or I help you dial it. We use a synthesizer to speak it.  What number 
did you want to call and now you are in a loop.  Hopefully, 

that system, that entire speech circle will enable you to 
keep using the system and these are the kind of services 
people try to build today. So, we are going to concentrate on that first box a lot because there really are a lot of challenges there.  
The speech recognition process after a very long time is 
very mathematically oriented.  It starts off with your 

infant speech, you know, 10 kilohertz, 16 kilohertz, 8 The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   309309kilohertz, whatever you want to have and does three processing steps.  The first one is feature analysis.  You 

really don't want to process that entire 64 kilobyte signal 
since it is laden with redundancy and it has information 
that is useful to you as a human, you know, to talk to somebody, to have a conversation, but it absolutely has 
nothing to do with the meaning of the words. So, things like the pitch and your inflection and your emotion and things like that, which, you know, are 
very important for human communication, but for 
recognition, we try to eliminate them because they are 
confusing variables. So, we do a mathematical analysis.  We will talk 
about that.  Then we do the heart of the work, statistical 

decoding, based on statistical models and, of course, this 
is the box that has three attached models.  Those attached 

models are the training environment and we will get into 
that. Then, finally, we do a little bit of cleanup and there is the classical computer science, helloworld program, you know.  If you have got that one, you may even 
have a chance of going to a little more sophisticated one. Let's look at each of the boxes there.  The 
feature -- box is all this to go out and get robust The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   310310features, things that are irrelevant or invariant to the environment, to the noise, to the transmission, to the 
transducer used, to the background situation and make them 
be relevant for -- and they did have the information.  So, 
that was spectral information that characterizes the sounds of speech, the phoning, the context of -- et cetera.  So, 

over the last 40 years we have learned how to do it through 
a spectrum analysis.  We are using something like linear 

predictive coding, which let's derive parameters that we think are extremely efficient representation to the signal. In fact, we code speech from 64 kilobytes down to 
about 5 kilobytes.  Now, if I have to give you kind of a 
guidance point, your cell phone uses an 8 kilobyte representation.  So, it is below that, but it is 

fundamentally -- it has got some of the same parameters 
that the cell phone uses for actually operating in the poor 
environment of cell -- but it has got about 30 or -- that 
you use in cell phones.  So, it is a little bit higher 

rate.  The first challenge you come across is the fact that 

-- as I said, there are at least a dozen major systems out there.  You can call Charles Schwab and get stock price 
quotes.  You can call AT&T's customer care and I will show 

you, for example, that system.  They all work nicely, but 

they are not robust. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   311311They fall apart in noisy environments, when you have office noise, when you try to operate it in the middle 
of an airport lounge, when you are operating in your car at 
60 miles an hour and you have road noise and you have all the background and the radio blaring.  When you try to use 
it over a speaker phone or a cell phone, every system just 
about falls apart.  Get somebody with an accent or a 

dialect or a speaking defect, real problem.  Of course, 

noise and echo environments. So, the first problem and the major problem is robustness.  You might say to yourself, why don't you make 

parameters that are robust to everything.  What happens is 
then you have taken a distribution which is finely tuned and works real well and made it broad and it works terribly 
all the time.  That is your choice.  So, we have got to do 

something. The second thing, of course, is that the speaker set is one that we devised probably about 10 to 15 years 
ago and maybe there is some place for it to go.  So, let me 
play a couple of examples. The mismatch between when you train the system, so you train a system in an environment for a set of 
speakers, for a set of inputs, et cetera, and when you test 
them, on the whole, people don't obey those rules.  You 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   312312know, they really want it to work where they want, the way they want it to work.  I will 
show you examples of how it can result in performance degradation. So, the concept is let's try to make it a little bit more like humans would do it perceptually.  So, here 
comes a nice little model of what goes on.  When you train 

your system, you had a training signal.  People smoke in 

the environment.  They are going to use it.  You extracted 

your features and you build models. Those statistical models are really good representations of that data.  Now, all of the sudden you 

hand that system off to somebody and they start speaking in a new environment and now the signal is mismatched to that signal.  So, of course, what y
ou are saying is, well, I 
want to add to the new environment and retrain or after the 
fact, since I can't really do that in many cases, I have 
three paths I can try.  One is I 
can say let me try to 
enhance the signal so that even though you are in -- well, 
let's enhance it.  Let's get rid of the noise or let's get 

rid of the reverberation or let's make it less sensitive.  
So, enhancement is kind of intense.  Make this signal 
statistical characteristics look like the original one. The second thing you can do is -- and try to normalize them so that the average statistical properties The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   313313of these features match those.  And, finally, the last 
thing you can do is when you finally have this model, you 

can say this model is a bad mismatch.  Let me try to go at 

it, adapt that model.  All of 
those have been tried and 
clearly with varying degrees of success. The acoustic model, though, now we are at the second stage and before -- there were three major models.  

There is one that is based on physical speech data, called 
the acoustic model and two that 
are based on -- so, the acoustic model is basically how do you take frames, which 
come on a regular basis every 10 milliseconds, but sounds 
don't come regularly.  Some sounds are long vowels, some 
sounds are very brief, like stock consonants, very short.  
So, we want to map the acoustic features, which occur on a 
regular frame-by-frame basis into events.  The events are 

sounds of the English language and you can think of these 
as being the phonings of the language. Now, that is just a very simplified view, because we don't use phonings.  We used context dependent phonings.  

Instead of having about 50 sounds, we have 50 times 50 times 50 sounds.  That is where mathematics really is nice 
because you can handle 50 times 50 times 50 sounds.  

Computers are pretty fast and we have some pretty good 
techniques. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   314314So, you characterize each of these sounds by the -- Markov model, which is a statistical method for 
characterizing the special properties of the signal and it 
is not the right model for speech, but it is so powerful 
that you can get into the model and represent virtually any distribution.  Now, the problem, of course, is you are 

over-training it in some sense, which makes you non-robust.  

You are training it to a distribution, which it doesn't 

actually follow.  But it actually in that environment, that 

overtraining works extremely well.   So, it is a powerful statistical model and, of course, it is a classification model.  You give it only 
exemplars of the sound you are 
trying to train.  So, it 
does a terrible job.  So, for example, let's say your 

vocabulary with the letters of the alphabet and you are 
spelling a name.  So, you have a letter like "e" and, you 

know, it is a set of b, c, d,
 e, g, p, t, d, z.  Listen 
over the phone and you are almost random.  When I spell my 

name, I say R-a-b as in boy, because if I don't say that, 
it will come out R-a-v, R-a-g, R-a-d.  It is whatever 
somebody hears because they are almost indistinguishable. So, that is one of the challenges is if you only train models on similar events, how does it every know how The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   315315to discriminate that model from other models that are in the system to give you better performance.  Okay? The next thing is the word lexicon.  So, we have 
got sounds and now we want to form words because not every sound is followed by every other sound and we know that.  
We know there are only a certain number of consonants that 
can follow each other before a vowel has to appear.  So, 

the concept of the word lexicon is it is a dictionary.  How 

do you map legal phone sequences into words according to 
rules?   So, a name like David, it
 is da a va id a.  That 
is kind of nice for a name like David.  How about a word 

like d-a-t-a.  Is it data or is it data?  Completely 
different.  So, you have to put in at least two 
representations.  We all know of words with multiple -- 

either, either, et cetera.  Lots of pronunciations.  So, 

here is a challenge. We can pick up a dictionary, you know, take -- you know, use it all, but how do you generate a word 
lexicon automatically.  What happens if there are 

scientific terms or there are new names that you haven't seen before.  How do you edit various dialects and word 
pronunciations, mathematically complicated problems. The next level of the language model is what word 
sequences are now valid in the task you are doing, that so-The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   316316called language models.  How do you map words and phrases 
into sentences that are valid, based on the syntax of the 
recognition task you are doing?  So, there are two ways.  

You can hand craft them.  
So, you literally write out a 
graph of what is allowed and people do this for a very long time or, of course, you go 
back to statistics.  So, you 
take, you know, a few hundred million words of text and 
build a trigram, an engram statistic of, you know, what is 
the probability of this word followed and preceded by other 
words and this word or combinations of words.  Of course, the problem is that you get the text from somewhere and that assumes that people will speak according to that text model, much as we assume they would speak according to the accoustic model and of course there 
are problems of how you build a new one for a new task.  

Still real challenges there. Finally comes the heart of the work, the place where mathematics has really helped a lot and that is the 
pattern classification.  So, we have got these features 

coming in.  We want to determine the proper sequence of 
sounds, words and the sentence that comes out.  We want to 
combine all of those, those three models, to generate the 
optimal word sequence, the highest probability, the maximum 
likelihood event given a task, which defines the syntax, The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   317317given a set of words that could 
be spoken, which is the 
lexicon and given the sounds of the language. So, we have an -- search through every possible recognition choice.  So, the real issue is how do you build 
an efficient structure, a finite state network for decoding and searching large vocabularies.  Let's assume we have a 

vocabulary of a million words, okay, with 50 times 50 times 
50 units, with all of the complexity of the language model.  

So, we have features, cross units, cross phones, cross 
words, cross sentences and some of our big recognizers have 
10 to the 22nd states that have to be searched. Well, that is difficult.  The goal is to take 
this structure, which even sequentially you are going to 10 to the 22nd states.  No one can do that, even with nice 

fast computers.  So, we have very, very fast approximation 

algorithms, like the A Star Decoder or the fast linear 
search, but instead we figured out methods that can compile 
the network down from 10 to the 22nd to 10 to the 8th 
states.  That is 14 orders of magnitude of deficiency. We don't know what the limit is.  And I will show 
you some examples of what we have got.  So, the concept is 
for a 64,000 word Wall Street Journal vocabulary -- this is 
the one that went down -- 10 to the 22nd, 10 to the 8th.  

The way it does it is by 
using -- weighted finite state The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   318318transducer at the HMM level for the sound, at the phone level, at the word level, at the phrase, they all get 
combined.  They get optimized.  They get determinized and 

they get minimized using very, very fancy computational linguistic techniques and out comes a search network with significantly lower states. So, here is an example of just a simple word transducer under the word "data" and basically the 
transducer just has arcs, which are the sounds and states 
where it winds up.  So, from the da we wrote an a or an a 

with certain probabilities, with certain weights.  These 
weights can be optimized and they can be minimized for the whole graph and the end result of it is that we have been looking at these techniques for the better part of six 
years and here is Moore's law, for those who are familiar 
with what -- you know, every 18 months, computational 
capability doubles.  This is what we call Morey's law, from 

the name of the person who has been spearheading the effort 
at AT&T, Nario(?) Morey, and he has doubled the performance 
of search every single year.  So, it is almost a factor of 
2 to the 5th in five years of searching. Using the best approximation techniques in the speech community, it is off by a factor of about 2 to 1.  
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   319319So, the community has done pretty well, too.  So, another 
interesting problem. Finally, the last stage in recognition, utterance verification.  The concept here is that you are asking the 
machine to give you the best sequence of words according to a grammar and a task.  The answer is how do you know if 

that sequence of words is reasonable or the right ones.  

So, we do what we call utterance verification.  So, 

somebody says credit please in a somewhat noisy 
environment.  The machine finds an equally valid sentence 

credit fees.  When you all done, you can ask the machine to 

tell you what is the likelihood or the confidence score of the word "credit" and it is very high.  That is great. But fees was not.  It was certainly better than 
please.  So, you would take that one and say I am not so 

sure that is the output.  Okay.  You can reject it or you 

could go out and ask for some clarification.  So, here are 

some examples. Somebody -- a baby cries in the background of this one.  Those are both in this database, which I will 
show you the result on in a minute.  So, the rejection 
problem is how do you extract -- how do you eliminate 
extraneous acoustic events, noise, background, get a The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   320320confidence measure and you do the best you can with it.  
So, what is the performance?  I have three databases we have used over the last 15 years for just connected digit recognition, simple cases; you know, reading a telephone number or reading a calling card number or a credit card number.  The first one 

is recorded by TI in a really antiseptic environment and 
the word error rate for 11 digits, 0 through 9, plus 0, is 
3/10ths of a percent.  We have another one in a customer 

care application where you can speak freely and during it, 
people will list numbers, you know, like they want credit 
for numbers and there the word error rate is 5 percent.  
That is a 17 to 1 increase in digit error rate. It is a robustness problem.  We are using pretty 
much the same models, but the good news as you work your 
way up is we can do a thousand word vocabulary that is -- 
for a number of years around 2 percent when they stop the 
work at a thousand.  Even as you work your way up to 

reading spontaneous speech for airline travel information, 
reading text from Wall Street Journal and business publications, broadcast news, listening to anchors on the radio and translating them, switchboard is sort of what you 
think of, literally listening to conversations off of the The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   321321telephone switchboard.  These are cases of people literally 
calling home. Now, the error rates certainly go way, way up.  
You say to yourself, my God, 
40 percent error rate.  It 
doesn't work.  Well, we have a system I am going to show 
you later that started off with a 50 percent word error 
rate and the task error rate was virtually zero.  Okay?  

Because it all depends on what words it kind of doesn't do 
too well on.   Here is the connected digit.  That is 

3/10ths of a percent.  It is clean.  It is beautiful 

speech.  Here is North American Business News.  Here is 

some from the switchboard.  Very folksy, but, you know. Here is an example of -- this one is hard to see, I guess, because it is not blown up enough.  But 

fundamentally today we can operate 50, 60, 70,000 word 
vocabularies in essentially real time as you see there. What we have been able to show as a result of all of the mathematics we have applied and all the signal 
processing is that whatever task we look at, we can make 
its word accuracy start approaching natural performance, but only approaching it.  We haven't gotten there.  We 
handle vocabularies -- in 1970, there was a two word 

vocabulary with a yes/no application.  Today we are 

handling vocabularies in excess of a million words, a The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   322322million names, et cetera.  So, there is no limitation of 
that form at all. But if you want to kind of figure out how we are doing compared to human performance, here is the range where machines outperform humans and you notice there are not many data points in this one, practically none.  Within 

the 10 to 1 range, there is only a couple that get on the 

edge of 10 to 1.  Then digit
 recognition, here is digit 
recognition, the humans outperformed the machine by a 
factor of about 30 or 40 to 1, including those great error 
rates.  Humans doa  real -- we had operators for a long 

time who got their pay based on never misrecognizing the telephone numbers because that would annoy a customer.  
Remember, we used to have a lot of operator services. The best ones, if you look at what those are, 
like The Wall Street Journal is within about a factor of 
10.  That is because humans don't -- you know, they do 

well, but it is deadly dull stuff and it is not the kind of 
thing you really want to translate. So, let me take the last five or so minutes on the rest of it.  Spoken language understanding is the next 
stage.  Interpret the meaning of words and phrases and take 

action.  The key thing here is that you can get accurate 

understanding without correctly recognizing every word.  
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   323323Okay?  So, I am going to show an application where we 
started with a 50 percent word error rate, but almost 
always got the key words that told us what the meaning was.  

That we actually have as a nationwide service.  It is 
called the "How May I Help You Service."  It is AT&T 
customer care for its long distance.  It is operating 

nationwide today. Also spoken -- makes it possible to let a customer speak naturally, which is why we don't understand 
all the words.  We don't even know what words they are 

going to say.  We just happen to know that certain words 

key certain things to happen and we do really, really well on those words.  So, we know the ones that key the things. So, we find what is the salient words and phrase.  
They map high information, word sequences to meaning and we 
do that really, really well.  We do performance evaluation 

and we do these operator assisted tasks.  They are real 

hard problems.  There are challenges there. The next phase, of course, is in order to do that, you need dialogue management and spoken language generation and that is -- the goal there is determine the meaning and what you could do based on the whole 
interaction, not just on that local loop.  I really should 

have made that clear, that what you say depends on how The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   324324often you have gone through the loop.  The methodology is 
you have a model of dialogue to guide the dialogue forward 
so it is a clear and well-understood goal and, obviously, 
evaluation of speed and accuracy of obtaining the goal, like booking an airline reservation, renting a car, purchasing a stock, obtaining help, and we use that 
internally. The challenge here is how do you get a science of dialogue.  How do you keep it efficient in terms of -- how 

do you obtain goals, get answers and is there is an -- how 
does the user interface play into the art and science of 
dialogue.  We will see that there are examples where it is 
better to use multimodal interactions.  Sometimes it is 
better to point than it is to -- Here is an example of a before and after the system.  This was our customer care, touch tone hell 

system, as we call it.  I will 
play a little bit of this.  
I am not going to let you go through this.  It took two 

minute and 55 seconds to get to a reverse directory 
assistance. When we started playing with -- 28 seconds right there all the way.  So, the way this thing works -- we call 

it the "How May I Help You."  The prompt is simple.  You 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   325325can say anything you want.  If you say pure gibberish, you 
are going to get pure gibberish out. From listening to about two or three million conversations between humans and our real attendants, we 
figured out that people call us to find out about account balances or about our calling plans or local plans or if 
there is an unrecognized number on their bill or whatever.  

There are between 15 and 50 things and guess what?  It is 

easier to map all of those two million and figure out what 
words they say that cues you into what they wanted.  Okay?  

So, we made it work. So, here is -- I am going to play one example from our field test labs here.  This guy was irate.  He 
bleeped out in the beginning and in the end he got exactly 
what he wanted.  It really worked well. The system has been in use nationwide since last November, a 37 percent decrease, repeat calls that weren't 
happy and 78 percent decreased customer complaints.  

Customers love this system. [Multiple discussions.]  Here is a little example of how you might do it on the web-based customer care agent.  This is basically 

how you would use multimodal to basically get you in 
situations where it might be -- the concept is that The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   326326sometimes better actually to point and sometimes it is better to speak and the combination is a more powerful 
paradigm.  We play a few examples of things that would 

generate totally from text, never spoken by a human. That is not a human speaking.  That is a machine.  
Now, here is some Spanish, same text.  Now, for those who 

prefer a more natural face, this is the exact same 
synthesis lined up with the face.  Now, this last example 

is a broad band one where we use 16 kilohertz rather than -
- so, again, in 40 years, what have we done? We have put out a lot of services.  There are 
desktop applications like dictation and command an d control of the desktop and control of document properties, stock quotes and traffic reports and weather and voice 
dialing.  There are 20 million cell phones that are voice 

enabled today, access to messaging, 
access to calendars.  
Voice works as a concept of converting any web page to a 
voice enabled site.  So, you can answer any question on 

line and  
-- other key protocols into making this happen. Telematics, which is command and control of automotive features, not the car, but, you know, the 
comfort system, the radio, the windows, the sun roof and 
finally smart devices, PDAs and cell phones. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   327327So, we have come a long way.  Mathematics has 
driven us from small vocabulary to medium vocabulary in the 
sixties to -- and we got to the mathematics and statistical 
based in the seventies and early eighties.  We started 
going to from tens and hundreds of words to tens of thousands and hundreds of thousands and eventually a 
million words in the early nineties, we had a multimodal 
and dialogue in this time frame and finally the last one as 
we go forward. The dialogue systems are going to be very large vocabulary, limited task and control.  That is where we are 

today.  In three years, we are going to be able to go 
through an arbitrary environment.  We are going to have the 
robustness problem pretty much in hand and in about another 

three or four years after that, we will go to unlimited 
tasks.  So, mathematics has played a key role in that 40 

year evolution.  Got a long way to go. Thanks. 
[Applause.]  
PARTICIPANT:  Why did it take 40 years? DR. RABINER:  First of all, Moore's law is the 
key thing.  Okay?  Until you get that computation, you 

know, I run the starting and, you know, a two word 
vocabulary in 1980, we had a real application and we had to The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   328328build specialized hardware for it on an operator handset.  
Okay?  Today, you know, we can do in real time on your 

basic PC hundreds of thousands of words.  It is a big 

difference when the computation in this storage is not -- PARTICIPANT:  Did you in 1980 or -- did you 
really know exactly what you wanted to do but you couldn't 
do it fast enough or you didn't have the right -- the 
conceptual framework, how did it evolve? DR. RABINER:  You know, it is a chicken and an 
egg thing.  In 1980, we had a sense of what we wanted to 

do, but it was computationally infeasible.   You learn what works and then as machines get faster, you -- gee, that is not exactly what I want to do.  
Do I want to do mixture density?  Do I want to play games 

with -- we had a sense of what we wanted to do but not the 
power to do it. PARTICIPANT:  How did this 
know-how occur that you have obtained? DR. RABINER:  Carnegie Mellon particularly made 
their same -- they were one of the key pioneers in this.  
In England, Cambridge University -- and they made that public.  They first were going to sell it.  Not many people 

wanted to buy it.  So, they 
made it open source, public domain.  So, anybody, any university today can go out and 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   329329just get it all for research purposes only and use it.  So, 
in a sense it is the most open community you can imagine. DARPA also helped to make it open because -- almost all of the projects over the last decade have been based on DARPA responses initiative.  They would issue a 
challenge.  All of the DARPA work is open. MR. AGRAWAL:  [Comment off microphone.]  
DR. RABINER:  There is nothing inhibiting us.  I 
mean, I think we know what to do.  Okay?  One of the things 
that I didn't mention is a challenge.  In synthesis, the 

reason synthesis -- what we realized is that if you really 
want to make synthesis good, you know, the easiest way to do it?  Record a trillion sentences that somebody says and 
decompose them into their basic unit and store them.  It 

was inconceivable when this was proposed in the 1980s.  We 

store them all and we have extremely fast retrieval. We literally look through every one of them and say what is the best unit, in combination with every other 
best unit and -- in recognition there ought to be -- and 

that is called data driven. So, obviously, in theory, we actually store about 50 megabytes worth.  But, you know, that is just the 

compression technology.  Get that same database.  Store 

across a few thousand people.  Just do recognition by just 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   330330looking up the units.  That is one of the things we would 
love to do.  We haven't actually done it.  Why haven't we 

done it?  Because the stuff works so well in limited 

environments.  Synthesis has a problem because it never 
worked well.  It always was intelligible but it sounded 
like -- we used to call it non-customer quality.  If you 

listen for 20 minutes, you -- asleep.  It would put you to 

sleep.  But when you do this, you can listen to that 

forever.  You know, it is absolutely perfect. PARTICIPANT:  Is there any intelligence that can 
be placed on the hand set that the receiver can be trained 
so that the recognition -- the server area can be -- DR. RABINER:  Certainly in cell phone technology, 
there is a standard called Aurora(?).  The goal is to put 

intelligence in the hand set, so you can make speech 
recognition in cell phones much less dependent on the 
transition you use. All of the robustness techniques have that capability. PARTICIPANT:  It seems like the next doable 
challenge will be probably to do real time translation because it seems like you have -- DR. RABINER:  Real time translation is a much 
harder problem.  It is a much harder problem because even 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   331331if you do the recognition in one language really well, the text to text translation itself is a real problem.  So, 

there has been a lot of studying on how do you do text to 

text translation.  There are old classic examples of -- in 
time, you know, idiomatic sentences that are almost impossible -- but the answer is there are limited task 
domains.  We have done it with Japanese and with Chinese, 

English.  Certainly, translation is probably about a decade 

away because of the text to text problems, not because of 
the recognition or the synthesis. PARTICIPANT:  [Comment off microphone.]  
DR. RABINER:  You are in an environment right now 
-- again, if -- piece of cake.  Why not? PARTICIPANT:  [Comment off microphone.]  
DR. RABINER:  People practice that art and who do 
it really very well.  There are certain pieces of things -- 

user interface is an art.  Dialogue management is an art.  

So, we have to make it into a science. PARTICIPANT:  -- speaker recognition? 
DR. RABINER:  That is a completely different 
topic.  Okay?  Speaker recognition is something that will 
probably never be done.  Speaker verification is what you 

really want to ask about.  Okay? The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   332332The answer is -- obviously, you can do it with 
some performance -- whether you use retinal scan, whether 
you use fingerprints, all of these have various -- false 
alarm rates.  The best systems -- achieve 98, 99 percent.  
Verification accuracy with something on the order of a half to 1 percent false projection.  Okay?  Is that good enough?  

Well, certainly it screens out some things.  It is very 

easy to go at in some systems and just record your voice.  

You can't use a fixed, you know, verification phrase.  You 

are dead as soon as somebody records you. You have to change it all the time and once you change it, that performance starts edging down a little bit because you are a variable yourself.  But the technology 
that as not good enough -- you can say I am going to 
guarantee to keep all these bad guys -- but it is a pretty 
good return technology. MS. CHAYES:  Why won't it be done?  I mean, we 
can do it ourselves, right?  You hear a song, you know who 

is singing it.  You mean it won't be done on a short time 

scale or it won't be done on a -- DR. RABINER:  Can you listen to somebody you have 
never heard before, listen to then two or three or four 
times and then -- I will let you listen to 30 people you The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   333333have never heard before five times each and then a week later I am going to give you one of those 30 and then -- MS. CHAYES:  The computer has a better memory 
than I do. DR. RABINER:  Not much. MR. MC CURLEY:  [Comment off microphone.] 
DR. RABINER:  Right now, what this whole concept 
of this broadcast news is to say can you record all of 

these and use that as a searching index. MR. MC CURLEY:  I guess my question was would you 
convert it into text or would you convert it into something 
else. DR. RABINER:  No, you convert it into text.  
Okay?  What it would do is it would do real well on the 

significant words.  Okay?  So, if you listen to that North 

American Business News or whatever, the key words were all 

perfect.  "For" or "it" or "this" gets wrong a lot of the 

time.  So, the bottom line to this is you would align that 

text with the speech.  Find all occurrences of Saddam 

Hussein.  Okay?  And guess what?  You will find most of 
them absolutely perfectly.  It will mis
s a few.  And it 
will have a couple of false alarms, but you can check.  You 

click on each one.  That is not
 what I want.  That is not 
what I want.  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   334334So, it is not perfect, but it gets you a long, long way to where you want to be. You come back and you have 30 voice mail messages.  You don't go through them sequentially.  Okay?  
We have a system which we call ScanMail.  It was actually 
written up in The New York Times yesterday.  ScanMail 

converts every one of your voice messages, to text and 
gives you a chance to scan it as though it is text mail.  

More than that, if you are really, really good at finding 
numbers, call me back at 917-3211-2217.  It will find that 

and it aligns it with it.  You can click on it.  So, it 

gives you a synopsis.  Synopsis isn't perfect, but most 
people find that you actually get through that and what it does is it gives them the triaging capability. So, if you are a sales person with 30 -- I get 
one voice mail message every month.  E-mail, I get 75 a 
day.  But there are sales people who get 30, 40, 50 voice 

messages a day and very little e-mail and they are the 
people who love this kind of capability. PARTICIPANT:  [Comment off microphone.]  DR. RABINER:  They come down to making things 
more efficient, so you can try more things. PARTICIPANT:  [Comment off microphone.]  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   335335DR. RABINER:  Well, the text-to-text translation 
is a really tough problem.  Okay.  And very likely, most 

terrorists don't give you those free -- [Laughter.]  Obviously, homeland defense is -- you know, the speaker recognition, the verification.  They go out in the 

surveillance.  Having something that converts it into text 

and looking for some key words.  They are not going to be 

the key words you wanted just for the reason that you can't 
really listen to everything that goes on.  No one can do 

that.   MR. EUBANK:  You talked a lot about robustness, 
but the kind of robustness you were describing is noise and things like that and not an adversarial -- DR. RABINER:  What is adversarial in speech 
recognition? MR. EUBANK:  [Comment off microphone.]  
DR. RABINER:  Yes, probably, but, you know, you 
would to be much more specific.  I just can't give you an 

easy answer on that one.  Sorry. I am going to turn this back to you. DR. LENCZOWSKI:  I want to thank you for very 
stimulating discussions.  With that, I was going to turn 

this over to Dr. McLaughlin, whose responsibility during The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   336336this session was to listen and to capture some of the challenges, the complexities that we should be thinking 
about in terms of the presentations. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   337337Challenges in Speech Recognition 
 Larry Rabiner  There are two main challenges in speech r
ecognition.  To begin, many speech recognition 
systems are very task-specific, with limited 
vocabularies.  In addition, speech recognition systems are often very environment-specific, 
performing poorly when tested with speaker 
phones or cell phones, or in noisy environments 
such as restaurants, airport lounges, or moving cars. 
 
It is easy to take a well performing, finely 
tuned system and make
 it so broad that it works terribly all the time.  Further, when a 
system is designed in an environment with a 
set of speakers and a set of inputs, then in a new environment, the signal is mismatched. 
 
There are three models for speech recognition: 

 1. The acoustic model. This model is based on phys
ical speech data and the numerous types of sounds it must di
stinguish. One powerful approach in this domain is a Markov model, wh
ich is a statistical method for 
characterizing the special properties of
 the signal. The system works well 
in the given environment, but is nonrobust.  
 2. The word lexicon. This is a dictionary bridging legal phenome sequences and words, according to rules. The mathematical challenge is in generating 
a word lexicon automatically, given 
that new words are often introduced to a language and the lexicon must
 handle a range of pronunciations.  3. The language model. This model builds valid sequences from words and 
phrases, based on the syntax of the recognition task. Like the acoustic model, it assumes that people will speak according to a certain text model, 

making this model nonrobust. 
 
The goal is to determine the most probable wo
rd sequence, given a task (which defines the syntax), given a set of words that could be spoken (which is the lexicon), and given the sounds of the language.  The current state of the art is a decoder that searches 108 possible recognition choices whereby combina
tions are weighted and minimized.  The 
final stage is ﬁutterance verification,ﬂ where key words are identified.  Currently, speech recognition systems have very large vocabul
aries and limited tasks. By 2006, systems 
should be able to perform effectively in arbitrary environments, and by 2010, systems 
should be able to perform unlimited tasks. 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   338338David McLaughlin  ﬁRemarks on Image Analysis and Voice Recognitionﬂ 
 
Transcript of Presentation  
Summary of Presentation 
Video Presentation 
 
 David McLaughlin is a provost and a professor of
 mathematics and neural science at New York 
University. His research interests are in visual 
neural science, integrable waves, chaotic nonlinear 
waves, and mathematical nonlinear optics.
   The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   339339DR. MC LAUGHLIN:  So, I am going to try to be very brief and just make a few remarks.  The first remark I 
wanted to make concerned comments this morning about how do 
-- does the government or any interested set of parties get mathematicians and scientists interested in homeland defense.  Rather than try to answer that, I just want to -- 
I want to state what I think are three of the major 
problems that have to be overcome. The first is that in our guts as scientists and mathematicians, we don't see the immediacy and the urgency 
of the problem in our guts.  Intellectually, we say it is a 
big problem.  But we all hope that we have had the last terrorist attack.  That is combined with two other things that we realize.   The second is that this isn't one problem, homeland defense.  It is thousands of problems and as 
mathematicians or as scientists, we tend to attack one 
problem or one area of problems, if you like.  This is 
pretty -- a pretty broad list of things for us to sink our 
teeth into. You combine that with how we know we work, we work over 40 year time frames and we are being -- and we 
think if we do think about the immediacy of the problem, we 
are worried about what is going to happen in the next six The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   340340months or a year.  It seems to me that you have to face those three realities and I certainly don't have any 
solutions, but it does seem to me that those sorts of 
realities have to be faced by people concerned with getting scientists and mathematicians immediately involved in homeland defense as they were in the Manhattan Project, 
where some of those problems were not necessary to overcome 
or else the scientific leaders realized they were not 
necessary to overcome.  I don't know the history of the 
time. That was the first point I wanted to make.  A second point I wanted to make concerned the small needle in a large haystack that has been referred to many times today and it refers to it somewhat indirectly, but I wanted to 
share with you a story that I have heard several times in 
recent months.  There is a man by the name of Steve Flynn.  Steve is a high officer in the Coast Guard, perhaps a lieutenant 
commander, but in any case a high officer, who this year is 
on leave from the Coast Guard in one of the government think tanks and his task is to think about border security.  He is concerned with two things. That he wants to protect 
our borders;on the other hand, he doesn't want to close the 
Canadian border unnecessarily for financial reasons. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   341341So, he tells this story, which I will try to abbreviate it because it is late, but it is rather 
disturbing.  He talks about one problem of preventing a 
bomb, perhaps a dirty bomb, from being brought into the country through shipping.  He talks about how in Pakistan, crates are loaded onto something and they get to Hong Kong 
and in Hong Kong, they are stored more or less in the open, 
after which they are loaded onto boats and come to San 
Diego. In San Diego they are loaded onto trucks.  There is no inspection of this process yet.  They are loaded onto 
trucks and nobody monitors where those trucks go.  They know where they are going to end up.  Perhaps they are going to end up in Newark at the -- near the Newark Airport 
in a storage facility, where they are -- where whoever has 
bought this equipment will pick them up. It is there that Customs will pay some attention to them.  But in the meantime, they have gone through 
Chicago.  They have taken detours totally unmonitored, 
depending on the truck drivers.  Once they get in Newark, it would be conceivable for a phone call to detonate. The question is how do you discover which, if any, of the crates has a bomb in it?  Now, Flynn's response 
-- so this is definitely a small needle in a large haystack The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   342342and his response is that it probably cannot be done at that point in time.  In fact, he is urging people to monitor 
much more closely the packing of the boxes in -- at the 
entry point.  The reason I mention that is -- and it is an obvious point, but when you are dealing with a small needle 
in a large haystack, it seems to me you want to carefully 
define that needle.  Flynn is defining it as entry point, 
but in each case, I think we want to very carefully define 
the needle that we are seeking.  So, that is the point two 
that I wanted to make. The last point I wanted to make is slightly more scientific and it returns to a point that George Papanicolaou made this morning, when he was -- when he 
mentioned a comment about general data mining and he was 
urging people when possible to use science in addition to 
statistics. He used the example of the physics of earthquakes versus sound detonation.  In what we talked about today, 
this afternoon, I want to focus on a few remarks about computer vision, although I believe similar remarks would apply to speech recognition and so forth.  But as Professor 
Malik knows and if you read his work, he uses, it is very 
wise in computer vision to attempt to use biological vision The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   343343to guide our thinking and construction of computer vision algorithms.  The problem is we know very little about real vision.  But when you think about how visual information is processed in the cortex, there are a few things that we do know and I just want to close by listing some of them and I 
am sure that the computer vision experts (a) know these, 
(b) undoubtedly try to use them, but I also believe that 
since we don't understand how they are used in the human 
and mammalian visual system, we haven't yet unveiled how 
they should be used in the computer visual system. In any case, when you think about the cortical processing of visual information, the first thing that is completely clear is that that region of the brain is a 
massively complex feedback system.  There are extensive 
feedbacks between regions of the brain and many of these 
regions of the brain are themselves layered structures.  
There is massive feedback between the layers. So, if you like, you can almost think about feedback within feedback within feedback.  You can ask questions like how is the brain making use of the fact that the architecture is layered?  People don't know the answer 
to that.  People do know which regions are coupled to 
which.  They know that is based on anatomy and they know The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   344344very well which layers are coupled to which, also based on anatomy.  They don't have much feeling for the strengths of 
those couplings. For example, the visual system is often modeled as a feed forward network where information enters through the retina and it goes on to a filter called the LGN and on 
into the visual cortex; two specific layers of the primary 
visual cortex, 4 and 6.  Now, it is known anatomically that 
there is a huge amount of feedback from 6 back to the LGN.  
In fact, there is more feedback anatomically from 6 back to 
the LGN than there is from the LGN forward to 6. Yet, nobody knows within the visual system what that feedback is doing.  It must be doing something because there is so much of it anatomically.  Another issue is time 
scales.  People are beginning to wonder is there temporal 
delays between these different regions for which the 
feedback might be slightly slower or might be slightly 
delayed and, in fact, it could be delayed within delayed 
within delayed when you think about regions within regions 
within regions, which seems to be the architecture. It is quite controversial as to how important these delays are.  David Mumford and LeMay and Lee have 
been concentrating on delays for several years now.  Other 
neuroscientists focus upon the fact that there are The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   345345precursors in these delay processes that are almost instantaneous. But in any case, when you think about those features of the real visual system, namely, layered structures, massive feedbacks and the importance of temporal dynamics, some of the more static single layer or 
two dimensional image reconstruction that is done in 
computer vision, there is a chance that by better 
understanding the real visual system or even if we don't 
understand the real visual system by thinking about 
possible uses of this architecture and delay might well 
improve the computer vision system. Now, this is saying nothing to Professor Malik, who does this in his work continually, but it is a fact 
that I think that the computer vision community doesn't 
talk with the biological vision community enough.   So, I think that that is the only three points that I really wanted to make and it is late and I think I 
will conclude with that. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   346346Remarks on Image Analysis and Voice Recognition   David McLaughlin   How can the government, or any interested 
set of parties, get mathematicians and 
scientists interested in homeland defense? Some of the challenges are these: 

  1. As mathematicians and scientists, 
we don™t see the immediacy and the 
urgency of the problem. Intellectually, we 
say it™s a big problem, but we all 
hope that we™ve had the last terrorist attack. 
 2. Homeland defense is not a single proble
m. It™s thousands of problems. But 
mathematicians and scientists tend to
 attack one problem, or one area of 
problems, at a time, and there is a pretty 
broad list of things for us to sink our teeth into. 
 3. We work over 40-year time frames, a
nd if we do think about the immediacy 
of the problem, we worry about what™s going to happen in the next 6 months 
or a year.    Many of the problems in homeland security 
involve finding a small 
needle in a large 
haystack. One way to deal with this problem is
 to put more effort into carefully defining 
that needle. Dr. McLaughlin illustrated his comment with a hypothetical example, 
attributed to Steve Flynn, a high-ranking officer in the U.S. Coast Guard, whose current 
task is to think about border security.    It is necessaryŠsay, in data miningŠto use 
not only statistics but also insights from whatever other scientific realms inform the 
problem, even if they are distant from the 
analyst™s own field. In computer vision, for ex
ample, it would be wise to attempt to use 
biological vision to guide our thinking and construction of algorithms.  
  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   347347David Donoho   ﬁRemarks on Image Analysis and Voice Recognitionﬂ 
 
Transcript of Presentation  
Summary of Presentation 
Video Presentation   David Donoho is the Anne T. and Robert M. Bass Pr
ofessor in the Humanities and Sciences at 
Stanford University. He has worked on wavelet denoi
sing, on visualization of multivariate data, on 
multiscale approaches to ill-posed inverse pr
oblems, on multiscale geometric representations, 
such as ridgelets, curvelets, and beamlets, and on 
manifolds generated by high dimensional data. 
He received his A.B. in statistics at Princeton a
nd his Ph.D. in statistics at Harvard.  He is a 
member of the National Academy of Sciences 
and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. 
  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   348348DR. LENCZOWSKI:  Once again setting up 
electronically here -- wouldn't it be nice to have voice 
recognition and simply tell it to connect. With respect to the voice recognition, that there were only two words there in 1980 because I know in 1981, that system we had recognized or purportedly recognized 10 
if properly enunciated. The next discussant that we have here to make commentary on, again, the complexity of the various topics 
is David Donoho.  Interestingly enough, he was also a 

reference in one of the previous presentations.  So, he has 

the opportunity to determine whether or not he was represented properly. MR. DONOHO:  Well, the cardinal difficulty I have 
to face here is I am standing between you and a reception.  

So, be brief, right? I wanted to put in context an idea that I think it is implicit.  Everybody already accepts, but I might as 

well just say it out loud.  Why do we think that 

mathematics is relevant to homeland security?  It is 
because we are entering a data saturated era.  We are 
seeing a one time transition to ubiquitous measurement and 
exploitation of data and we believe that mathematics is 
relevant to that. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   349349So, I just want to go into that and talk about some of the obstacles not yet addressed and that I think 
were exemplified in some of these talks and isolate a few 
mathematical challenges, but I can't possibly be exhaustive. So, while world hunger has been with us for a long time and will continue to be with us sadly, we are at 
a point now where we will never be like Sherlock Holmes.  

We will be inundated with so much data that we will never 
feel that we don't have what we need to make decisions.  

The era that we are entering we have got the prodigious 
efforts of the best and brightest in our society are dedicated to create huge data repositories and exploit it all sorts of ways.  The information technology business is 

a huge part of our economy.  It dominates corporate 

America.  It is like 50 percent of Fortune 500 budgets in 

information technology. So, it is clear that this is an important phenomenon but it is really, let's say, pushing the 
thinking of everybody about how we ought to go about 
things, at least Internet he United States.  So, if you 
look at the definition of an era, of course, there were, 
you know, great minds in the Renaissance and in the Middle 
Ages that defined the era for them by, for example, The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   350350building wonderful structures or creating great works of art. What we are doing instead is creating networks -- pervasive networking, gargantuan databases and promulgating an ethic of data rich discourse and decisions.  So, 
homeland security that we can contribute to, I guess, 
everyone is assuming it is all about data gathering, data 
analysis and then somehow we are going to find in this 
mountain of data things that are going to be useful. For example, if we had a national I.D., there would be some way to codify that into a process that would 
let us keep people from doing bad things to our citizens.  
Okay?  So, it is important to say how far this really goes.  
I mean, anything can be quantified and data really can be 
gathered about everything and we really will be able to 
encode all sorts of things about human entity or behavior. People would say smells are an example of something that is merely poetry, but actually now we have 
electronic noses, arrays that have excellent abilities to 
distinguish between let's say roses and garbage or more to the point, they can distinguish between, for example, different hydrocarbons like in this case methane and 
benzene and so on.  They could do a job that wouldn't be so 

safe for humans to do. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   351351As Professor Coifman pointed out, we have hyperspectral photography that goes considerably beyond the 
abilities of the human eye, getting thousands of spectral 
bands and able to identify what things are made of, not merely what they looked like, simply by looking at them.  
Human motion tracking, there are now sensors that can 
record gestures, pose and the articulation over time and so 
on.  So, all this data is being gathered and I could only 

sketch here, just mention a few examples, but it goes on 
and on.  So, certainly all aspects of human identity, date and posture will be captured and digitized completely.  
This goes to the point that the NBA is currently -- has a web site where they have nine weekly games and talk about 
amazing moves that people made that were atypical for that 
player.   Okay.  Now, we all know that there are people who 
are naysayers about the data era and they would say that 
there is going to be a violation of privacy or morals and 
then there are people who say that calculating all this data and compiling it is just wasting time and you are just going to be lost in this glut and be paralyzed by the fact 
that you have the information. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   352352So, if we look at the issues for homeland security, I guess I see the following things.  So, first of 

all, any time you talk about compiling data, for example, 
around imagery or around speech, something like that, there is going to be in this city in particular a big reaction, 
which is based around political maneuvering and there will 
be always issues of -- there will always be issues of civil 
liberties and so on.   Secondly, and this was mentioned before, there is also the issue that in our system we do things by private 
enterprise and so there is going to be a lot of trade speech claiming benefits and workability, which is quite different from the actual experience of some of the customers who tried to do these things. In addition, there are massive engineering issues -- there are massive engineering problems associated with 
this, that just merely to have something like a national 
idea or to use biometrics in a consistent way that would 
really close off from undocumented people the ability to 
get on airplanes and so on, just to create that system is 
very challenging and there would be a lot of discussion 
about whether you could actually build the infrastructure. But none of those things are science.  So, it is 
really not Ralph Nader or the Pope or the data glut The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   353353arguments.  Suppose all of those things are solved, we 
really should just face what the scientific issues are in 
using all this data.  I see them 
as being -- if we wanted 
broad issues identified, generalizability, scalability, robustness or lack of fundamental understanding of the structure of the data.  Generalizability would mean you can build these small systems in a research lab, but then you can't deploy 
them through the level of dealing with a quarter billion 
people in a satisfactory way.  Robustness would be, again, 

work in perfect conditions, but you can't deal with 
articulated conditions, where something is buried away from the research lab.   A lack of fundamental understanding has to do 
with the fact that a lot of what we are doing is using what 
mathematics gave us 40 or 50 years ago and not developing 
mathematics  that tries to understand what the underlying 

issues out of the data that we are trying to deal with is.  

We are just getting what -- how can we deploy the stuff 
that is out there. So, it seems to me that all of those things are due to the fact that mathematics hasn't been going where 
the data resolution is pushing us, at least not enough to 
make a difference in the directions that we like.  Where 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   354354the data revolution is pushing us is dealing with very, 
very high dimensional space.  So, if you look at an 

utterance or an image, you are talking about something that 
is a vector up in a thousand or a million dimensional space. So, what we really need to think about is what is going on in high dimensions.  I just mention here some 

examples, human identity, even highly decimated .  It might 

be 65,000 variables just to take raw imagery, hyperspectral 
image.  For a chemical, you have a thousand spectral lines 

for a sample.  If you went to an image, you would have a 

thousand times the number of pixels. So, what are the needs with high dimensional data?  I see a couple of things 
that came out in the talks 
today.  Coping with dimensional 
glut, understanding high dimensional space and representing high dimensional data in 
qualitatively new ways.  I think in various ways if 

mathematicians make major progress in these areas, there 
will be long term payoffs.  Again, it might be just 40 

years from now when the real problems are something else.  
But these things will get ultimately inserted in deliverables. One issue about dimensional glut, which underlay a little bit, when you have too many dimensions, often what The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   355355we are seeing in modern data sets is very, very high dimensions about each individual under study.  So, an image 

is like maybe a million dimensions about one particular 
thing you are looking at. Traditional statistical theory says that the number of dimensions compared to the number of observations 
should be such that you have a very favorable ratio; 
namely, D over N.  It is small.  But where Moore's law is 

pushing us is D over N is going to infinity in some sense.  

We are getting more and more complex articulated data about 
just a few individuals and we are not getting more and more 
data per se about independent observations. As a result, we find it very difficult to train from this enormously high dimensional stuff and then get 
something that generalizes.  Just as an example, I went out 

on the web and found a class project on Eigenfaces.  So, 

you use principle components to find the underlying 
structure of face space in some sense.  So, here is a class 

and there are their Eigenfaces.  The thing is that what 

they have is each person is like a 16,000 dimensional vector.  Right? Then there is only, I don't know, 30 kids in the class or something.  So, it is exactly the situation that I 

was talking about.  When you look at Eigen analysis on 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   356356this, what you find is that basically each person is equal to one Eigenface, take away the average.  So, actually what 

happens is that the Eigen analysis just gives you back the 
individual identities and so on. Now, Eigen analysis is being used all the time throughout science and people are exactly going down this 
road all the time.  It is not well-understood that if you 

go to high dimensions and you have relatively few examples, 
you have these distortions.  The whole area of what 

distortions there are and what systematic issues you have 
are not very well understood. Another area of dimensional glut is that you have the cursive dimensionality.  Algorithms don't run well in 
high dimensions.  A simple example in the context of the 

talks that we have had is say I have to search through a 
database for nearest neighbors.  That gets slow as you go 

up into high dimensions and there is a lot of theoretical 
research that has tried to crack the problem, but basically 
it has not been really solved in any practically effective 
way.  So, basically you just have to go through a 
significant fraction of the data set to find the nearest neighbor. No ideas of hierarchical search really work in 
these way high dimensions.  For example, Jerry Friedman in 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   357357the audience pioneered the idea of using hierarchical search.  It works great in low dimensions, like ten 

dimensions or something, but you know, when N is much 

smaller than D, it is not a viable method. Well, the other issues we just don't understand enough about what our data structures are that we are 
gathering.  They are these things up in high dimensional 

space.  There isn't enough terms of reference for 

mathematics that has been provided to us to describe it.  

We lack the language.  It is really the responsibility of 

math to develop that language. So, a lot of these things are about point clouds and high dimensions, just individual points are pictures or sounds or something.  They are up in high dimensions.  If 

we collect the whole data base, we have a cloud of points 
and high dimensions.  That has some structure.  What is it?  

We believe that there is something like a manifold or 
complex or some other mathematical object behind it. We also know that when we look at things like the articulations of images as they vary through some condition like the pose, that we can actually see that things follow a trajectory up in some high dimensional space notionally, 
but we can't visualize it or understand it very well. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   358358So, people are trying to develop methods to let us understand better what the manifolds of data are like.  

Tell me what this data looks like.  Josh Tannenbaum, who I 

guess is now going to M.I.T., did this work with EisoMap(?), which given an unordered set of pictures of the hands, okay, figures out a map that shows what the 
underlying parameter space is.  So, there is a parameter 

that is like this and there is -- that is this parameter 
and then there is a parameter that goes like that and that 
is discovered by a method that just takes this unstructured 
data set and finds the parameterization. We need a lot more understanding in this direction.  The kinds of image data that you see here, this 
is just one articulation, one specific issue and one 
methodology for dealing with it.  But we could go much 

further. Representation of high dimensional data, Professor Coifman mentioned this and in some of Professor 
Malik's work it is also relevant.  What are the right 

features or the right basis to represent these high dimensional data in so that you can pull out the important structures?  So, just as an example, if you look at facial 

gestures, faces articulating in time and you try to find 
how do you actually represent those gestures the best, one The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   359359could think of using a technique like principal components analysis to do that.  It fails very much because the 

structure of looking at facial articulation is nothing like 
the linear manifold structure that, you know, 70 years ago was really, you know, cutting edge stuff, when Hoteling(?) came up with principal components.   It is a much more subtle thing.  So, independent 
components analysis deal much more with the structure as it 
really is and you get little basis functions, each one of 
which can be mapped and correlated with an actual muscle 
that is able to do an articulation of the face.  You can 

discover that from data. It is also nice to come up with mathematically defined systems that correlate in some way with the 
underlying structures of the data.  So, through techniques 

like multi-resolution analysis, there are mathematicians 
designing, you know, bases and frames and so on that have 
some of the features that correlate in a way with what you 
see in these data.  So, for example, through a construction 

of taking data and band pass filtering it, breaking it into blocks and doing local redon(?) transform on each block, you can come up with systems that have the property that 
they add in little local ridges and so on.  So, you can 

represent with low dimensions structures like fingerprints The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   360360because you have designed special ways of representing data that have long -- elongated structures and it is also 

relevant to the facial articulation because the muscles and 
so on have exactly the structure that you saw. Okay.  So, just some of the points I have made, 
we are entering an era of data, the generalizability, the 
robustness, the scalability that have come up in some of 
these things are issues that will have to be addressed and 
in order for that data to deliver for any kind of homeland 
defense, where mathematicians can contribute is 
understanding fundamentally the structure of this high 
dimensional data much better than we do today.  It can 
provide a language to science and a whole new set of concepts that may make them think better about it. Our challenge is to think more about how to cope with dimensional glut, understand high dimensional space 
and represent high dimensional data.  The speakers have 

brought up the issues that I have said in various ways and 
trying to -- you know, under one umbrella, cover all of 
this is pretty hard, but certainly in Professor Malik's talk was brought up the issue of robustness to articulation.  We don't understand the articulation 

manifold of the images well enough.  As an object in the 

world is articulated, the images that it generates go The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   361361through a manifold in high dimensional space.  It is poorly 
understood.  IsoMap is an example of a tool that goes in 

the right direction. But to get robustness to articulations, it would be good to understand them better.  The structure of image 
manifolds, as Professor Malik mentioned, working directly 
with shape, that is again trying to get away from a flat 
idea of the way data are in high dimensional space and come 
up with a completely different way to parameterize things. Professor Coifman, well, he basically like we are co-authors, so I am just extending his talk, but, anyway, 
the connections there are pretty obvious. Finally, I think what Rabiner showed is first of all the ability to be robust to articulations was 
mentioned.  So, again, to understand I think how those 

strange noises in the data -- what is the structure of the 
manifold of those things up in high dimensional space.  So, 

the structure is speech and confusers would be interesting 
to know. I think he has shown that if you work very hard for a long time, you can take some simple math ideas and really make them deliver, which also is a very important 

thread for us to not lose track of.  He mentioned a number 

of math problems that he thought would be interesting.  I 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   362362wish he had been able to stay and we could have discussed 
those at greater length. There was a questioner in the audience who said, well, but you said you had just been carrying out an implementation for 20 years.  Are there any new math 
problems that we really need to break now?  It would be 

very interesting to hear what he had to say. I think all the speakers have pointed out that a lot of progress has been stimulated by -- in math, I think, 
from the study of images and -- associated multimedia data 

and I think that will continue as well and eventually we 
will see the payoff in homeland security deliverables, but perhaps a long time. Thank you. 
 [Applause.]  
PARTICIPANT:  [Comment off microphone.]  
MR. DONOHO:  IsoMap is just a preprocessor for 
multidimensional scaling, for example.  So, for instance, 

you didn't have this standard method multidimensional 
scaling, we wouldn't be able to -- just provide a special set of distances. Has any of this played out?  I mean there are 
10,000 references a year to that methodology.  I don't 

think I could track them all down and make a meta-analysis The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   363363of how many were just, you know, forgotten publications.  
But it just seems like millions of references -- PARTICIPANT:  [Comment off microphone.]  
MR. DONOHO:  We are right now getting data in 
volumes that were never considered 20 years ago.  We have 
computation in ways that were not possible 20 years ago; 
whereas, the methodology of 80 years ago, just with the 

data and computations that we have is starting to deliver 
some impressive results.  So, if we are talking about more 

recent methodology, well, let the data take hold and let 
some computations take hold. MR. MC CURLEY:  [Comment off microphone.]  MR. DONOHO:  Your earlier question about what 
features would help to index, I think it is connected with 
that.  I think that the idea of looking for nearest 

neighbors in a database of all the multimedia experiences 
in the whole unit, it is sort of where this is going.  

Right?  That is not going to happen. 
 There ought to be a 
more intelligent way to index, to compress and so on. Can we make a decision right now how much data to gather?  I don't know.  I think economics will drive 
everything. PARTICIPANT:  [Comment off microphone.]  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   364364MR. DONOHO:  It is an excellent question.  I have 
some opinions on the matter but I don't know if I have 
really the right to stand between people and liquid 
refreshment. Yes, I think that most of the political things that I have seen are between non-technical people who are 
playing out the dynamics of where they are coming from 
rather than looking at really solving the problem.  So, you 

know, I am a little bit -- so, for example, a national I.D. 
card wouldn't have any privacy issues if all it was used 
for is for -- you know, it contained data on the card and 
it was yours and it was digitally signed and encrypted and all of that stuff and there was no national database that big brother could look through. Actually, the point was that it was the card and that was it.  Right?  What people assumes it means there is 

that big brother has all the stuff there and they can track 
their movements and stuff like that.  So, there are all 

those kinds of things.  There is nothing that says the I.D. 

card can't just be used for face verification or identity verification.  You are that person and that is it.  They 
are not communicating with anybody.  It is illegal to 

communicate with anybody.  That can all be done.  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   365365But people get together and butt heads is sort of 
an Orwell characterization I guess.  The science is 

absolutely clear, that you could do it without having all 
of those -- violating personal liberty and so on. DR. LENCZOWSKI:  Are there other questions for 
any of the speakers?  I guess 
that everyone is ready to 
take their break.  I want to thank you very much for your participation this afternoon. 
[Applause.] The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   366366Remarks on Image Analysis and Voice Rcognition   David Donoho  
  Our era has defined itself as a data era by creating pervasive netw
orks and gargantuan databases that are promulgating an ethic of
 data-rich discourse and decisions. Some 
scientific issues that arise in working with massive amounts of data include these: 
   GeneralizabilityŒbuilding systems that can efficiently handle data for billions of people  RobustnessŒbuilding systems that work under articulated conditions, and 
 Understanding the structure of the dataŒtechniques for working with data in very high dimensional space. 
  
Take, for example, the task of coping with high-dimensional data in body gesture 

recognition.  If you look at an utterance or an image, you are talking about something that 
is a vector in a 1,000- or 1,000,000-dimensiona
l space. For example, human identity, 
even highly decimated, might require some 
65,000 variables just to produce raw imagery. 
  
Characterization of facial gestures is a subtle thing, and independent-components analysis (as opposed to principal-compone
nts analysis) deals much more
 with the structure as it really is. You get little basis functions, each
 one of which can be mapped and correlated 
with an actual muscle that is able
 to do an articulation of the face. 
  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   367367Opening Remarks and Discussion, April 27
  Transcript of Presentation   The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   368368DR. CHAYES:  I'm not exactly sure what we are 
going to do in this session.  We have a great session 

coming up at 9 o'clock. Let me tell you a couple of things about the room.  We are filming this for the MSRI website, so that it 
will be archived.  This is the only mike which we will hear 

in the room, but all the speakers should attempt to speak 
into those mikes, even though they won't seem as if they 
are being miked, because it is being picked up for the 
film.  If you can remember, wh
en you ask a question, it would be great if you would go to that mike over there and 
speak into that, just so that this is archived better. The second thing is that the temperature in the room -- I know that some people were freezing yesterday and 
other people claimed to be quite warm.  It is considerably 

warmer on that side of the room, so if you are freezing, 
you can do your own temperature control by just moving from 
one side of the room to the other, if we haven't gotten the 
heating or cooling system working properly in here, which 
it seems like we haven't, actually, given the way the room feels. The purpose of this session, which I was just told a few minutes ago that I am chairing, is just to try 
to summarize what we talked about yesterday.  This is a 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   369369very unusual workshop, as anyone who was here yesterday realizes.  We have got people who are actually 

practitioners in various fields, which are related to 
homeland security, although the speakers themselves may not have thought in much detail about homeland security in the past.  We have also got mathematicians, some of whom are 

really core mathematicians. What we hope to come out of this is that a lot of mathematicians who have not really thought about doing 
applied work in the past or certainly who have not thought 
about doing anything like homeland security, are now 
thinking about it.  A lot of mathematicians who haven't 
made contributions to these kinds of efforts in the past want to make contributions in the future, so we need a 
research agenda and we don't want to do what mathematicians 
sometimes do, which is just make up a problem and then 
write in the beginning of your NSF proposal that this is 
relevant to such-and-such.  We really want to talk to 

people in the field to find out what their real problems 
are, and set a research agenda for the community that people who are interested can get involved in.  Hopefully, 
it will be interesting enough that many people will want to 
get involved. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   370370I know that there were some comments yesterday that we didn't have time for, so I am hoping that some of 
you who had general comments to make -- I know that Andrew 
made some interesting general comments, but if others of you have general comments on homeland security, on the role of mathematics in homeland security, and if you are 
prepared to make those comments at this hour of the 
morning, this is your big chance. Does anybody have comments?  I'll start calling 
on people.  Sally.  And, Sally, can you speak into that so 

that we can record you for posterity? DR. KELLER-McNULTY:  I don't need to, because I 
was going to point to Kathy, who was making some important comments outside during coffee. DR. CHAYES:  Oh, Kathy Laskey, wonderful.   
DR. KELLER-McNULTY:  So I call on her to stand up 
and do that. DR. LASKEY:  As I said to a few of you at the 
reception before and also in comments outside, I think we 
really have to take a systems approach to the homeland security issue.  We think of ourselves as being part of a 
system that involves equipment, people, processes, and we 
want to improve our over
all security process, and The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   371371mathematics plays a role in that.  There are important 
mathematics challenges. One of the things that I want to avoid is people thinking I have this mathematical algorithm that I am going to use to solve problems of homeland security, or this mathematical theorem that I have just proved is going to 
solve homeland security.  What you want to do is look for 

aspects of that system that can be improved. What we want to look at is the critical aspects.  
We want to be able to analyze
 the whole system and say, 
what are the bottlenecks, what are the problems.  It may be 

that I can fix this piece of the system and it wouldn't do anything for overall system performance.  It may be that 
the driver is something else.  So we have to look at how 

all of the components of the system interact, and that in 
itself poses mathematical challenges. We were talking about gain theory.  We were 
talking about economic and gain theoretic models of the 
actors in the system playing against each other.  In order 

to solve those kinds of challenges, it requires the mathematicians to work with the political scientists, the anthropologists, the organizations, the psychologists, to 
analyze behaviors of organizations and what happens when we The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   372372do this and they do that, and 
the gaming aspects of it.  
But all those things have to go together as a system.   DR. CHAYES:  Let me ask you a question about 
that.  What about mathematics?  How does the system 
approach involve mathematics?  Or are you simply saying 
that mathematicians must interact with these other groups? DR. LASKEY:  There are mathematical systems.  
There are mathematical challenges in analyzing a system, 
breaking it into sub-systems, issues of modelling pieces of 
the system and how they interact, and different 
resolutions.  I can model the economy at the macro level by 

flows of currency, or I can look at individual micro -- I forget the name of the person who gave the talk yesterday, where he was talking about the agent simulations.  I can 

make the connection between the micro and the macro 
behavior. There are definitely mathematical challenges in that.  There are system architectures we can design.  

Suppose we design our airpor
t security architecture this way.  This is what happens when people walk in the door.  
They go up to the counter and they present their security, and then they go through the lines and they do this.  You 

can build a simulation of that, a mathematical model of it, 
and then simulate it, and then analyze different changes in The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   373373the system architecture and how that will impact on airport security.  If I increase the sensitivity of this sensor 

when I am putting my luggage through, how is that going to 
impact on overall security? DR. CHAYES:  And the economic implications of 
doing that also. DR. LASKEY:  It is benefit tradeoffs, right. 
DR. CHAYES:  Yes, cost-benefit. 
DR. LASKEY:  But the issues of looking at these 
things not as a simulation that gives as an answer, because 
I don't think we can build a giant simulation of our 
security apparatus and then say, let me change this parameter and see what the classic implications are and the security implications.  But we can analyze pieces of it.  

We can try to think globally as a system. DR. CHAYES:  Peter? 
DR. BICKEL:  I think what has to distinguish the 
short term and long term effects and the interaction with 
mathematics.  I think Kathy has described the short term 

interactions which could benefit directly homeland security. On the other hand, we had yesterday a longer term question, which would be called for not only by the 
homeland security concerns, but more generally by society.  
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   374374I am referring to Dave Donoho's presentation, or the discussion from Coifman.  There you have these large 

problems, contributions to which will hopefully, in fact, I 
think almost surely, will move back possibly to directly affect how one can deal with problems of homeland security.  
So I think one has to distinguish between --  DR. CHAYES:  Any other people volunteering to 
make comments before I call on someone?  I would actually 

like to hear from someone from one of the funding agencies, 
or one of the agencies that would potentially fund.   I see people almost heading towards the door at this point, looking away.  This is what I do; I look away 
when I go through the airport security, so that they won't choose me.  So I see all the people I know from the 

agencies, looking away.  It is effective sometimes, but I 

know your names. But seriously, I think that one of the ways in 
which the mathematics community moves, since we are a 
fairly conservative community, is that we are energized by 
some of the federal agencies putting funds in various places.  So I was wondering if anybody from the agencies 
would like to speak to the question of, if people here want 
to start doing work on some of the problems that we have 

discussed, how do you deal with very high dimensional The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   375375systems and some of the other problems that we have talked about, where would this fit in, in NSF and DARPA and DoD?  

Where would somebody apply to do this, and what is the 
infrastructure that exists already, or that we might want to implement to support these kinds of efforts? Deborah?  You knew I was going to call on you. 
DR. LOCKHART:  If I had to describe NSF's 
mission, it is to support basic research in science and 

education.  So we respond to proposals that come.  We don't 

necessarily put out special calls for proposals in a 
particular area, although sometimes we do. What I would say at this point on the best thing someone could do if they wanted to make a proposal in this area is simply to submit a proposal.  We have a number of 

programs in our division that would certainly welcome such 
proposals.   My own program in applied mathematics, I can see a number of the issues that we talked about yesterday being 
relevant to that.  We have a program called computational 

methods for statistics and probability that I think would also be very, very response to proposals in these areas.  
So there already exists this venue for individuals who want 
to do research. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   376376But I want to follow up on something Felipe Hondure said yesterday.  There is another vehicle that we 

started two or three years ago that I think can be very, 
very useful for those of you who are seeking support.  That 
is a relatively new vehicle, research groups in mathematical sciences.   We are currently beginning the process of recommending awards in the third round.  The purpose of 

this program is support groups of researchers to work on 
what they think are important problems.  These are the 

kinds of problems that require the collective expertise of 
either a group of mathematicians working together or a group of statisticians working together or mathematicians and statisticians working together with people in other 
disciplines.  So the proposals can either be 

multidisciplinary or not, as the problem is described, and 
in terms of what is demanded in terms of expertise. The duration of such grants is three years, and the funding varies from $150 K to $350 K per year.  So a 

number of the grants approach on the order of close to a million dollars over three years, which can support students, postdocs, et cetera.   What is important is the 

timeliness of the problem, and I can't think of things more 
timely than this, of course the scientific quality, the The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   377377fact that a project has to make the case that the results will reflect -- that the group will be more than the sum of 
its parts.   So that is certainly a vehicle.  Now, in terms of 
when proposals come in, we are in the process of putting together our new solicitation for that right now.  I would 

expect that the required letters of intent would be coming 
in sometime in August, and the proposals would be due 
sometime in mid-September, so there would be sufficient 
time.  So it is not a hurry up, get this in tomorrow kind 

of program, but something that could reflect these middle 
and longer term issues that so many of you have talked about over the last day or so. So I think right now there are ways we can use our existing venues.  I don't know if there is going to be 

a special kind of money available at NSF to broaden these 
kinds of things.  That will be up to the President and 

Congress.  But we don't have anything right now that -- but 

I suspect that if we do, we will be hearing about it.   DR. KELLER-McNULTY:  Jennifer, I'm going to pick 
on another person.  I am going to make Sally get up and 
reiterate some of the things we were talking about at the 
reception in terms of trying to think of how --  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   378378DR. CHAYES:  This is not being picked up, so 
perhaps you can come up here or go over there. DR. KELLER-McNULTY:  To me, part of the issue is 
how do we actually start to mobilize an effort in certain areas to try to look at the complexity of the problems we 
are talking about, both short term and long term.   At the reception we were talking about that a little bit, and Sally actually brought up some really good 
examples of historically where this has been done in the 

areas that started out with some problems, probably equally 
vague to some degree as what we are talking about in the 

homeland security.   So Sally, do you want to comment on some of that?  
I don't know how one gets funding for this; that is sort of 
a secondary issue to me in terms of figuring out what are 

some models to jump start activity. DR. BLOWER:  What we were talking about were 
problems that academics have, that we are all trying to 
work on specific problems.  We can't suddenly switch 

because your funding depends on it. But one thing that perhaps would be a good idea is to put a team of people together for a month and give 
them a specific question and a specific mandate.  They 

would spend a week talking about something and then two The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   379379weeks actually doing it, and the final week actually writing the manuscripts and getting them out.  So you are 

taking people out of their normal environments but giving 
them a specific problem. For example, since I am on infectious diseases, 
that is immediately what comes to mind, to say with 
smallpox, and what could happen at different centers.  So 

you might get teams of people, and they end up with a 
variety of different approaches, or you get a group effort 

at the end.  So that would be a month's worth of work, but 

you could do that in a relatively short term. That is what happened with the foot and mouth epidemic in the U.K.  People were switched onto that full 
time, and they came out with it relatively quickly. DR. LOCKHART:  I just want to mention -- I can't 
really say any specifics right now, but there are a number 
of things that we are working on that would facilitate the 
formation of such groups.  Watch this space; we may be able 

to tell you more in a month or two. DR. CHAYES:  Right.  I am allowed to say a little 
bit, since I am not bound.  I don't know anything for 
certain, but it may be that there is an institute that may 
be funded which is designed for this type of program, which 
is designed to bring people together to solve a particular The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   380380problem.  If such an institute were to be funded, I would 
assume -- and I am asking this of the granting agency that 
might do such funding -- whether it could be done on a 
short time scale. This is not clear.  I now that the NSF can 
sometimes with relatively small amounts of money respond on 
a small time scale.  I think that for these particular 

issues, it is very important.  But the foot and mouth 

disease, if in England they had to wait for a new funding 
cycle, a lot of animals would have died.  So hopefully 

there will be a way of responding to this quickly.  If 

these unsubstantiated rumors are true, there will be a venue. Also, Bamf, which has been funded, has some monies set aside for small research groups.  Bamf is also 

in a very nice area.  So if you like to ski or you like the 

mountains, you might like it even more than Santa Fe.  They 

certainly do have money for -- I think they are also called 
focused research groups.   I'm sure many of you know, there is a new math institute at Bamf that is a collaboration of PIMS, which is the Pacific Institute of Mathematical Sciences, and MSRI.  

It has some NSF funding, highly leveraged NSF funding.  

There are going to be on the order of 40 weekly workshops The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   381381there.  If somebody has longer term plans, one cold apply 
for a workshop on one of these 
issues, but you can also 
bring together small groups of people to work on a 
particular problem.  That has been funded. So any issues other than funding issues?  I 
really liked what we heard at the end of the day yesterday, 
about high dimensional problems.  I think that brings 

together not just statistics.  There is a huge element of 

statistics in that, but I think that a lot of us realize 

that stat has a huge place in homeland security.   One of the things that I would like to see more discussion of is how other areas of mathematics, especially core mathematics, are necessary to solve some of these problems.  I think it is clear that they are necessary.  

When you get these large amounts of data, you need a 
statistical analysis, but you also need some geometry, 
anthropology. So I would like to hear either from somebody now in the next few minutes, or hopefully in the talks that we 
will hear today, how areas of mathematics that we generally 
think of as core mathematics are necessary to solve these problems, working hand in hand with statisticians and with 
applied people in the particular field. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   382382I guess I am not going to hear that now, which is fine.  Is Howard here?  Howard should be here soon.  Is 

anybody here from the 9 o'clock session? PARTICIPANT:  Howard is outside. DR. CHAYES:  Howard is outside.  I will go get 
Howard, and then that session will start. (Brief recess.) 
DR. CHAYES:  I am very excited about this next 
session.  We are very lucky to have Howard Schmidt from the 

White House here.  He is from the Office of Cyber Security, 

which is part of the White House.  He was at Microsoft, running the security for Microsoft until he went to the White House a few months ago.  It is Microsoft's loss, but hopefully it is cyber 

security's gain. DR. SCHMIDT:  Thank you very much.  It is great 
to be here this morning.   I think back to the first e-mail I got from 
Jennifer about this meeting.  The title itself is somewhat 

very ominous as far as mathematics and sciences and homeland security.  At first, I thought she was joking with 
me, in all honesty. As I started thinking about it, as I got the e-mail that said this really wasn't a joke, I started looking The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   383383into it and thinking, what better way to solve some of the issues that we have got that aren't going to be solved with 
guns, gates and guards and fences and stuff like that.  So 

I thank you for the opportunity to be here. I am joined by some extremely distinguished folks on the panel and the follow-on review and discussion.  I am 

just going to say their names for right now.  After I asked 

everyone give me some little talking points on your bios 

and everything, I am probably going to let them do it, 
because I think I would not do them justice by introducing 
them my way, so I would like to have them do it themselves. In that vein, as we go through the session this morning, I would like to start out just framing some of the things we are looking at from the White House perspective 
in this area.  As I have talked to the panelists -- and 

their presentation -- in the back of your mind, and I'm 
sure they will point it out specifically, look at some of 
the correlations between some of the things we are looking 

to accomplish in creating a national strategy in defending 
cyberspace, where is where one of our key focuses is, and some of the things that the panelists are going to be talking about.  Going back to my previous comment about thinking this might be a joke, in reality this makes a lot of sense.  
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   384384Listening to what they are going to say, you will see whether there is so much potential in using the talent to 
solve some of the key problems we have got. I'm not sure if it was Dorothy or someone at one point talked about the big encryption debate that was going around.  The comment was made, if you think encryption is 

the answer to security, you understand neither security nor 
encryption.   So when you look at the picture from the 

things we are trying to solve, 
it is just as complex as 
that. So with that, let me talk about some of the 
things that the President's Critical Infrastructure Protection Board is looking at as priorities, and then turn 
it over to my distinguished colleagues here. First and foremost, one of the things that we find to be in short supply is awareness.  As we have gone 

around the country, we have talked to government leaders, 
we have talked to industry leaders.  If you get outside 

that small sphere of security and you talk about security, 
you get the deer in the headlight look, so people start to drool, going, what are you talking about?  Why do I care 
about this? So there is this component about the awareness and the education we really need to focus on, and build The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   385385that piece up.  One of the ways we are looking at this 
right now through the education component is, we have 
created a scholarship program called Scholarships for 
Service.  The National Science Foundation administers it.  
I think our biggest customer thus far has been the Department of Defense, where they allocate funds through NSF to scholarships to people in advanced degree programs 
in information assurance, information security.  They do a 

one-for-one; if we pay for one year of tuition, they come 
back and do one year of government service, two years and 
two years, et cetera. The intent is to build the cadre of expertise that we have internal to the government, because we lose it regularly.  Many go back and forth between the private 

sector. The discussion also goes, though, if we train these people and they come back and do two years of 
government service, they are going to be prime candidates 
to go in the public sector.  My answer is, wonderful, 

because who are the owners and operators of the critical infrastructure that we care about?  The private sector.  So 
it is a win-win situation. We have a couple of years to beef up the government stuff, which we need desperate help on.  At the 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   386386same time, we have the opportunity for those folks to get some real, live, on the job training, move out into the 
private sector and then continue to proliferate the 
wonderful things they have learned. The other priority is the information sharing part.  This is a wonderful forum for that as well.  There 

is this pace of activity that goes on that you see in the 
newspaper all the time.  I read one last night.  There was 

a bunch of computer sites in Korea, in which the ill-
intended people are doing things and using those to launch 
attacks on other systems around the world. That is a bad thing.  
But when you try to get details and you try to get some information, it is generally a standoff approach.  We are not privy to a lot 

of the details.  We are not privy to a lot of the things 

that could help us better protect ourselves.  So this 

sharing amongst professionals, and there is no group that 
does it better than academia, and sharing that information 
and saying, let's figure out how this is going on, let's 
figure out the defenses to make it work accordingly. The other one is the R&D component.  There is a 
true belief, at least in the government circle, and I think 
it is shared by some of my colleagues, I know when I was in 
the private sector, many of us talked about it, that there The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   387387is some wonderful R&D being done in the buildings where the walls that have no windows and being done in the venue of 
national security. There is some really great stuff being done by the researchers in the private sectors to generate things that can be used to bring to market to benefit the public.  

But there is some space in the middle that we are not sure 
what that space is.  We think there is some really hard-

core, thoughtful R&D that needs to be done that is not 
being funded. So we have asked the Congress to give us a boatload of money, in the tens of millions of dollars, to fund some key programs.  People come to us and say, gee, I 
think we can do this, and this will help the overall 
package and we can help fund these things on the front end.  

So the R&D is extremely important. I want to touch on another thing that is a priority for us, and that is some pure technology things, 
the way the Internet was built.  That is the domain name 

servers and border gateway protocols.   If you are not familiar with this aspect of it, the domain name servers are those things, when you type in 
a name, it is converted to a number, when then identifies 
your address on the Internet.  There are about 14 of them 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   388388out there.  So if I wanted to disrupt activity in the 
online world, be it commercial or be it telecommunications, 
that is where I will go, because I can knock out those 
fairly handily because they are addressable from the Internet.  They are addressable in spaces where they have 
to be able to have an in-band address to be able to 
communicate.  So consequently, we have some real concerns 

about that. I don't think redundancy is the answer.  In the 
border gateway protocols, the language they talk in is 
insecure.  Many times it is done in unclear text.  We see 

in this, particularly going back to the illustration I mentioned about career -- one of the things I cited was being able to create denial of service attacks as a result 
of it. Then there is the priority we have about standards and best practices.  Many of you -- and Dorothy 

and I were just talking about this in the lobby, about the 
old Orange Book that effectively said, here is the standard 
to which you design things.  Then no one can meet the 
standard, so consequently they start 
to give exemptions.  
Then exemptions led to almost total obliteration of the 
standard and say don't worry about it anymore, because 
nobody can meet it. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   389389We have got to find a meaningful scientific way to say, we can bring this up.  We can raise the standard so 

we can use the procurement power that we have both within 
government and outside of government to make sure that the development process meets what we need in the areas of security. Let me broaden security for just a moment, because I am almost fanatical in some cases about this.  I 

want to use the word trust, because security is only a 
component of it.  I will qualify that right now.  You have 

got the security, you've got the privacy, you've got the 
availability component.  There has been a lot of discussion 
of late -- this is a little bit of a digression from my notes here, but there has been a lot of discussion that 
security is going to trump privacy. I oftentimes get asked, where we are going to level?  I don't know.  We are still in this aftershock mode 

after what happened last year.  So am I willing to give up 

a little bit of my privacy for security?  I don't know that 

I will be six months from now, so I don't know what I'll feel.  But I think fundamentally, the issue always comes 
across as an issue of trust.  You have to have the 

security, you have to have the privacy, you have to have The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   390390the availability.  So we are talking about the standards 
and best practices that we look to; those all play into it. The next one is something that is extremely worrisome to me as well as many of my colleagues, and that is digital control systems.  Last year, there was an 
incident where a disgruntled employee left a company in 
Australia, went back in in an unauthorized manner, broke 
into the systems and reversed the flow of raw sewage.  

Instead of going into the raw sewage treatment plant, they 
went into one of the local parks.  It is all because of 

accessibility to digital control systems. Look what we are seeing today.  We are seeing a 
lot of these digital control systems being accessible or addressable from the Internet.  It makes business sense, 

but it doesn't make security sense.  Not only do we have 

directly accessible from the Internet, but we are finding 
some that are saying, no, we don't have any addressable 

space on the Internet, and you find out that they have 
digital control systems connected to an internal 
administrative LAN which is then connected to the Internet on the other side, which translates into, they are addressable from the Internet. That is very worrisome.  It controls the power 
grid, it controls the water supplies in many instances.  It 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   391391controls the water flowing over many dams to generate electricity.  There is a whole bunch of things that are 

being controlled by digital control devices right now.   When we talk to some of the people that are involved in the technology designing some of these things -- this is something that maybe you all can collectively 
help with -- they say, we would 
like to do more.  But what 
happens is, even if we are looking 
to do a simple thing like authentication a digital control system, when we are 
talking nanosecond switching time, there is no way to 
authenticate something and still do the switching in an 
appropriate manner.  So we need to figure out a scientific 
way to be able to do the authentication without losing the gating factor, that we have to do switching of these 

things.   It is a complex problem, and it is only going to be solved by some of the activity that you all are doing. DR. BORGS:  I don't understand that.  If I can go 
in from the Internet to reverse the flow of the sewage 
system, this is not necessarily to make it --  PARTICIPANT:  An example.  There are other 
examples. DR. SCHMIDT:  Yes, that was a very broad example 
from something that was very public in the news. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   392392DR. BORGS:  But where you are worried about this 
outside the controls, that should not --  DR. CHAYES: The electricity, for example. 
DR. SCHMIDT: For example, last year there was a storm in the Pacific Northwest.  A tree blew down in Oregon 
and the lights went out in Tucson, Arizona, 1500 miles 
away.  It is all because of the switching controls. Many of the switching controls, for example, in the power grid are based on very, very slight fluctuations 
in electrical usage that would cause the entire system to 
switch over to another grid to provide power.  Those are 

the sort of instantaneous controls that need to be switched, but there has also got to be the ability to do 
them on an authenticated mechanism.  That is what I am 

referring to. Lastly, and by all means no less importantly, 
would be the issues around securing the future systems.  I 

love wireless.  I don't know how many of you use it in 

here, but I couldn't live without it.  I did it when I was 

at Microsoft, I use it at my home now, and I love it, but 
it is not the most secure environment right now because it hasn't been designed as such.  We have grave concerns about 

it. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   393393Many agencies are talking about outlawing the use of it.  So consequently, there are issues around the 

authentication piece, about the encryption piece, and other 
future generation systems that we are looking at. So with that, I took this opportunity to talk about what we are concerned about in framing a broad 
perspective, before I turn it over to my distinguished 
colleagues to talk about their concerns. Thank you very much.  I'd like to start out by 
asking Dorothy Denning to step up and give us her thoughts 
on it.  Thank you. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   394394Howard Schmidt 
ﬁIntroduction by Session Chairﬂ  
Transcript of Presentation  
Summary of Presentation 
Video Presentation 
 Howard A. Schmidt was appointed by President Ge
orge W. Bush as a Special Assistant to the 
President and the Vice Chair of the President'
s Critical Infrastructure Protection Board in 
December 2001. The Cyber Security Board supp
orts Dr. Condoleezza Rice, National Security 
Advisor and Tom Ridge, Secretary of Homeland 
Security. The Cyber Security Board focuses on 
building a specialized group of senior government
 and private sector leaders to focus on cyber 
security issues and coordination of
 security related incidents.  
 Previously, Mr. Schmidt was chief security office
r for Microsoft Corp., overseeing the Security 
Strategies Group, which was responsible for ensu
ring the development of a trusted computing 
environment via auditing, policy, best practices and 
incubation of security pr
oducts and practices. 
Before working at Microsoft, Mr. Schmidt was a 
supervisory special agent and director of the Air 
Force Office of Special Investigations (AFOSI),
 Computer Forensic Lab and Computer Crime and 
Information Warfare Division. While there, he es
tablished the first dedicated computer forensic 
lab into the government. AFOSI specialized in 
investigating intrusions into government and 
military systems by unauthorized persons in count
erintelligence organizations and criminals. 
Before working at AFOSI, Mr. Schmidt was with 
the FBI at the National Drug Intelligence Center, 
where he headed the Computer Exploitation Team. 
He is recognized as one of the pioneers in 
the field of computer forensics and computer evid
ence collection. Before working at the FBI, Mr. 
Schmidt was a city police officer from 1983 to 1994 for the police department in Chandler, 
Arizona.  
 
Mr. Schmidt served with the U.S. Air Force in 
various roles from 1967 to 1983, both on active 
duty and in the civil service. He has served in 
the military reserves since 1989 and currently 
serves as a credentialed special agent in the 
U.S. Army Reserves, Criminal Investigation 
Division. He has testified as an 
expert witness in federal and military courts in the areas of 
computer crime, computer forensics, and Internet activity.  

 Mr. Schmidt had also served as the international 
president of the Information Systems Security 
Association (ISSA) and the Information Technology 
Information Sharing and Analysis Center (IT-
ISAC). He is a former executive board member 
of the International Organization of Computer 
Evidence and served as the cochair of the Federa
l Computer Investigations Committee. He is a 
member of the American Academy of Forensic Scientists. He served as an advisory board 

member for the Technical Research Institute of
 the National White Collar Crime Center and is a 
distinguished special lecturer at the University 
of New Haven in Connecticut, teaching a graduate 
certificate course in forensic computing. He 
served as an augmented member of the President's 
Committee of Advisors on Science and Technology in the formation of an Institute for Information 
Infrastructure Protection. Mr. Sc
hmidt was one of 29 industry leaders called to the White House to 
meet with President Clinton on cybersecurity. 
He has testified before a joint committee on 
computer security and has been instrumental in 
the creation of public and private partnerships 
and information-sharing initiatives.  
 
Mr. Schmidt holds a bachelor's degree in business administration and a master's degree in 
organizational management. 
  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   395395 The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   396396DR. SCHMIDT:  Thank you very much.  It is great to be here this morning.   I think back to the first e-mail I got from Jennifer about this meeting.  The title itself is somewhat very ominous as far as mathematics and sciences and homeland security.  At first, I thought she was joking with 
me, in all honesty. As I started thinking about it, as I got the e-mail that said this really wasn't a joke, I started looking 
into it and thinking, what better way to solve some of the 
issues that we have got that aren't going to be solved with 
guns, gates and guards and fences and stuff like that.  So I thank you for the opportunity to be here. I am joined by some extremely distinguished folks on the panel and the follow-on review and discussion.  I am 
just going to say their names for right now.  After I asked 
everyone give me some little talking points on your bios 
and everything, I am probably going to let them do it, 
because I think I would not do them justice by introducing 
them my way, so I would like to have them do it themselves. In that vein, as we go through the session this morning, I would like to start out just framing some of the 
things we are looking at from the White House perspective 
in this area.  As I have talked to the panelists -- and The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   397397their presentation -- in the back of your mind, and I'm sure they will point it out specifically, look at some of 
the correlations between some of the things we are looking 
to accomplish in creating a national strategy in defending cyberspace, where is where one of our key focuses is, and some of the things that the panelists are going to be 
talking about.  Going back to my previous comment about thinking this might be a joke, in reality this makes a lot of sense.  
Listening to what they are going to say, you will see 
whether there is so much potential in using the talent to 
solve some of the key problems we have got. I'm not sure if it was Dorothy or someone at one point talked about the big encryption debate that was going 
around.  The comment was made, if you think encryption is 
the answer to security, you understand neither security nor 
encryption.  So when you look at the picture from the 
things we are trying to solve, it is just as complex as 
that. So with that, let me talk about some of the things that the President's Critical Infrastructure Protection Board is looking at as priorities, and then turn 
it over to my distinguished colleagues here. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   398398First and foremost, one of the things that we find to be in short supply is awareness.  As we have gone 
around the country, we have talked to government leaders, 
we have talked to industry leaders.  If you get outside that small sphere of security and you talk about security, you get the deer in the headlight look, so people start to 
drool, going, what are you talking about?  Why do I care 
about this? So there is this component about the awareness and the education we really need to focus on, and build 
that piece up.  One of the ways we are looking at this 
right now through the education component is, we have created a scholarship program called Scholarships for Service.  The National Science Foundation administers it.  
I think our biggest customer thus far has been the 
Department of Defense, where they allocate funds through 
NSF to scholarships to people in advanced degree programs 
in information assurance, information security.  They do a 
one-for-one; if we pay for one year of tuition, they come 
back and do one year of government service, two years and two years, et cetera. The intent is to build the cadre of expertise that we have internal to the government, because we lose it The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   399399regularly.  Many go back and forth between the private sector. The discussion also goes, though, if we train these people and they come back and do two years of government service, they are going to be prime candidates to go in the public sector.  My answer is, wonderful, 
because who are the owners and operators of the critical 
infrastructure that we care about?  The private sector.  So 
it is a win-win situation. We have a couple of years to beef up the government stuff, which we need desperate help on.  At the 
same time, we have the opportunity for those folks to get some real, live, on the job training, move out into the private sector and then continue to proliferate the 
wonderful things they have learned. The other priority is the information sharing part.  This is a wonderful forum for that as well.  There 
is this pace of activity that goes on that you see in the 
newspaper all the time.  I read one last night.  There was 
a bunch of computer sites in Korea, in which the ill-intended people are doing things and using those to launch attacks on other systems around the world. That is a bad thing.  But when you try to get details and you try to get some information, it is The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   400400generally a standoff approach.  We are not privy to a lot of the details.  We are not privy to a lot of the things 
that could help us better protect ourselves.  So this 
sharing amongst professionals, and there is no group that does it better than academia, and sharing that information and saying, let's figure out how this is going on, let's 
figure out the defenses to make it work accordingly. The other one is the R&D component.  There is a true belief, at least in the government circle, and I think 
it is shared by some of my colleagues, I know when I was in 
the private sector, many of us talked about it, that there 
is some wonderful R&D being done in the buildings where the walls that have no windows and being done in the venue of national security. There is some really great stuff being done by the researchers in the private sectors to generate things 
that can be used to bring to market to benefit the public.  
But there is some space in the middle that we are not sure 
what that space is.  We think there is some really hard-
core, thoughtful R&D that needs to be done that is not being funded. So we have asked the Congress to give us a boatload of money, in the tens of millions of dollars, to 
fund some key programs.  People come to us and say, gee, I The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   401401think we can do this, and this will help the overall package and we can help fund these things on the front end.  
So the R&D is extremely important. I want to touch on another thing that is a priority for us, and that is some pure technology things, the way the Internet was built.  That is the domain name 
servers and border gateway protocols.   If you are not familiar with this aspect of it, the domain name servers are those things, when you type in 
a name, it is converted to a number, when then identifies 
your address on the Internet.  There are about 14 of them 
out there.  So if I wanted to disrupt activity in the online world, be it commercial or be it telecommunications, that is where I will go, because I can knock out those 
fairly handily because they are addressable from the 
Internet.  They are addressable in spaces where they have 
to be able to have an in-band address to be able to 
communicate.  So consequently, we have some real concerns 
about that. I don't think redundancy is the answer.  In the border gateway protocols, the language they talk in is insecure.  Many times it is done in unclear text.  We see 
in this, particularly going back to the illustration I 
mentioned about career -- one of the things I cited was The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   402402being able to create denial of service attacks as a result of it. Then there is the priority we have about standards and best practices.  Many of you -- and Dorothy and I were just talking about this in the lobby, about the old Orange Book that effectively said, here is the standard 
to which you design things.  Then no one can meet the 
standard, so consequently they start to give exemptions.  
Then exemptions led to almost total obliteration of the 
standard and say don't worry about it anymore, because 
nobody can meet it. We have got to find a meaningful scientific way to say, we can bring this up.  We can raise the standard so we can use the procurement power that we have both within 
government and outside of government to make sure that the 
development process meets what we need in the areas of 
security. Let me broaden security for just a moment, because I am almost fanatical in some cases about this.  I 
want to use the word trust, because security is only a component of it.  I will qualify that right now.  You have got the security, you've got the privacy, you've got the 
availability component.  There has been a lot of discussion 
of late -- this is a little bit of a digression from my The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   403403notes here, but there has been a lot of discussion that security is going to trump privacy. I oftentimes get asked, where we are going to level?  I don't know.  We are still in this aftershock mode after what happened last year.  So am I willing to give up a little bit of my privacy for security?  I don't know that 
I will be six months from now, so I don't know what I'll 
feel.  But I think fundamentally, the issue always comes 
across as an issue of trust.  You have to have the 
security, you have to have the privacy, you have to have 
the availability.  So we are talking about the standards 
and best practices that we look to; those all play into it. The next one is something that is extremely worrisome to me as well as many of my colleagues, and that 
is digital control systems.  Last year, there was an 
incident where a disgruntled employee left a company in 
Australia, went back in in an unauthorized manner, broke 
into the systems and reversed the flow of raw sewage.  
Instead of going into the raw sewage treatment plant, they 
went into one of the local parks.  It is all because of accessibility to digital control systems. Look what we are seeing today.  We are seeing a lot of these digital control systems being accessible or 
addressable from the Internet.  It makes business sense, The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   404404but it doesn't make security sense.  Not only do we have directly accessible from the Internet, but we are finding 
some that are saying, no, we don't have any addressable 
space on the Internet, and you find out that they have digital control systems connected to an internal administrative LAN which is then connected to the Internet 
on the other side, which translates into, they are 
addressable from the Internet. That is very worrisome.  It controls the power grid, it controls the water supplies in many instances.  It 
controls the water flowing over many dams to generate 
electricity.  There is a whole bunch of things that are being controlled by digital control devices right now.   When we talk to some of the people that are involved in the technology designing some of these things -
- this is something that maybe you all can collectively 
help with -- they say, we would like to do more.  But what 
happens is, even if we are looking to do a simple thing 
like authentication a digital control system, when we are 
talking nanosecond switching time, there is no way to authenticate something and still do the switching in an appropriate manner.  So we need to figure out a scientific 
way to be able to do the authentication without losing the The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   405405gating factor, that we have to do switching of these things.   It is a complex problem, and it is only going to be solved by some of the activity that you all are doing. DR. BORGS:  I don't understand that.  If I can go in from the Internet to reverse the flow of the sewage 
system, this is not necessarily to make it --  PARTICIPANT:  An example.  There are other examples. DR. SCHMIDT:  Yes, that was a very broad example from something that was very public in the news. DR. BORGS:  But where you are worried about this outside the controls, that should not --  DR. CHAYES:  The electricity, for example. 
DR. SCHMIDT:  For example, last year there was a storm in the Pacific Northwest.  A tree blew down in Oregon 
and the lights went out in Tucson, Arizona, 1500 miles 
away.  It is all because of the switching controls. Many of the switching controls, for example, in the power grid are based on very, very slight fluctuations in electrical usage that would cause the entire system to switch over to another grid to provide power.  Those are 
the sort of instantaneous controls that need to be 
switched, but there has also got to be the ability to do The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   406406them on an authenticated mechanism.  That is what I am referring to. Lastly, and by all means no less importantly, would be the issues around securing the future systems.  I love wireless.  I don't know how many of you use it in here, but I couldn't live without it.  I did it when I was 
at Microsoft, I use it at my home now, and I love it, but 
it is not the most secure environment right now because it 
hasn't been designed as such.  We have grave concerns about 
it. Many agencies are talking about outlawing the use of it.  So consequently, there are issues around the authentication piece, about the encryption piece, and other future generation systems that we are looking at. So with that, I took this opportunity to talk about what we are concerned about in framing a broad 
perspective, before I turn it over to my distinguished 
colleagues to talk about their concerns. Thank you very much.  I'd like to start out by asking Dorothy Denning to step up and give us her thoughts on it.  Thank you.  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   407407Introduction by Session Chair
  Howard Schmidt 
 Mr. Schmidt discussed some of the priorities 
of the President™s Critical Infrastructure 
Protection Board.  

 
One priority is to build awareness of various homeland security issues and build the cadre 
of expertise that we have internal to the government. One way the government is 
addressing this problem is through a program 
called Scholarships for Service, which is administered by the National Science F
oundation and funded in large part by the Department of Defense. Scholarships go to
 people in advanced-degree programs in 
information security, who then do a one-fo
r-one paybackŠif government has paid for 
N years of tuition, recipients return N years of government service.  
 
Another priority is information-sharing. We are 
not privy to a lot of the things that could help us better protect ourselves. Governme
nt needs to be included in the kind of information-sharing among professionals that is done so well in academia. 

 
While wonderful R&D is being done by the government directly in the area of national 
security and by researchers in the private sector, there is some hard-core, thoughtful R&D 
that needs to be done but that is not being 
funded, because it falls between the traditional 
interests of national security and those 
of commercial entities. Therefore, the 
administration has asked Congress for funds 
to support competitive R&D programs that 
fill this gap. 

 
Other priorities include improving Internet security, and reviewing security standards for digital control systems, such as power gr
ids or water supplies, some of which are 
currently accessible from the Internet. Having such systems accessible from the Internet 

makes business sense, but it doesn™t make security sense. 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   408408Dorothy Denning
  ﬁA Security Challenge:  Retu
rn on Security Investmentﬂ  
Transcript of Presentation  
Summary of Presentation  
Power Point Slides 

Video Presentation 
  Dorothy Denning is a professor in the Department
 of Defense Analysis at the Naval Postgraduate 
School. At the time of the workshop, she was t
he Patricia and Patrick Callahan Family Professor 
of Computer Science and Director of the Geor
getown Institute of Information Assurance at 
Georgetown University. Dr. Denning
 has published 120 articles and four books, her most recent 
being Information Warfare and Security
. She is an Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) 
fellow and recipient of several awards, including the Augusta Ada Lovelace Award and the 
National Computer Systems Security Award. 
  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   409409DR. DENNING:  Thanks.  I was wondering if the 
slides would magically appear, and they did.  So I can 

relax now. DR. SCHMIDT: Vince Serf and I were at a meeting recently, and Vince in his opening comment was having a similar problem and said, power corrupts, Power Point 
corrupts absolutely. DR. DENNING:  What I thought I would do is just 
start out with a little bit of data about the state of 
security currently. This is the data that is reported to the Computer 
Emergency Response Team at Carnegie-Mellon University.  
They receive incident reports from people who have had some kind of security incident, generally through the Internet. As you can see in the last couple of years, the number of incidents reported has gone up rather 
dramatically.  On top of that, each incident that is 

reported to CERT can actually represent an attack against 
thousands or even hundreds of thousands of host computers.  

So the Code Red worm, for example, which hit hundreds of thousands of computers is one data point on that chart.  It 
is also true that not all data is reported to CERT.  So it 
doesn't represent all attacks. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   410410This is some more data.  This is what was 
collected by MI 2G in London.  This is just web 

defacements, and again, in the last few years a dramatic 

increase. This is one that was collected by Riptech.  They 
are a local company which is a managed security firm that 
monitors and networks their clients.  This represents data 

collected over a six-month period of 300 of their clients. What it shows is the average number of network attacks against each of their clients over that period.  

One of the things that is very interesting here is that 
each company on average is experiencing a greater intensity of attacks, or more attacks.  So the increase in attacks on 
the Internet cannot just be attributed to the fact that 
maybe there are more computers on the Internet and he 
Internet is growing.  The attacks on a particular company 

also are increasing. DR. CHAYES:  Is that a seasonal thing? 
DR. DENNING:  Who knows?  I don't know.  We will 
have to look at the next six months that they get.  I hope 
they will continue this, particularly with those 300 clients, because it will be interesting to see what happens 

on a long term basis. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   411411DR. MC CURLEY:  You might also look at the 
release cycle of Outlook, to see if they are correlated. DR. DENNING:  One of the things that is 
interesting is that contrary to a lot of statements that were made, attacks did not go down after September 11. DR. CHAYES:  What do you mean?  Some people don't 
know what you mean by an individual attack. DR. DENNING:  What is an attack on here? 
DR. CHAYES:  Yes. 
DR. DENNING:  It could be anything from people 
just scanning their networks to actually getting in the 
networks, denial of service attacks, anything that involved either penetration or an attempt to penetrate a computer network. PARTICIPANT:  (Comments off mike.) 
DR. DENNING:  Ping?  I don't remember exactly 
what --  DR. SCHMIDT:  Some people considering pinging as 
a base -- for example, if you throw a thousand packets 
against someone, they consider that an attack. DR. DENNING:  That would be definitely, in that 
case. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   412412DR. BICKEL:  When you break it down, do you get 
consistent trends?  So if you look at the attacks that 

potentially can cause the most damage, --  DR. DENNING:  They did that, too.  They broke it 
down into different categories of attacks.  I don't think I 
have the slide in here for that.  I just put a couple of 

slides in, just to give you a general idea. Their whole report is on the web.  If you go to 
riptech.com, you can get a copy of their report for free. Finally, also more vulnerabilities are being reported in products.  It is not just Microsoft, it is 

Linux and Solaris and everything else.  But the 
vulnerability reports have gone up. When you just think in terms of the raw numbers, over 2,000 last year, 2500, I 
guess it was, last year, when you think of the impact of 
trying to deal with all those, if you are a network 
administrator, that is pretty horrendous.  You are looking 

at several vulnerabilities per day with the patches that 
you might have to respond to.  Responding to patches is not 

all that straightforward, because you can start patching things up, and it changes your network, and something else 
might break.  So it is a non-trivial exercise.  Yes? The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   413413DR. CHAYES:  Do you think it is due to the 
complexity of the programs, they actually are more 
vulnerable? DR. DENNING:  Yes. DR. CHAYES:  Or do you think that people are just 
seeing more of the vulnerabilities? DR. DENNING:  I don't think I have the slide in 
here, either, but if you just look at the software itself, 
it is getting more complex.  It is getting bigger.  Like, 

Windows XB is 40 million lines of code, whereas if you go 

back a few generations, there is less millions of lines of 
code in it.  Then there are more interactions and so on, so 
it is a difficult problem. So what can we conclude from all that?  This is 
just a statement of the obvious.  Either what we have 

installed in the way security is optimal -- and I want to 
throw that out as a possibility, even though no one 
believes that, but it could be that given what the products 
are that are out there, and what we know about security, 
right now today, we are doing the best we can, and we need to learn to live with the risk. The other alternative is that it is really not optimal, that we could be doing better.  We could be 

reducing the risk, reducing losses from attacks at a cost The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   414414that would be lower, so we wouldn't have to spend ten million dollars in order to prevent one million dollars 
worth of losses. What I want to do is look at the question of return on security investment.  A lot of the security that 
has been developed in the past is based on what we think 
works, intuition, wisdom, things like this.  These are not 

bad things, but a lot of it is not really based on any 
empirical data. The goal.  Risk security has to be cost 
effective.  It has got to be that the cost that you spend 

on the security has got to be less than the expected losses that you are protecting against, because you don't have an infinite budget to spend on security, and so you have to 
put it in places where you are going to reduce risk in a 
cost effective way. DR. CHAYES:  Dorothy, you are talking about the 
kinds of things that Howard was talking about, like the 
protection of our water supply and that kind of thing.  So 

actual personal injury resulting.  How hard is it to 
quantify? DR. DENNING:  Absolutely hard to measure.  Let me 
just keep going. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   415415Return on security investment would measure in some way the bang that you got for your buck, so to speak.  

The comment like you just mentioned is that it is very 
difficult to measure this, because a lot of it is intangibles.  Not only that, you have also got 
dependencies, so that a loss that you might suffer as your 
company may also translate into losses to other people who 
are depending on your business or whatever it is that you 
offer.  So when you go down, they go as well, so there can 

be a lot of impact. The next slide actually is the same example is the same example that Howard used, so you can get a little more data there.  One of the, I thought, very interesting 
aspects of that case was that this guy tried 46 times 
apparently to do this.  It wasn't until the 46th try that 

he succeeded.  So something was very wrong in whatever 

security they were deploying there that they didn't pick 
this up and abort it before it happened. There is some good news there, too.  I think what 
it does suggest is, maybe these attacks aren't all that easy.  Here we had an insider; he had a copy of the 
software, he had helped develop the software and everything 
else.  So while he did pull 
it off, it wasn't something 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   416416that just anybody anywhere in the world could have done remotely. One other comment back on that.  This particular 
attack actually led to loss of life.  It wasn't human life, 
but there was wildlife that was killed by that, and it had a pretty severe impact on the environment. To me, the security challenge that has to be met 
is developing security better than we are doing now, but it 
has to be the case that it is also cost effective.  What 

that means is that as we go 
forward, we have to base it on sound mathematical models so that we can do good analysis.  

Also, we have to base it on empirical data.  A lot of the 
work is not based on empirical data. I can tell you, my colleagues here, one of the things that I have admired about their work is that it has 
in fact been -- I remember, 
the first paper I ever read 
about David Wagner's was the one where he showed that the 
40-bit key that Netscape was using was -- he could break it 
in 30 seconds or something phenomenal.  He had the data to 

show that he could do it, as well.   That is the kind of thing we need, so that we actually can support scientifically the best practices and 
the standards and so on that we develop for security. When 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   417417you take some of the existing standards, they are not based on any empirical data. Let me just give you a couple of examples of the kind of thing that I have in mind.  One of my big beefs is 
the systems that make me change my password every 30 days or 60 days or something.  I hate these things.  I would 

like to see somebody do a study and tell me that if you do 
that, you are lowering the risk by such and such and that 
this is a cost effective thing to do.  I have never seen 

any studies to support that, or any of the other quote best 
practices that are stated for security. There are a lot of questions about what we can 
expect from a return on security investment if we do certain things.  I would like to see research that goes 

more in that direction. Let me give you some very specific examples.  
This is an example that was done by researchers in the lab 
at Stake, which is a security consulting company.  A lot of 

people have said, you should harden your server, and you 
should shut down the ports you are not using and get rid of the services you are not using and so on. So what they did was, they went out and measured to see what is the effect of doing all that.  They looked 

at several different kinds of networks -- this is just the The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   418418data from one of them -- and what they showed was that you actually get better throughput on your network.  So here is 

a great example of return on security investment.  Spend a 

little bit of time hardening that network, and now your network performs better.  So this is the kind of data I had 
in mind. Another example.  We know that the software is 
vulnerable.  What would be the impact if more effort is put 

into developing software, so that there are fewer holes in 
it from the beginning.  We know Microsoft now is committed 

to doing that, trying to develop their software with less 
bugs in it. Here is some data that shows that in fact, the impact in terms of the cost of responding to a flaw that is 
found in the software is actually rather dramatic.  This is 

just accounting for the effort required to fix the software 
on the part of the vendor.  This is not even taking into 

effect the impact on the people who are using the software, 
and what losses they will experience as a result of the 
flaws in the software. They have this cost multiplier factor.  If you 
find and fix the flaw in the design stage before you start 
coding, it costs unit one.  When you get to the 

implementation stage, it is 6.5, testing 15, and when it is The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   419419all the way up to the maintenance, you are up potentially to a cost increase of a hundred fold. Then this slide here just shows again the return on security investment if you can remediate them at different stages.  So if you remediate at the design stage, 
you have a 21 percent increase, and so on.  If you want to get the details of these, these were both published in articles that were published in the 
Secure Business Quarterly.  They are on the web.  If you 

type in Secure Business Quarterly into Google or provide, 
you will probably come up with a website.   Then finally, this is on a totally different topic.  Since this is math sciences, I started thinking 
about what kinds of mathematics have been used in security 

over the years, and came up with a rather lengthy list.  

But what gave me despair about all this is that we don't 

teach any of this, except for probability and statistics, 
in most computer science curriculum, as something that 
anybody would get. If you take some artificial intelligence courses, you will get some of the stuff related to that, like maybe neural nets and pattern recognition and stuff, but 
generally, the math itself is not something that most of 
the students would pick up. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   420420I don't know if there is something that needs to be done there, or if it is just appropriate to teach the 
math and the courses where you drop in IT cryptography and 
you obviously need number theory.  So I teach the number 
theory in the course, because none of the students otherwise would have picked up the number theory from their 
basic curriculum. The other interesting thing is, when I started out working in security, which was around 1972, 30 years 
ago, none of this math was used in security at all, with 
the exception of probability and statistics and number 
theory starting to show up in cryptography.  So we have in 
many respects come a long way in applying math to the security problems. I think that is all I've got, so thank you. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   421421A Security Challenge: Return
 on Security Investment   Dorothy Denning   
  Our goal is to develop better security than we have now, in a cost-effective way.  One current obstacle is that some existing practi
ces and standards are not based on scientific 
data. For example, many systems require us
ers to change their password every 30 or 60 days, but there is no scientific study supporting this as a best security practice.  In addition, there is a lack of formal mathematic
s in computer science 
curricula, with the exception of probability and statistics. 

  
Security should be based on empirical data 
and sound mathematical 
models as opposed to 
intuition. We need to scientifically support the best practices and standards. There are two examples of improved return on secu
rity investment based on empirical data: 
   Studies show that by hardening a server, shutting down ports, and removing 
unused services, not only does security cost-effectiveness improve but the 
network™s throughput increases as well.  Studies show that developing code with fewer bugs from the beginning is 100 
times as cost-effective as fixing bugs during the maintenance stage. 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   422422Kevin McCurley  Session on Communications and Computer Security  Dr. Kevin McCurley is a computer scientist in
 the Theory Group at IBM Almaden Research 
Center. During his career he has worked in seve
ral different fields, including number theory, 
cryptography, information retrieval, and Web data mining. 
 
Dr. McCurley received a Ph.D. in mathematics from
 the University of Illinois in 1981, under the 
direction of Paul T. Bateman. 
   The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   423423David Wagner ﬁA Few Open Problems in Computer Securityﬂ 
 
Transcript of Presentation  
Summary of Presentation 
Power Point Slides 

Video Presentation 
 
 David Wagner is a professor of computer science 
at the University of California, Berkeley. His 
research interests include computer security, espe
cially the security of 
large-scale systems and 
networks, applications of stat
ic and dynamic program analysis to computer security, theory of 
cryptography, design and analysis of symmetric
-key cryptosystems and 
operating systems, and 
computer science theory. He is currently worki
ng on software security, wireless security, sensor 
network security, crypt
ography, and other topics. 
  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   424424DR. SCHMIDT:  While we are doing the mike switch, 
I'll just take this opportunity to make a couple of quick 
comments about one of the things that Dorothy had said when 
we talk about the analysis of the activity in the research we are seeing. One of the challenges that I think we need some help on is looking at developing a methodology to find out 
where the noise level is.  You were asking about pinging.  

Pinging is basically as far as we are concerned, because 

there is not a real structure to attack.  It can be 

problematic in a larger sense, but right now we see a lot 

of noise out there, but not a real good ability to differentiate between what we have to be concerned about and what we have to react to. David, did I give you enough time? 
DR. WAGNER:  While we are bringing the slides up, 
I am Dave Wagner, and I am from UC-Berkeley. I have to apologize that I wasn't here yesterday, so for my benefit I wonder if 
I can take a poll just to get a sense for what the audience is like.  Here is your chance 
to stretch.  How many of you would identify yourselves as 
mathematicians, defined however you would like to define it?  Any computer scientists? The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   425425PARTICIPANT:  I think some people are putting 
their hands up twice. PARTICIPANT:  I'd like to speak up for the 
unrepresented minority here.  I am a statistician. DR. WAGNER:  Okay, thanks.  I wanted to show you 
a couple of problems that I had hoped might prove for some 
fruitful collaboration between the computer security folks 
and the mathematicians.  So I think it is great to see a 

sprinkling here from both camps.  I am not going to be 

nearly as prolific as Kevin McCurley was.  I have only two 

sets of problems. Let me start off with some general remarks.  I am 
going to say something later in this talk about cryptography, but I would like to remind you that computer 

security is about a lot more than cryptography.   Here is a way to think about the security problem.  There are two computers.  They want to talk to 

each other, and yet they don't trust each other.  They want 

to engage in some collaborative computation, possibly in the presence of an adversary, where they may not even have aligned interests or aligned incentives. There are two problems here for security people to solve.  First, the communication channel between the two 

in general may not be secure, as is often the case with the The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   426426Internet.  The second challenge is the end points may not 
be secure.   If you want to think at a very high level, we can think of two techniques in computer security to deal with these problems. To deal with the insecure channel problem we often use cryptography and to deal with the insecure end 
point problem, we often use other techniques.  So let me 

just warn you that cryptography can't solve both problems.  

Cryptography isn't the silver bullet that can solve all 
your problems.  If I have got an authenticated connection 

to Joe Hacker, it doesn't help much, the fact that that 
connection is encrypted, if he is sending me the latest 
virus. I'm going to move on to the first of two problem areas that I thought might be interesting to look at.  One 

of the really nice things about this workshop setting is, I 
thought I could talk about problems and questions where I 
don't know the answers, or I don't know how to solve them.  

So I am hoping this will be a discussion, not just a one-
way presentation. Since the topic of this workshop is homeland defense, I thought that critical infrastructure protection 
was an obvious problem area to talk about.  If one looks at 

the infrastructures in the nation, one finds a number of The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   427427critical infrastructures, from the utilities like power, water, oil, gas, to the telecomm industries, your public 
switch telephone network, Internet and other communications 
mechanisms, and the financial sector and others.   We have become very dependent on these systems.  
These systems are evolving legacy systems that weren't 
necessarily designed for security when they were first 
deployed, and continue to change on the fly.  They are 

becoming increasingly reliant on IT, information 
technology, which I find troubling, because the security of 
information technology is not at the level that I would 

want to put much reliance in. So I think the defining characteristic of the critical infrastructure problem is we have got systems here 
that are very large scale and are tightly interdependent.  

If we look at the banking system, the correct functioning 
of the banking system depends first of all on the correct 
functioning of many banks, but also on a number of other 
critical infrastructures.  If the power is not on, the 

banks and the ATMs are probably not going to be working.  
If the phones are out, then your ATM probably isn't going to work.  So we have got tightly interdependent systems, 

and that means that security is a challenge. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   428428So let's move on.  I wanted to give an example in 
a little bit of detail, which is one of the critical 
infrastructures, the power grid.  Let me warn you up front 

that I am definitely not an expert on the power grid.  I 
wanted to share with you some of my recent explorations to learn more, and just be warned to take this with a big 
grain of salt.  This is not my specialty. A quick introduction to the power grid.  There 
are a number of key elements.  First of all, there are the 

loads.  That is my laptop, plugged into the wall over 

there, and your refrigerator, and so on and so forth, and 
the loads on the power system can vary from time to time, 
both predictably, seasonally, and unpredictably. There is what we might think of as the power grid -- the transmission system can be broken down into two 
parts, the local distribution mechanisms from your local 
area substation to your home, and there is the long 
distance transmission lines that span the country.  Then of 

course, there are the generators which actually supply the 
power to the transmission lines, which make their way to the distribution system and finally to your home. On top of that, it is important to remember that 
the power grid is not a passive system.  It is a system 

with active feedback loops.  There are a number of control 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   429429centers.  In fact, the picture here on the lower left is 
showing the control centers that try to coordinate the 
power grid.  There is a higher level financial settling and 

bidding and coordination between power providers. So there are a number of issues here.  All the 
layers of the power grid, for instance, the eligible 
receiver operation run by the NSA in 1997, I believe, is 
one of the more troubling exercises I am aware of.  The NSA 

put together a number of computer security experts, and 
their charter was to take off the shelf software they could 
download off the Net, nothing but what they could download 

off the Net, without breaking any laws, in a simulated attack try to see what damage could be done in the United 
States. A number of critical infrastructures were ruled to be at severe risk.  The referees ruled that if they had 

wanted, they could have taken down part of the power grids, 
substantial portions of the emergency 911 system and other, 
so that is quite troubling. PARTICIPANT:  (Comments off mike.) DR. WAGNER:  Unknown. DR. DENNING:  They did not actually attack the 
power grid.  This was a paper exercise. PARTICIPANT:  (Comments off mike.) The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   430430DR. WAGNER:  I don't know.  Details are sparse. PARTICIPANT:  (Comments off mike.) 
DR. DENNING:  No, they did assume in their paper 
exercise that anybody with Internet access and just using tools that you could download from the Internet, so it didn't require any special access. DR. SCHMIDT:  When we did that, it was just 
basically an escalation process, where we had a system 
administrator of a relatively insignificant system, which 
was connected to another system, connected to another 
system.  Through escalation of privileges, it gives you the 

ability to reach into this backbone type of environment. DR. WAGNER:  So our own vulnerability assessments 
have reported systems connected by modems or connected to 
the Internet, their administrators didn't know about, and 
that is an obvious risk.  So 
I frankly don't know these 
kinds of details. One of the really problematic features of the power grid that makes life hard for securing the power grid 
is this feature of cascading filters.  It is a tightly 
interdependent system, and a single failure can cascade and have a very significant effect, too, to affect large parts 
of the system. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   431431Just a couple of examples.  In 1989, solar storms 
caused a failure in Quebec.  That is in yellow, the picture 

on the left.  This failure in Quebec affected the power 

grid throughout all of the United States.  You can see 
these little circles are protective breakers that were tripped by this, that if not for the protective equipment 
would have caused damage.  In fact, some equipment was also 

damaged on the East Coast.  So this map illustrates that 

local failures can cause global effects. Maybe an even better example is the 1996 blackouts in July and August, particularly the ones in 
August.  There were two line failures that occurred nearby 
each other.  I believe a tree fell on the line or something 
like this, and this led to oscillations in the power grid 
that caused eventually blackouts in 13 states and affected 
millions of folks on the West Coast.   In fact, I am told, if I got my sources right, that it is not even completely understood why this caused 
the failure.  So that is quite troubling.  That means that 

our understanding of the power grid is really not at the level we would like it to be. This is caused by the
 interdependencies in the 
power grid.  If anything, all the evidence suggests that 

things are going to get better, not worse.  For instance, 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   432432the capacity margin, the redundancy built into the system, the over capacity in generation is built into the system.  

It was about a 25 percent in 1980 and now is about 12 
percent, and we can expect this is going to be going down, because projected demand over the next decade is growing at 20 percent, while the projected building of new generation 
capacity is expected to only grow about three percent.  So 

these are becoming very, very slim margins, and the 
combination of these trends and deregulation is something 
to be concerned about. I tried to put together some very simplistic examples that I thought would help give some intuition for how cascading failures can occur.  Here is a very simple 
transmission system with five nodes and seven lines.  The 

idea is that each line may have a different capacity.  The 

lines on the left have a 100,000 volt capacity; anything 
above that and they fry.  The orange lines have a 75,000 

volt capacity, and the blue ones have a 25,000 volt 
capacity -- completely made-up numbers, just to illustrate 
an example. We can imagine that the resistance in all the lines is the same, so that the amount of current flowing 
through the line is proportional to the voltage difference 
across the line. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   433433Here is a steady state flow through the network.  
We are trying to transmit 160,000 volts equivalent in 
current from the left-most node to the right-most node.  

You can see that due to symmetry, it is going to split evenly up and down.  If you work out V equals IR, that 
tells you you will get the following flows.   You can see that the flow is splitting evenly between up and down.  In this node it is splitting three to 

one for the large line.  You can check that all these flows 

are well within capacity.  There is plenty of slack here.   So we have got about 20,000 volts of capacity over here, and spare capacity may be another 15 dozen volts of spare capacity there.  So there is certainly 10,000 or 
15,000 or 20,000 volts of spare capacity in the system. Now let's imagine we have a line failure.  A tree 
falls, you have lost this line right here, so this line is 
going to go away, it fried, it went to zero kilovolts.  The 

load is now redistributed through the rest of the network, 
again following Ohm's law.  We see 
that the load is now 
distributed so that more of the load flows down along the bottom half of the network.  H
ere we have some lines in 
parallel. Now you expect there is no problem.  We had 
plenty of slack laying around, plenty of spare capacity, The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   434434and we lost a line that was carrying 20,000 volts, but we had 20,000 volts of spare capacity laying around, in fact 
more than that, so there should 
be no problem.  If this 
were a flow problem, all would be well.  You could arrange 
the flows to send this much capacity through, even though you lost the line, because there is plenty of redundancy.  

But this isn't a flow problem.  It is constrained to follow 

the equipotential Ohm's law and so on and so forth.  You 

find if you take this solution, you find the following flow 
numbers along the links. You notice that most of these links are well within capacity except that this poor guy right here has capacity for 25,000 volts, and now has gotten 29,000.  So 
that is what happens.  He 
is overloaded, he is going to 
fry.  We lost that link, so that
 link is now not going to 
be able to carry any more current, so we have a new 
solution.  The current redistributes itself through the 

network, nice and symmetric. Now we have got a problem.  No problem in this 
link, we are well within capacity, but now this link has got too much current flowing through it.  So we have got an 
overload there.  Once again, those lines are now 

overloaded, and we have killed our network. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   435435So even though a priori it looked like we had plenty of spare capacity, nonetheless losing one line 
causes the network to become completely disconnected.  So 

this is a very simplistic example, only showing you with 
capacities.  In practice, I believe there are a number of 
effects you would want to model, not just the capacity.  

Moreover, this is only the static behavior of the network.  

In practice, there are also dynamic behaviors as well.  

When a line is lost the system oscillates a while before it 
hits the steady state, and those oscillations can be quite 
important, and I think are poorly understood. So I hope this gives some idea of what we might like to understand about a power network.   Let me pose a few research questions for you.  
Stepping up the level now, thinking not just about power 

grids, but about principles that might apply to 
infrastructure protection in general. We have got a large scale system here.  It is 
very interdependent.  There are a number of natural 

questions to ask here.  One natural question is, pick a 
system, can we build a useful predictive model?  Can we 
build a mathematical model that allows us to analytically 
express some of this properties, and in particular, can we 

measure security against malicious attack? The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   436436I showed here a system that failed if a tree fell on one line, then the whole system failed.  If we are 

worried about malicious attack on our power system, then we 
can imagine that a plausible threat model might be that an attacker who is able to figure out where that critical line is will be able to fry a line or fry three carefully chosen 
lines.   So if you have a model, an algorhithmic question might be, is there an efficient way to detect whether there 
exists any three lines in the power system whose failure 
will cause you to become disconnected.  Right now, I believe what the industry uses is the exhaustive search algorithm.  They try all possible 
thoughts, and their focus so far has been on not so much 

security against malicious attack as robustness against 
random failures.  So the premise is that they only need to 

worry about a single failure and they exhaustively look at 
all possible single failures to see whether any of them 

could cause a cascading failure.  So I think there is room 

for a lot of progress here. More generally, you might ask, rather than looking at specific systems, you might raise the level of 
abstraction just a bit more and look at class of systems 
and ask about the structural properties of such systems. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   437437We can imagine that the attackers' capabilities give us some cost metric or some distance metric on 
systems.  The attacker can perturb the system a little it, 

but not too much.  Then we can ask, what are the parameters 
of these drafts that determine their robustness properties.  
Can we design systems that are inherently self stabilizing, 
inherently robust.  Moreover, are there any local control 

rules that insure global stability with only local 
evolution. I mentioned that the power grid is an adaptive feedback loop.  In fact, it is crucial right now that the 

industry is relying on the ability to have global knowledge of the whole grid.  That doesn't scale, and it is going to 
run into problems with deregulation.  So there are a number 

of research problems that I think might be exciting in this 
area. I wanted to tell you a little bit about some problems in cryptography that I think might be interesting, 
particularly to folks interested in the algebraic side of 
things.  Let me tell you about block ciphers, which are 
useful in cryptography. What is a block cipher?  A block cipher is a 
black box like this.  It takes two inputs.  It takes a key 

K and it takes a plain text X and if you fix the key, then The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   438438this is a bijective map on some space.  Moreover, we insist 
that it be bijective for all keys.  This just means -- the 

bijectivity means that it can be decrypted, and should be 
efficiently computable in both directions. This picture illustrates a common design theme for how you build block ciphers in practice.  You build a 

number of simple transformations, call them rounds, and you 
compose them, just take the composition. The obvious question to ask is, when is a block cipher secure.  Let me give you the definition that turns 

out to be useful.  On the left, we have a block cipher 

keyed by some key K that is chosen randomly and kept secret by the parties to the conversation.  On the right, I want 
you to imagine pi, which is permutation chosen uniformly at 
random from the set of all bijective maps on this space. I want you to consider the distributions on this.  
The block cipher is secure if intuitively it approximates 
the behavior of a random permutation.  Let me give this to 

you in a very operational sense.  Imagine that behind my 

back I am going to either decide I'm going to give you a block cipher or I am going to decide I'm going to give you a random permutation.  You don't know which.  If it is the 

block cipher I am going to pick a key at random, if it is 

the permutation I am going to pick a permutation at random.  
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   439439I am going to build an implementation of them.  I am going 
to stick them inside a black box, and now I hand you the 
black box. The black box has an input and an output.  You 
can feed any inputs you like and observe the outputs and interact with it adaptively, and your role is to guess how 
do I substantiate the black box.  This is a secure 

primitive if you can't guess.  That is the object. DR. BORGS:  Using one instance or several 
instances? DR. WAGNER:  Using one instance.  We want to know 
what is the probability you can correctly identify what kind of black box you have been given.  So you can flip a 
coin and be right with a probability of half, and this is 
secure if you can't do any better than that, if you have 

only negligible advantage compared to flipping a coin. Here is an example of a block cipher that has been standardized, that is going to take over the world.  

It is called the AES.  It is the new standard.  It is 

fantastic, it is great.  It follows this product cipher 
methodology, so it iterates the number of rounds. Here is a round.  I wanted to show you this in 
detail, because I wanted to show you just how much The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   440440algebraic structure is present in this structure that is being used in practice. What does a round do?  This operates on 16 bytes.  
So you can think of 16 elements from GF-256.  A round we 
have exclusive or key material, so those are just additions in the finite field.  Then we apply 16 S boxes, they are 

called.  They are simply bijective maps.  It is effectively 

just the inversion map in the finite field.  Then we hit it 

with some linear transformations, which are the bottom two 
layers of the round.  We do t
hat about ten times, using different keys in every round. The claim is, as far as we know, the conjecture is that this is a secure block cipher. PARTICIPANT:  It is secure in the prayer 
theoretic model. DR. WAGNER:  In the prayer theoretic model.  We 
have no proof whatsoever.  In fact, there are good reasons 

to believe that it is not likely going to be easy to 
provide a proof. So you can see there is a lot of mathematical structure here.  In fact, as I described it so far, this is 
working entirely in the finite field.  That leaves so much 

structure that that is probably not good for security.  So 

the S box is tweaked a little bit by adding a linear map, The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   441441composing with a linear map that -- anyhow, the details aren't too important. Let's move on.  I also wanted to show you a 
candidate public key encryption cipher that has been proposed.  Here is one such candidate.  The private key is 
a pair of linear maps, L and L', general linear maps.  They 

are linear over the finite field with 256 elements.   This middle layer consists again of a row of S 
boxes, but in this case the 
S boxes will be a bijective map. It is just a cubing map in the finite field.  That 

looks like it is order three; you can think of it as being 
close to -- remember, the squaring map is the Frobenius map, it is linear, so this is the first power map that is not a linear map. The public key will be the composition of these three layers.  Given explicitly, in other words, we write 

this as a multivariate polynomial with 16 variables over 
the finite field, and then we write down the coefficients.  

It is easy to see there can't be too many coefficients, 
because this is essentially a quadratic function, so the number of coefficients is something like 16 or something. This it turns out is not a public key encryption 
scheme, but there are schemes much like this that are 
conjectured to be secure. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   442442DR. CHAYES:  So is this being used now? DR. WAGNER:  Not being used yet, because 
cryptographers are conservative, but it is a promising 

candidate.  It has a number of promising features.   Let's move on to the next slide, which will be 
the conclusion of this area.  Let me suggest a problem that 

I think will be very interesting to know something about.  

The problem that seems to come up in both these private key 
and public key settings is the following one. We have a system of N equations.  An equation is 
a multivariate polynomial, N unknowns over some finite 
field.  Typically the kind of finite fields we care about 
are the two element finite field or the 256 element finite field, or small finite fields of characteristic two.  Often 

the multivariate polynomials are sparse and they are low 
degree, and we may frequently have a very over-defined 
system of equations, so many more equations than unknowns. The problem is to efficiently find a solution to this.  Here is what is known about this problem.  First you 

might think there is some reason to believe this is a hard problem.  If you have the same number of equations as 
unknowns, even in the case where you have only got 
quadratic equations, this is empty.  So there are unlikely 

to be efficient algorithms for it.   The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   443443Yet, on the other hand, if the number of equations exceeds the square of the number of unknowns, 
then there is a polynomial time algorithm, linearization.  

You simply replace all the terms, XI, XJ.  There can only 
be N squared such terms, and choose two such terms.  
Replace each one by a new linear formal unknown and you 
solve the linear system of equations with Gaussian 
elimination. Now the interesting question is, what is in between the two.  This linearization led to a successful 

attack on some of these systems.  Since then in the crypto 

literature there has been a number of improvements and refinements discovered.  It has been found that you can 
replace this constant half by any other constant and you 
still have a polynomial time algorithm by a recursive 
application of linearization.   By some ideas inspired from Gröbner bases, there is a conjecture that if the number of equations exceeds the 
number of -- this is an error over here.  This is supposed 

to say, if N exceeds N plus C.  C is the number of unknowns 
plus a small constant.  There is an algorithm that the 
authors have conjectured to be run in sub-exponential time. 
So that is a significant improvement over the naive 
algorithm of just guessing a solution. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   444444The obvious question --  PARTICIPANT:  By conventional computer? 
DR. WAGNER:  On a conventional computer.  So the 
obvious question is, why not use Gröbner basis algorithms.  
Let me just say, to my understanding, they are not competitive for these kinds of parameters, because they are 
exponential in practice and the constants are so huge, that 

more than 15 unknowns is infeasible, which compares very 
poorly to the naive exhaustive search attack. So here is a problem that I think might be very interesting to look at, because I believe there would be a 
number of applications for cryptography. I have used up more than my time, so I'll end here. DR. CHAYES:  This is a semi-efficient algorithm, 
so what are you looking for exactly here? DR. WAGNER:  Yes.  The research question I think 
is to understand the complexity of this problem. DR. MC CURLEY:  Actually, I think I proposed 
something like this as a meta problem when Abelman and I wrote this paper on open problems, because it has many facets to it. DR. SCHMIDT:  Jennifer, do we take a break now 
and come back for discussion? The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   445445DR. CHAYES:  Yes, we'll have about a 15-minute 
break, and then we'll have the discussants. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   446446A Few Open Problems in Computer Security 
 David Wagner  Two topics might lead to fruitful collabor
ation between computer security people and mathematicians: 

 
1. Critical infrastructure protection
. Infrastructures such as electric power, water, oil, 
gas, and telecommunications were not necessar
ily designed for security when they were 
first deployed, and they continue to evolve. They are increasingly dependent on information technology, which is troubling becau
se the security of IT is not reliable enough. 
  ﬁCan we build a mathematical model that
 allows us to analytically express some of the system™s properties? In 
particular, can we measure security 
against malicious attack? 
 Is there an efficient way to detect whether there exist any lines in the power 
system whose single failure will produce a cascading failure? 
 Can we (re)configure the system to elim
inate or bolster these weakest links? 
 More abstractly, can we design systems 
that are inherently self-stabilizingŠ
that is, robust? 
 
2. Enhancing security for block ciphers.   We should investigate the AES standard for secure block ciphers.  We should investigate a candidate public-key encryption cipher that is conjectured to be secure.  We should investigate a certain polynomial-time algorithm produced by a 
recursive application 
of linearization. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   447447Andrew Odlyzko 
  ﬁRemarks on Communications and Computer Securityﬂ  
Transcript of Presentation  
Summary of Presentation 
Video Presentation 
  
  Andrew Odlyzko is director of the Interdisci
plinary Digital Technology Center, holds an ADC 
professorship, and is an assistant vice president fo
r research at the University of Minnesota. Prior 
to assuming that position in 2001, he devoted 26 y
ears to research and research management at 
Bell Telephone Laboratories, AT&T Bell Labs, and AT&T Labs, as that organization evolved and 
changed its name. 
  
Dr. Odlyzko has written more than 150 technical papers in computational complexity, 
cryptography, number theory, combinatorics, 
coding theory, analysis, probability theory, and 
related fields, and has three patents. He has an honorary doctorate from the Université de la 

Marne la Vallée and serves on the editorial boards of over 20 technical journals, as well as on 
several advisory and supervisory bodies. 
  
He has managed projects in such diverse areas as
 security, formal verification methods, parallel 
and distributed computation, and auction technol
ogy. In recent years he has also been working 
on electronic publishing, electronic commerce, and 
the economics of data networks, and he is the 
author of such widely cited papers as ﬁTragic 
loss or good riddance: The impending demise of 
traditional scholarly journals,ﬂ ﬁThe bumpy road of 
electronic commerce,ﬂ ﬁParis Metro pricing for 
the Internet,ﬂ ﬁContent is not king,ﬂ and ﬁThe hist
ory of communications and its implications for the 
Internet.ﬂ He may be known best for an early debun
king of the myth that Internet traffic would 
double every three or four months. 
  
Andrew Odlyzko™s e-mail address is odlyzko@umn.edu, and all his recent papers as well as other 
information can be found on his home 
page at http://www.dtc.umn.edu/~odlyzko.
     The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   448448DR. SCHMIDT:  Thanks, everyone, for coming back 
so rapidly.  We are going to move to the next section on 

review and discussion.  Michael and Andrew are going to be 

joining us from the University of Minnesota and Microsoft Research.  Michael will make his comments first.  Well, 
would you like to go first? DR. ODLYZKO:  When you talk about the difficulty 
with big secure systems, just think how hard it is to do a 
very simple coordination system like this one.  That is why 

software is hard. Let me just comment on some of the talks here, 
and maybe also a bit more generally.  Kathy Laskey had some 
very good comments about general issues, that we have to 
think about security at a systems level in general, and the 
issue of what matters to people.  When we do that, we also have to think about the general questions of what it is that we mean by security, 
or what kind of risks we are willing to accept, and look at 
a whole range of possibilities. Just to make it very clear that we do have a wide range, let me tell you a little joke.  The story goes that 
back in the old days of the Soviet regime, a Western group 
was visiting the Soviet Union.  They are being driven 

through the Siberian tundra, drive for miles, not a soul in The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   449449sight, deep forest, et cetera.  They come to a clearing, 
and they see a pile of gold bricks, and not a soul in 
sight, and nothing else.  Their tour guide says, how come 

you have this gold here, totally unprotected?  This is a 
Communist regime.  Gold is nothing.  The real treasure of 
the Communist regime are the people; those we watch night 
and day.  So there are different ways to achieve security.  

The question is, how do you want to do it, and what kind of 
security do we want. Something that Werner Stuetzle explained yesterday is that we have societies which are much more 
regimented than ours, which have 
suffered from terrorism and have managed to live with it.  Indeed, while 9/11 was a 
striking event for us, you see many societies, some quite 
democratic ones such as the British dealing with the IRA, 
the German dealing with the Bader-Meinhof gang, the Spanish 
dealing with the Basques, having certain levels of 
insecurity and terrorism.   So in many ways, one could actually say the task is not necessarily eradicating terrorism, which seems to be hard -- everybody wants to do it, but it seems to be essentially impossible with the limits of some societies -- 
but keeping it to a tolerable level.   The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   450450You may also look at some other risks that we put up with.  40,000 people die on the roads each year, after 

all.  Now there is a big debate about the double nickel, 55 

mile per hour speed limit, what effect it would have.  If 
you go for a single nickel, five mile per hour speed limit, you could eliminate those deaths.  Well, we are not willing 

to do that, which says that we are willing to accept a 
certain level of risk. This then goes back to some of the comments people made, that we have to look at the whole system.  We 

have to look at economics, sociology, politics, general 

public policy questions that are involved here. Now, to come back to the presentations in the session, Dorothy Denning's presentation was largely at the 
large systems level, where she is explaining that we should 

be looking at the economic questions, return on investment.  

One way I might phrase some of what she said is that one 
could think about these issues in terms of insurance.   Other people have made the same point.  I think 
Ross Anderson may have been first almost a decade ago when he said, when you think about security issues and if you think about what is the right level of security, ask your 
insurance company. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   451451Unfortunately, that doesn't always work very well.  The problem is that insurance is unsuccessful when 

you are dealing with well understood risks.  Indeed, all 

insurance policies that I am aware of exclude war risk, and many of them increasingly are
 excluding terrorist risks, 
too.  When you are talking about rapidly changing 

technologies, insurance may not be the right approach. There is also the issue of market failures.  The 
general trend has been for very good reasons to rely 
increasingly on the markets for resource allocations, but 
there are market failures.  We do not rely on markets to 

provide police protection, et cetera.  There is a question 
whether the commercial industry is behaving optimally for society, given the incentives they face.   That goes to the question of exactly what kind of 
assurance do we really want as a society, do we want 
government to either bribe or coerce companies like 
Microsoft and IBM into producing more secure systems.  

These are very important questions. These are all very high level questions, and they are also the kind of questions which go to what we might call the integrationist line of thought in science and 
technology.  Mathematics and physics has been more the 

reductionist approach.  This gets to the question of very 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   452452uncomfortable cultural transition that many mathematicians and computer scientists as well have to undergo when faced 
with these questions.  These mathematicians have tended to 

like nice, neatly posed problems. It is also true of physicists.  The theory of 
gravitation has been cited as one beautiful example, then 
of course Einstein's theory of relativity, and now we have 
the search for the ultimate unified theory of physics.   On the other hand, if you look at where resources 
are going or what is happening, they are going to other 
areas.  There is a huge shift in general funding of 

research and development at the federal level, but also in 
the commercial sector towards the biomedical sciences.  
What happens in the search for elementary particles or 
unified field theory is essentially irrelevant for those areas.  Even if physicists succeed beyond their wildest 

imaginations, nobody can figure how that is going to impact 
on the bulk of the research that is going on right now not 
for the next few decades. So we can look at different levels.  Most of the 
problems that society cares about, like reducing the risks of terrorist attacks, seems to be at a system level, the 
kind of things that Kathy Laskey has been talking about.  

But there are problems which are more congenial perhaps to The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   453453the traditional mode of operations of mathematicians and 
computer scientists, and we heard quite a few examples that 
she cited here. Kevin talked about a variety of problems such as detection of covert -- here we are talking about a much more manageable problem.  We can perhaps model it more 

easily, and can talk about applying a variety of 
mathematical tools in that situation.  General issues of 

limits on security, exactly how much information is 
protected by different kinds of crypto systems.  This is a 

very comfortable mathematical question we can attack. David Wagner then posed a variety of questions 
having to do with algebraic crypto systems, and this is straight mathematics; we understand exactly what it is.  

But even in David's presentation we also had questions of 
the other variety, the integrationist approach, namely, 
questions about infrastructure security. 
 There are some 
questions, very nicely posed mathematical questions, that 
do suggest themselves very easily.  Or he talked about some 

others I can see coming out of his presentation.  A more 
general question is, do you build networks which are ultra 
reliable but maybe with centralized controls and very 
efficient, or do you go for redundancy.   The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   454454We see in the 9/11 events much of the success we have seen in communication was due to the fact that we had 
cell phones, we had wired phones and we have the Internet.  

Not a single one of them was faultless, not a single one of them operated as well as we might have wished, but 
altogether they produced quite a satisfactory response.   So there is quite a variety of different problems that mathematical scientists can investigate there. DR. SCHMIDT:  Thank you very much, Andrew.  
Michael? The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   455455Remarks on Communications and Computer Security  Andrew Odlyzko 
 It is important to realize that people are 
willing to accept some level of risk and that 
while it is not necessary (or possible) to er
adicate risk, it is possi
ble to keep it at a tolerable level.  In addition, when one thinks of security issues, one often thinks of insurance.  However, insurance usually deals with well-understood risks.  The risks posed by war, terrorism, and changing tec
hnology are, in general, poorly understood.    
These types of questions are high-level questions and go to what we might call the 
intergrationist line of thought in science and technology.  In the past, however, mathematics often took reductionist approach
; mathematicians tended to like nice, 
neatly posed problems.  Many mathematicians
, and computer scientists as well, will 
have to undergo a very uncomfortable cu
ltural transition when faced with these 
questions.  After all, most of the problems 
that society cares about, like reducing the risks of terrorist attacks, seem
 to be at a system level. 
 
Nevertheless, many problems are much more
 congenial to the traditional mode of operation of mathematicians and computer scientists.  Some examples proposed by 

other participants include the detection of covert channels and questions dealing with algebraic crypto systems.   

 
The basic question is, Do you build networks that are ultra-reliable and efficient but maybe with centralized controls, or do
 you go for redundancy?   The events of 
September 11 seem to indicate the latter, as
 cell phones, wired phones, and the Internet all worked imperfectly but well enough in the aggregate so that communication was 
satisfactory.  
 
There is quite a variety of different problems that mathematical scientists can 
investigate without having to change their traditions, though they will have many more 
to consider if they adopt, at least some 
of the time, a more integrationist line of 
thought.  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   456456Michael Freedman   Session on Communications and Computer Security  Michael Freedman is a member of the Theory Grou
p at Microsoft Research. Before working at 
Microsoft, Dr. Freedman was the Charles Lee Powell Professor of Ma
thematics at the University 
of California at San Diego. 
The work for which Dr. Freedman is best known 
is the solution of the long-standing Poincaré 
conjecture in four dimensions, for which he rece
ived the Fields Medal. He has received numerous 
other awards and honors, including Sloan and Gu
ggenheim Fellowships, a MacArthur Fellowship, 
and the National Medal of Science. He is an elected member of the National Academy of 
Sciences, the American Academy of Arts and Scie
nces, and the New York Academy of Sciences. 
Dr. Freedman™s current research focuses on fundam
ental problems in the theoretical computer 
science, in particular on the P/NP question
 and nonstandard models of computation. 
 The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   457457Alexander Levis   ﬁIntroduction by Session Chairﬂ  
Transcript of Presentation  
Summary of Presentation 
Power Point Slides 

Video Presentation 
 Alexander Levis is chief scientist of the U.S. Air 
Force, Washington, D.C. He serves as chief 
scientific adviser to the Chief of Staff and Secr
etary of the Air Force and provides assessments 
on a wide range of scientific and technical issues affecting the Air Force mission. 

 Dr. Levis received his professional education at t
he Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Prior 
to his current position, he was University Pr
ofessor of Electrical, Computer and Systems 
Engineering at George Mason University in Fa
irfax, Virginia, and head of the System 
Architectures Laboratory of the C3I Center. For t
he last 20 years, Dr. Levis has conducted basic 
and applied research in and taught many aspect
s of command and control, from organization 
design for command centers, to operational and 
system architectures, to decision support 
systems. 
 
Dr. Levis has served as senior officer in national a
nd international professional societies, is on the 
editorial board of several professional journal
s, and on the Board of Directors of the AFCEA 
Education Foundation. He has held two appointments 
to the Air Force Scientific Advisory Board, 
where he participated in several summer studies and several ad hoc studies. 
  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   458458DR. LEVIS:  Just on a serious note on that, the 
term stegonography was mentioned in the first session, and 
people asked what is it.  As far as I know, Al-Queda has 

used it already.  So they are fairly sophisticated. Good afternoon.  My name is Alex Levis, and I 
will be chairing this session.  My current position -- I 

have never worn a uniform in my life, but my current 
position is with the Air Force.  I am chief scientist.  It 

is the best job in the world.
  It has no specification.  
What I am supposed to do is give advice to the chief of the 
Air Force and the Secretary of the Air Force.  The 

Secretary of the Air Force did his Ph.D. on decision analysis at Harvard.  He does not need any advice from me 
on matters technical. 
The chief has a war to fight, he needs no advice from me.  

So I am having a great time coming to workshops, and I 

really appreciate the invitation. Somewhere in my distant path actually, I do have a degree in mathematics, but it is an undergraduate one.  I 

noted when David earlier -- there was a question asked yesterday, how many people have a degree in mathematics, and four or five people raised their hands.  The question 

today that David asked is, how many mathematicians, and The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   459459two-thirds of the people raised their hands.  I wonder what 
the significance of this is. I would like to make some comments first.  I have 
learned a lot of interesting things yesterday and today.  
Information security I am a little more familiar with.  But 
the thing that hasn't come up very much is the problem.  

Those who want to contribute in mathematics, and I believe 

strongly in that, and I'll try to show a couple of 
examples, mathematics to the problem. I am an engineer, and I need to understand the 
problem before I apply solutions to it.  The problem has 

not been defined in this workshop.  We all took it for 
granted.  From the discussion it is apparent that our 
knowledge is what we all hear from the newspapers, et 
cetera.  I don't think even the White House has defined 

homeland security, let alone -- I don't know the difference 
between homeland defense and homeland security, by the way, 
but different people use them in different ways. So let me try to define in non-technical terms the problem.  We don't really know who the adversaries are.  
We know some individuals, we know some organizations, but we don't have a complete knowledge of the adversaries.  We 

don't know where they are.  You see every night on TV that 

we really don't know where they are, and we don't know The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   460460where they are going to attack, whether it is going to be in the U.S.  The call just 
went out again, after being prepared for a year and a half. We don't know when they will attack.  We do not 
know what they will attack, and we don't know how they are going to attack.  We know bits and pieces of that, but this 

is the classic journalism, the five questions.  So when we 

talk about homeland security, we have to look at all those 
aspects. You can characterize the uncertainty.  We talked 
a lot about probability yesterday and a little bit today, 
but there are different kinds of uncertainty that are associated with this.  You have temporal uncertainties, you 
have locational uncertainties, you have all sorts of things 
that somehow have to mix and match together.  This session, 

remember, is about integration and fusion. Now, the strategies that you can consider fall in three categories:  reactive strategies, --  PARTICIPANT:  By the way, you forgot one 
question.  We don't know why they are attacking us. DR. LEVIS:  No, I'm sorry, that we know.  They 
don't like us.  We can start a debate, but I come from that 

part of the world, and I can tell you in great length why 
they don't like us.   The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   461461We have concentrated mostly in terms of what people have been discussing and the approaches they are 
indicating.  We are looking primarily at the reactive 

problem, what happens if somebody does that.  Much of the 
work that was presented in epidemiology would go into the reactive part:  once there is an 
attack, what can we do 
about it. There is also the anticipatory part.  Some of the 
work yesterday relates to that.  We know that somebody is 

crossing the broader.  We don't know where, but we are 

going to look for it, we 
are expecting an attack on the 
bridges of San Francisco during that week.  This is 
anticipatory.   The other one is the proactive; get them before they get a chance to get us, which is what we are doing 
right now, what the Air Force is actually doing.  The term 

that the Air Force uses for this kind of a notion, that is, 
the last one, is predictive battle space awareness.  It 

doesn't really mean anything.  This is a bumper sticker to 

put at the end of the car.  It tells you it is great to 
know what they have done.  It is great to have all the 
sensors to tell me what happened, but that really is of 
very limited value.  What I re
ally want to know is what The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   462462they are going to do next, so I 
can go and get them before they do it.  That is the hard problem. With the expansion of sensors, information technology, et cetera, as many of you indicated, we have a wealth of data, but our difficulty is to take that data and start determining intent, which takes us away from just 
projection of the data.  We have to understand what is 

going on, because you need to know intent, to understand 
intent, to make the predictions. The first part I have already mentioned.  
Yesterday we talked a lot about searching for a needle in a 
haystack.  I am the last person to tell you how to do that.  
I have no idea now to do that.  But there are alternative 
approaches, how to think about the problem.   First of all, somebody mentioned yesterday getting a magnet or changing the properties of the needle 
so that you can find it more easily, given the kind of 
sensors that you have.  A lot of our intelligence community 

is worrying about things like that.  There are ways of 

trying to mark things that we eventually may want to find.  
That is one way of approaching it.  The last one is, find the needle before it gets in the haystack.  As an engineer, this appeals to me very 

much.  I am lazy.  I want to solve the easy problem, I 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   463463don't want to solve the hard one.  
We need to keep this in mind.  There is a whole spectrum of activities over here. To get to this predictive integration notion, given that there are large gaps in knowledge, because you can get to intent -- intent is human, and you can't really model all that stuff.  You cannot go to databases to find 

those things.  You need to do some modeling and simulation. This is now a case study to respond to a question that was raised later, you have all those good solutions, 
how do you go and give them for people to use.  That is a 
very hard problem.  You cannot just say, I have a wonderful 

solution.  I think it was mentioned, you have to understand 
the science of the problem, we have to understand the application of the problem, because nobody is going to pay 
attention.  You expect somebody else to understand the 

solution and then convert it and apply it.  Not anymore; 

nobody has the patience for that.  One needs to go out. One example over here very quickly which is relevant to the presentations today, that is why I chose 

it, has to do with influence nets.  After 9/11, actually a 
couple of weeks later in September, I went to the Air Force Studies and Analysis.  These are the people who do the 

actual math and do modeling and so forth for the Air Force.  

Originally they were the whiz kids.  Some of you who are my 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   464464age will remember McNamara; this is the whiz kids group of McNamara's.  They still exist, with a fancy name. I gave them some software from the lab, research software, to start modeling Al-Queda.  They did it, and it 
has been used since then to do a number of analyses.  That 
software was certainly not for prime time.  It was homemade 

by my master's level students.  Since then, we have got 

people from the Air Force Research Laboratory, this is from 
Rome Lab up in upstate New York, the information 
directorate, and they were developing software over there 
which had some relation to mathematics, but it was not very 
explicit what the relationship between the software and the mathematics was.  It was very heuristic in a way, but it 
did approximately the same things, but it is much more user 
friendly. Once we established from the laboratory the validity of the approach using more rigorous tools, a 
heuristic approach was being used and is used currently. Now we need the data.  Some of the data came from 
databases, as described yesterday, but some of the data had to do with judgments.  We brought in the analysts from many 
of the three-letter agencies that were discussed yesterday 
to provide that information.   The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   465465The moment the analysts got that stuff, after they learned within two or three days how to use the 
software and how to model in that way, immediately they 
started asking for more.  All this does is, you wiggle the 
inputs to see what the outputs are. This is good for planning, but how do I go to the execution?  This is what we showed to the generals.  This 

way they understood the influence nets and Bayesian 
networks, except for the Secretary, who does know Bayesian 
networks.  Fortunately, I did my homework, and before I 

discussed those things I knew that he knew Bayesian 
networks, and I didn't say silly things to him. But the idea of how to use them is a little bit 
different here.  You have to put yourself in the mind of 

the adversary and define a set of effects that you want to 
achieve.  We want Milosovich to change his mind, we want 

Saddam Hussein to stop bothering us and go on vacation or 
something like this.  You put that stuff over here, and 

then you start looking, what are the things that influence 
his decisions. This blob here is where the modeling takes place.  
You want to bring them to the point that you have what is 
called actional events, the things that we can do -- we are The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   466466the good guys, the blue -- that will eventually have an effect here.   This is the kind of models -- now we have made a bunch of models of those things.  Actually we have been 
using this kind of stuff in DoD since 1994, in the intelligence part of DoD.  They use it that way. But now the question came up -- and I wish I had mathematicians working with me to solve the problem, 
because I don't know -- and my students don't know the 
answer, and this is not the field that we work in.  Suppose 

now that they start the engagement.  Bombs start dropping 

or things are happening in Afghanistan.  I start having 
observations that come over here from various intermediate nodes; this thing occurred, that thing occurred.   Can I propagate forward?  Sure, I can propagate 
forward except I have to update first and update the priors 
and do all those things, and do it.  That is brute force, 

one can do it.  It takes a few weeks, you get it done, you 

implement.  But then they are a more sophisticated 

question.  If I look at this node and I see what has 
happened and that improves my information over here, how well am I doing in reaching the outcomes, can I solve the 
interest problem?  Can you tell me where I should put 

sensors to see what is happening, so 
I can get a better The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   467467understanding of whether I am achieving my goals or not.  
That is a lot harder problem, but from what I know, 
mathematicians will know how to do them correctly, as 
opposed to trying to ad hoc them, the way it is occurring 
right now.   But you cannot do it in two years.  You need to 
be ready to go and work and do it in a couple of weeks and 
put it in.  I hope it will be over before it is actually 

needed. This is a real transition, but it took a lot of people.  That is one of the good things when you are chief 

scientist; I could call people and cash in all my IOUs.  
This is how it has been established now, studies and 
analysis, now has the capability to do modeling, using 
Bayesian nets.  We never had that capability before.  The 

research laboratory, Air Force Office of Scientific 
Research, indeed, some of you in the audience probably know 

it, that is the basic research component of the Air Force 
research establishment.  This is the applied research, the 

Air Force Research Laboratory.  They are providing the 
algorithms and so forth. Here is the alphabet soup of the intelligence community, providing the data and the updates.  We are 

using it, responding to decision makers.  What we need here 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   468468is better math, because I am math limited in this area.  So 
are the analysts.  It is not their job to be 

mathematicians; their job is to understand that and to 
provide the answers.  Opportunities, every day.  But how do you exploit 
-- because I have good people 
like Kathy and Tod that I 
have known a long time who know about those areas.  A long 

time ago, 1994, I started learning about this stuff; I 
could make the transition.  It is not my technology, but at 

least I could see the possibility of a transition.  It 

takes a lot of work and it takes involvement to get to know 
the problem.  You need to understand the science.  The 
devil is in the details, and you have got to understand. I think I have said enough as an introduction to 
this session.  We have three 
speakers.  We are going to 
continue straight through with two discussers, and then an 
open discussion.  The intent is to leave here by 6 o'clock.  

No reaction by anybody?  You are all awake, I see, we are 

doing fine. With this, I would like to ask the first presenter, Tod Levitt.  I will ask each of the presenters 
to make appropriate comments about themselves.  Although I 

know them, they do not want me to say what I know about The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   469469them.  It is all good stuff, but it will take a long time 
to describe their accomplishments. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   470470Introduction by Session Chair 
  Alexander Levis   There are three types of strate
gies for handling an attack:   1. Reactive. Once there is an attack, how is it handled?  
  2. Anticipatory. What are the procedures when we are expecting an attack?  
  3. Proactive. What will happen next, 
so that it can be prevented? 
  
In a proactive strategy, mathem
atics is used to create models and simulations of the 
problem. One idea, from the Air Force™s Studi
es and Analysis group, is to use Bayesian networks to put ourselves in the mind of the a
dversary, and to define a set of effects that we then want to achieve. The model helps iden
tify the things that influence our decisions, as well as the actional eventsŠthe things we can 
do. We can also ﬁpropagate forwardﬂ to 
see how well we™re doing in reaching the desired outcomes, and test the outcomes™ 
sensitivities to what happened at key nodes along the way. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   471471Tod Levitt   ﬁReasoning About Rare Eventsﬂ  
Transcript of Presentation  
Summary of Presentation 
Power Point Slides 

Video Presentation 
 
  Tod Levitt™s research has focused on the development of advanced
 capabilities for multisensor 
fusion, SAR, IR, and EO image understanding, groun
d robot vision, air-to-ground surveillance 
systems, and C4ISR systems s
upporting multiple military intelligence, planning, and command 
and control applications. He has authored over 50 p
ublications in the fields of multisensor fusion, 
image understanding, robotics, and artificial inte
lligence. Dr. Levitt has a track record of unique 
developments in evidential reasoning in large-scal
e, high-dimensional data, qualitative navigation 
for mobile robots, encryption of algorithms, and 
the foundations of model-based software system 
design.  
  
Dr. Levitt has led the development of a diverse 
family of advanced inform
ation software systems 
built to handle real-world data under complex operating conditions. The breadth of these 
applications reflects his unique ability to transfer 
technology capabilities across sensor modalities 
and to demonstrate the application of advanced 
fusion techniques to dynamically meld the 
resulting multisensor observations into actionable intelligence. 
  
These systems include a fully automated middle-East
ern armor unit detector for the U.S. Army 
that was evaluated to perform at expert imagery 
analyst levels on wide-area, low-resolution 
Desert Storm SAR; a system for automated diagnos
tic measurement from digital x-rays of the 
hand that was employed in clinical care at t
he San Francisco Veterans Administration Medical 
Center; a system for semiautomated, three-dime
nsional construction of neural processes from 
multiple hundreds of two-dimensi
onal cross-sectional confocal mi
croscope images that was used 
in developmental anatomy studies at Stanford Univ
ersity™s Department 
of Neurosciences; and 
development and installation of an automated hot st
eel slab inspection system at U.S. Steel in 
Gary, Indiana. 
  Dr. Levitt founded Information Extraction and Transp
ort, Inc. (IET) in September 1991, aiming to 
achieve large-scale, breakthrough technology
 development of autom
ated systems supporting 
scientific discovery. IET provides products an
d services that manage uncertainty to add bottom-
line value in enterprise computing across busin
ess, defense, and engineering industries. IET 
brings together a world-class team of technol
ogists with a shared technology vision who produce 
best-of-breed tools and state-of-t
he-art solutions for dynamic Bayesian inference and decision 
making. 
  Prior to founding IET, Dr. Levitt was employed as
 a research scientist at Advanced Decision 
Systems from 1983 to 1991 and at the Honeywell Sy
stems and Research Center from 1978 to 
1983.   Dr. Levitt is a co-founder and member of the board 
of directors of the Association for Uncertainty 
in Artificial Intelligence. He re
ceived his Ph.D. in mathematics 
from the University of Minnesota. 
   The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   472472DR. LEVITT:  Thanks, Alex.  I have an advantage, 
in that I have few accomplishments, because I have spent 

the last 12 years running a company that deals with applied 
research, largely in information fusion for tactical battle space applications, a lot of work with DARPA and other military agencies.  As such, we have a wealth of experience 

in knocking our heads on problems that the government 
typically -- impossible problems the government states 
vaguely on purpose to try and get smart people like 
yourselves to come forward with answers to the questions 
they can't even pose. 
Certainly anything called homeland defense fulfills this in spaces. The title is reasoning about rare events.  I 
meant the term rare in two senses.  One is unlikely, the 

traditional sense that we simply don't expect any given 
thing to happen with any great likelihood, and the other is 
more technical, a concept due to David Schumm.  In fact, 

everything I will talk about is somebody else's work.   In that sense of rareness, we have the concept of rare evidence, that can occur even when a rare event is happening with certainty.  Rare evidence turns out to be 

very important for detecting anomaly.  In this way, we can 

hope to model things that we might expect and still detect The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   473473that something else is going on within the context of those models.  I will get to that eventually. But first, to wave hands at what homeland defense might actually mean, any notion of it has to immediately acknowledge that it is a stupendous panorama, any way you look at it.  This is one little cut Alex gave on it.  Here 

is another, to attempt to trot out taxonomies of what might 
be, and multiply them down and come up with possibilities 
for what we are trying to defend against.  So you are 

talking about people in organizations that want to hurt the 
United States, of all varieties there, where they might 
come from.  They don't necessarily come from overseas.  
They can be recruited here, of course, all kinds of different attacks, especially conventional ones.  TNT is 
readily available in the United States.  You can talk about 

hitting all sorts of supply chains from electrical grid to 
information to the waterways and actual transportation, 
agriculture, livestock is a huge issue.  It would be very 

easy to cause a terrific economic impact, not to mention 
effective terror, and political, information itself.  
Information is very easily spread and can cause a lot of problems in the United States.   I had an experience in December.  I heard a noted 
scholar remark that since we had a machine that could play The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   474474chess at a grandmaster level, doing automated intelligence assessment for tactical warfare surely must be solvable 
now.  I was kind of shocked, having spent most of my life 

trying to do that problem.  But it struck me after the 
fact, a lot of people think -- when you talk about automation which I insist, given the size of the problem, 
is where we want to focus, at least from the point of view 
of where mathematical breakthroughs are needed, and 
brilliant applications are needed in order to make any 
progress at all. You start looking at what chess looks like versus tactical warfare, which I am very familiar with -- these numbers are just wags.  They can be substantiated, but I 
won't take your time.  If you just casually look at what 

you are talking about here, you see two orders of magnitude 
in size basically as you move to the right each time.   Most importantly, you notice that there is no uncertainty in what you observe in chess.  It is all right 

there in front of you all the time.  That of course is 

spectacularly not the case.  It is the source of what makes 
data fusion necessary.  There is terrific uncertainty in 
what is out there, where it is at any given point in time, 
what it is doing, or as Alex said, the buzz word du jour, 
predictable awareness, what it will do. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   475475Then when you actually do see something, typically 65 percent is the typical number that turns up as 
to how certain you are of what you are looking at.  That is 

in tactical warfare.  That is very constrained.  You might 
be a little surprised that organizations in tactical warfare -- random number, just pick one, eight is typical.  

It is not commonly known when you go looking at these 
current types of tactical conflicts that go on.  For instance, in Bosnia there were three major armies, the Serbian, the Croatian Muslim and the Croatian 
Christian were all more or less conventional armies, 
meaning they had big armor and artillery and things that they had to haul around with big logistics trails.  There 
were 28 paramilitary groups, including mujahadeen coming in 
from all over the world, mercenaries, all kinds of 
different religious factions, all doing crazy things for strange reasons, joining up with the army, switching sides.  

This is pretty typical of war situations.  There are many 

actual organizations to consider. When you go to homela
nd defense, everything is much worse.  You are talking about the territory of the 
United States including Alaska and Hawaii and such.  You 

don't even know what to look for.  What are we looking for?  
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   476476If the answer is that you have to know about box cutters, this is a little frightening. Is it completely impossible?  No, I don't think 
so.  Mostly impossible, maybe, but there is actually a 
great deal of information that is being collected all the time, and that has been.  There are many standing 

organizations, Centers for Disease Control, the USDA, Plum 
Island spends all its time, as has been discussed at the 
workshop.  The Treasury Department is always auditing and 

tracking all sorts of things.  And of course, the 

intelligence agencies are doing these. One can imagine trying to -- these are efforts going on more or less.  This is a cartoon of what could be.  
You look on the right-hand side, you have different sources 
of expertise on the left, different areas gathering 
statistics.  These can be the same as they are at CDC, but 

they don't have to be.  If you start asking to consciously integrate these, so that the information is being automatically 
sifted and compared, and regionally focused and then hierarchically fused up from regions, it is conceivable 
that a great deal more might be known.  It makes it 

obvious, I hope, that automation is absolutely critical to 
sift and compare in an attempt to match against models, and The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   477477that this needs to be done from a strong scientific perspective, with any hope of not just generating spaghetti 
and garbage. 
  Quite basically, if we are going to have 
automated reasoning about what is going on when one formulates hypotheses on the basis of evidence, just to 
nail things down a little bit, if we had a hypothesis that 
was anthrax attack at a location in the United States, and 
that is either true or false, there is evidence of the sort 
of thing the Centers for Disease Control gets.  They get 

reports from physicians that have to report certain 
occurrences such as anthrax.  So they get anthrax diagnosis 
incidents at a location.  It is baseline, whatever that may 
be, zero most places, but it is not zero actually in the 

absence of attack; anthrax is naturally occurring.  Then 

anything else would be continued high. Then we have a standard one-stage Bayesian inference here.  It is important to notice that in modeling 

this, typically the way we think of this in building actual 
applications, it need not be causal, but it is a powerful way to think about the model. If there is an attack going 
on, then obviously one should expect to see an incidence of 
disease.  That is after all the purpose of the attack. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   478478The inference goes the other way.  You want to 
observe the incident and infer whether or not an attack is 
going on.  The Bayesian rules are built to do that.  In a 

one-stage inference like this, the likelihood ratio has the information.  So the likelihood of any -- once you observe 
the state of evidence, in this case it would be either high 
incidence or normal, then the ratio has all the relevant 
information in a one-stage inference. As you build complex networks, one-stage inference is no longer so simple.  We change to real-life 

modeling in terms of all kinds of webs.  There is actually 

a very large literature since the 1980s, focused in the uncertainty in the artificial intelligence community.  
There has been a proceedings, an annual conference since 
1985, and those are available since 1990 through Morgan 
Kaufman; I highly recommend it to any mathematician who 
wants to get quickly up with the state of the art in what 
is understood in automated Bayesian learning and in 
computation.   There are two basic algorithms that have been discovered in 1988.  Spiegelhalter developed the so-called 
joint triagramen, which solves any Bayesian network that is 
well structured automatically.  Then in 1991, Bruce 

d'Ambrosia and Brendon Claverill developed the The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   479479probabilistic inference algorithm, which also does the exact solution for any Bayesian network, based on an 
approach of heuristic rearrangement of polynomials, all 
probabilities here being modeled as discrete.  That is the 
website of the organization. Fortunately, Professor Laskey is going to talk a great deal about this, so I won't spend any more time on 
it. The next one, to get back to how we get to these complex models that require these sorts of algorithms, as 
we look at what really goes on and what the evidence comes 
from, this is a little more realistic here.   In this case, what you actually observe is a report at the Centers for Disease Control. That report may 
or may not accurately reflect the diagnosis that is 
supposed to be referred by a doctor because errors happen 
when reporting goes on, especially when it is done on a 
massive scale.  Then of course, the doctor's diagnosis may 

or may not be correct. So the observability -- was the report made, was it made accurately -- the credibility of the doctor, doctors who have no experience.  There is an attack in the 

heartland or something, it is very likely that most of the 
physicians that are seeing ill patients have never seen a The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   480480case of anthrax.  There can be
 delays, there can be all 
kinds of different sorts of things.  Together, if we look 

at the hypothesis I know, it is that people are actually 
ill from anthrax, and that is hidden.  It is not observed 
at all. But together, we see that we are modeling the veracity of that illness, based on factoring over the 
credibility of the physicians who are diagnosing, and the 
accuracy and timeliness often of the reporting. I stuck another random variable in there, the dispersion.  This is to get the sense of what is relevant.  

One might think off the top of one's head that the weather is not relevant to whether an anthrax attack is going to happen, but it certainly is if a crop duster is being used 
to disperse it.  It is going to be 
timed so that the wind is blowing and is likely to continue to be blowing and 
such, to cause the most damage.  So what one might think of 

as ancillary factors might become critical first-order 
variables.   This issue of what is relevant is place 

modeling, especially for something as broad as homeland defense might be defined to be.   So in a deep hierarchy like this, odd things happen. Most of the approaches to information fusion that 
have been used for automation focus from the tradition of The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   481481what we might call a standard probability Pascalian type probability, and focus on conditional independence, whether 
or not it is true, between random variables, and the weight 
of evidence that a piece of evidence carries in its pre-post area to an intermediate hypothesis or another piece of evidence, or the target's hypotheses about what is going on 

that one is interested in. But as this example suggests, there is actually a lot of other issues that come into play when one goes to do 
large scale modeling of these scarce events, as opposed to, 
we are going to drive tanks into somebody, and we have a 
pretty good idea of how they are going to respond when we 
do that.  They are not going to like it, and they are 
either going to run away or they are going to shoot back.  

Whereas here, things are much more wide open. So the issue, as suggested here, is evidential 
semantics and how that applies to how one should model 
things mathematically. The granularity of reasoning, how fine is it, how does one define the relevance of information, how fine does it have to be in order to get sufficient accuracy to draw 
conclusions to take action on?  Again, even naive 

reasoning, I hope, when one looks over the breadth of the 
land suggests that any action taken is going to be The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   482482enormously expensive.  So you want to be careful about what 
you actually choose to do. How finely do you have to reason in order to get good enough probabilities, whatever calculus might be used, so that your conclusions are likely to be robust?  Is that 
possible?   That leads to the question of completeness, whether you are spanning enough of the world or not.  These 

are all different approaches which are amenable, most of 
them explicitly so, to graphical representation.  The 

importance of that is that it leads naturally from the 
mathematics supporting the fusion of the information to algorithms that software engineers can actually build and compute. By the way, I might mention that the exact Bayesian inference solutions for arbitrary directed acyclic 
graphs of random variables is NP hard.  It has been proven 

so by Greg Cooper in 1992.  It is in the uncertainty AI 

literature.  That raises the issue of approximations.  For 

instance, variational mean field approximation is an explicit attempt by Tommy Jeckle and Michael Jordan -- not the basketball player -- to come up with a robust 

computable approximation to very large scale Bayesian 
networks, et  cetera. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   483483On the bottom here, the so-called belief functions, also called Dempster-Schaeffer functions and 
networks, and fuzzy set theory, are two examples that 
deviate from the Pascalian tradition in explicitly being motivated by other modeling considerations. In particular, we look at what some people in philosophy have probably called non-Pascalian, modeling 
ignorance.  When you look at homeland security, this raises 

its head as a big issue.  We simply don't know an awful 

lot. It is forbidding to think of actually modeling 
everything one might.  So this suggests looking at three 

logics, where you have a supporting, denying, don't know. Then work pioneered by, among others, Professor Dempster, upper-lower probabilities and inter-value 
probabilities motivated by some of the same issues.  Fuzzy 

theory, motivated by lack of precision in being able to 
express, lack of ability to obtain calibratable estimates.  

Of course, none of these calculi are particularly miscible 
with each other, and there are other issues. The one I would point at from a computational perspective and an automation perspective that has plagued the use of these theories is, in order to take action, 
ultimately we end up having to rank things.  And certainly 

in automation you do.  Interval valued or pair valued 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   484484calculi of course are not rankable, and it is easy to prove that if you do have a mathematically consistent way to rank 
them, then they have to flatten down to be equivalent to 
probability.  Nevertheless, these are important issues to 
look at. Something that is much less well known than the work of Professors Dempster and Schaeffer and Zotti is work 
by Jonathan Cohen, and more recently in causality with Glen 
Schaeffer and Yuta Proboth making very significant 
contributions.   These approaches, Baconian they have been called, the Humeian approaches, address in the first case, instead of weight of evidence approach to reasoning, eliminative reasoning, attempting to come up with exhaustive 
explanations that essentially deny a hypothesis on logical 
grounds, and counting them. This may seem silly when you say that of all the possible explanations.  But in fact, that is more or less 

what you do when you model in computer systems.  You have 

got to go build models, and when you are done, there is at least a numerable number of them in some sense.  They may 
be parameterized, but there typically is a finite number of 
models.  So even with the parameterization, you are only 

modeling so much of the world. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   485485John Cohen's calculi addresses the issue, not sufficiently for automation, but it is certainly an 
excellent place to start; how do you know when you've got 
enough, certainly a critical issue in homeland defense. Can we infer causality?  Going back to the 
Reichenbach and Fisher, there was a tradition in the 20th 
century in science of saying that causality could not be 
inferred, only correlation.  Now both Schaeffer and Pearl 

have challenged that, and have algorithms and approaches that address this question of, can we from the observable 
infer the causes of doing them?  This has the possibility 

then of discovery, without having to do so much explicit 
modeling. All the systems that we build at IT are based on hierarchical Bayesian inference, because there is 
tremendous power there to exploit, and there are 
fascinating issues that arise in attempting to do that 
exploit in the weight of evidence reasoning. One of the things that happens when you look at homeland defense is a wide area of fusion.  You are going 
to talk about evidence arising from all over at computers that are going to then do fusion.  In any national scheme, 

one would have to have a hierarchy of those or a web of 
them.  Evidence will come not necessarily in the temporal 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   486486order of occurrence or in relevance, and it may not be conditionally independent from evidence -- in fact, it is 
unlikely to be conditionally independent from evidence that 
has already been fused in models that have been spawned, or hypotheses that have been generated to this point. I would strongly point you at David Schumm's book, Evidential Foundations of Probablistic Reasoning, 
which gives the first scientific treatise of these issues 
in toto.  I am going to borrow heavily from his results in 

the following.  He distinguishes weak versus rare evidence, 

and this is evidence of which I was speaking at the 
beginning. Weak evidence is when a piece of evidence does not either strongly confirm or deny the hypothesis that it 
purports to support.  That means that the likelihood of 

that evidence relative to hypothesis is close to one. Rare evidence on the other hand is evidence where the absolute likelihood does not provide strong support or 
denial.  That is to say, it is close to zero.  In other 

words, what that is saying is that evidence doesn't occur very often, no matter what the state of the world.  The 
significance of rare evidence is that one could choose to 
model it on purpose, because when it occurs, it is going to The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   487487suggest that the hypothesis to which it might be attached in a model based sense is probably not the right one. So by explicitly attempting to model rare evidential states relative to hypotheses that we expect, we can build in anomaly detection and hope to essentially have an inference power that is far greater than the model space 
that we can explicitly spawn.  Kind of a subtle point, 

actually. What is interesting is that as Schumm points out in his book, that is not as widely known as it ought to be, 
when you go to multi-stage hierarchical inference, the 

likelihood ratio no longer tells the story.  In fact, the 
difference of the likelihoods is evidential in two or more states, so rare evidence becomes very salient.  You can 

have weak evidence that is rare or weak evidence that is 
not rare, and rare evidence that is not weak, et cetera. What is interesting is that weak evidence in hierarchical based inference and solution algorithms and 
Bayesian nets and such, the order that you accrue that 
evidence, given a static set to accrue, the order of that accrual will not significantly affect the results except up to precision.  In rare evidence, the inference order varies 

a lot. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   488488This is just a conceptual example, or an explicit way that I stuck in this idea that we could have a medium 
amount, whatever that would mean, of illness in the 
population.  One would expect that in an effective anthrax 
attack, you are going to have a high incidence, where high doesn't have to be very many, of course, in the human 
population in the United States.   The normal baseline -- by the way, those baseline statistics are available for all regions all over the 
United States from the CDC, so these are things that exist 
off the shelf -- and you can expect 
to see low or none.  So 
explicitly modeling a medium amount of anthrax is a way to build in an anomaly detector. For instance, what actually happened with the anthrax being distributed by mail turned up exactly that 
kind of behavior.  It was not like you would expect with an 

anthrax attack, but it was much higher than the baseline.  

It was like a medium amount.  That should suggest right 

away that it is not like an aerosol attack or something, 
that one would get. The weak evidence here is, if you had a doctor for instance who consistently misdiagnosed anthrax, then 
him saying things are normal is not particularly evidential 
to whether or not an attack is going on.  That is an 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   489489example of weak evidence.  So the credibility of a doctor 
to introduce that. This is an example again drawn from Schumm and applied to this example.  The weak evidence here is, if you 
have a report here of a given type, if you look down at the lower right, at the red numbers, it is saying that the 
probability of seeing those reports given on the doctor 
diagnosing is low and the probability of seeing the report 
if he is not diagnosing it is of course much lower.  In 

that case, this would be modeling that as rare evidence, 
not that it necessarily is; the one I pointed out as rare 

is in case three.  But the point here is just to show how 
the numbers work, if you insert them in and just do hierarchical Bayesian accrual up. You see down at the bottom here, we have the likelihood of the report, being that you do receive the 

reports for anthrax, given the concatenation of all the 
hypotheses above it, which is more or less the same as 
asking what is the force of this report on the final 
hypothesis at the top. As you can see, what is fascinating here is that when the rare evidence is close to the base of the 
argument, of the inference, then you get the same result as 
when there is not any rare evidence, in terms of the force The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   490490of that, the likelihood of it, on the final hypothesis, if you will. But as the rare evidence is moved up the chain, that force of the base report, the thing you actually observe, becomes weaker and weaker.  In other words, the 
whole argument weakens.  It is a very unexpected result.   What this says is that when you start saying, okay, we are going to start distributing some kind of 
sensors around -- those are the green things.  This could 

be people, it could be the current CDC, it could be 
hardware, whatever it is, any kind of way to make some kind 
of observations.  You are going to distribute them 
spatially.  They are going to report based on some 
protocol.  They are going to report some machine that is 

going to choose that with other information. The first thing to note is that when you distribute this sort of thing, this issue of rare evidence 
now when it arrives there is going to affect your 
conclusion.  That is a problem.  There is no answer to 

that.  That is a math problem, if you will. Now I am changing direction here.  The evidence 
itself for the sorts of things that are often modeled for 
homeland attack as being the critical large destruction 
type of issues, is often diffusive itself.  So you have 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   491491aerosols, you have disease incidents.  Foot and mouth for 
instance can be trivially transmitted.  It doesn't hurt 

people, you can carry it in your pocket, you can walk it 
right through Customs.  None of the things detect foot and 
mouth when you go through the airport.  They will say, you 
have a lot of grease in your pocket.  You can rub it on an 

animal, and that herd will be infected in a day.   It is a little-known fact that I found out, little-known to me, anyway, that there are only about 22 
facilities in the U.S. where all live processing from 
animals goes to stuff on the shelf.  
So if you go rub foot 
and mouth all over those facilities all at once, you are going to have a trillion dollar impact on the livestock industry in the United States.  It is not that hard to do.  

That is a simple example; how could you detect this? So you get these examples which have to do with combinatorial problems.  Optimal placement.  Again, the 

happy medium here is cost.  You absolutely want to minimize 

any active deployment, because most of the time it is not 
going to be doing you any good. Optimal placement and the assessors.  So I have 
the computers here, stuff that is fusing.  How do you do 

that, where do you put them?  You have the issues of going 

over telecommunications networks, you have the issue of the The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   492492latency of flight.  You are trying to infer here -- this 
gets to some of the issues Alex raised of space and time -- 
you are trying to infer whether you are getting a 
hypothesis that this is an aerosol or some other thing, a subway release, for mail if it was anthrax.  But this also 
applies to other distributed sorts of things like worms and 
viruses in computers.  You want to do this in such a way 

that you get a rapid convergence of such evidence when 
something is going on. I'm going to blitz through this.  This is an 
example of the kind of modeling work science that I teach.  

Jorgensen has been doing this as a reference in e-mail.  
The idea is to apply population ecology models, mathematical models, dynamical systems models, to detecting 
worms and viruses in computer environments, and also to 
proactively attempt to intervene to design them. In this case, you look at a computer network and 
look at what goes on in terms of a work flow model, which 
corresponds to the growth and death of things in a 
population.  You model that.  You 
then can do a standard differential equation model and do the standard dynamical 
systems analysis.  You can play with that in a what-if 

scenario to say, what if we changed that, what if we change 
the protocol, so that you get different effects in terms of The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   493493stability, in terms of how it would be taken over in the 
introduction of a worm. So this is an example, just one in a fairly 
tractable space, of the sort of thing that I mean when you talk about modeling how evidence is gathered, and what can be done about it. 
DR. BORGS:  (Comments off mike.) DR. LEVITT:  This is not a Bayesian network.  
This is a diagram that indicates the work flow. DR. CHAYES:  But if it has loops on it, you can't 
solve it. DR. LEVITT:  No, it's not a Bayesian network. It 
is a work flow diagram that is used to model the differential equations for the varying quantities that are 
being exchanged in the work going on in the LAN.  Then when 

you start having worms and things, that affects the 
parameters in the equations.  That is not a fusion 

technique, it is a modeling technique for the evidence 
itself. Just a quick left turn here.  If you now take a 
proactive defense view from a building point of view, instead of looking at the diffusion outdoors or whatever, 
or through computer systems, if you look at a building that 
is purposefully being asked -- and they do this with State The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   494494Department buildings and such now.  You say, if there was 
an aerosol release outside, how would it penetrate, and how 
would we deploy sensors to do that.  What you get is 

amenable to art gallery theorems.  You have vents, windows 
and doors and things where this can come in.  That is a 
completely different approach, but very valid in the sense 
of defending. Finally, these two things have to come together.  
The evidence has to match ultimately into the inference 
chains.  There is no such math.  These are different bodies 

of mathematics that simply aren't miscible at the current 
time. This is the punchline.  Where should we focus?  
Well, certainly calculi for automated inference for fusion, 
issues in accounting for granular completeness and 
causality.  We need to solve the problem of the 

asynchronous arrival of rare evidence, the optimal 
placement combinatorial problem of sensors and assessors, 
especially from the point of view -- and this is the twist 
that hasn't been done, the rapid convergence of evidence in the fusion algorithms that are used, not just the placement to meet some objective function. Finally, the integration of these mathematical representations, or the interoperation of them, if you The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   495495will, to transforation, from the continuous dynamical systems, boundary value type problems that you get when you 
look at diffuse phenomenon, to the inference webs and 
chains that have to occur if you are going to do fusion on machines. Thank you. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   496496Reasoning About Rare Events   Tod Levitt   The goal of data fusion is to allow us to consciously integrate data from organizations 
such as the Center for Disease Control, the 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, the Treasury 
Department, and the intelligence agencies, so th
at the information is automatically sifted 
and compared, regionally focused, and then 
hierarchically fused up from the regions. 
  
It is absolutely critical to build an auto
mated system in order to sift and compare 
collected data with highly complex mathematical models. Automated reasoning is a 
function of how observed data may 
depart from baseline conditions. 
  
Researchers are faced with several challenges in
 the area of data fusion. 
 First, it is crucial 
to verify the accuracy and timeliness of data.   Also, given the breadth of the United 

States, any action taken is going to be enormously expensive.  
  
Some areas of future wo
rk include the following:    Developing calculi for automated inference for fusion; 
 Determining when information is relevant
 and how complete it must be in order 
to give a level of accuracy necessary for drawing conclusions; 
 Handling the problem of asynchronous
 arrival of rare evidence; and  Transitioning from the mathematical m
odels that arise in studying diffuse phenomena to inference webs and chains
 that are required for data fusion.   The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   497497Kathryn Laskey
  ﬁKnowledge Representation and Inference for Multisource Fusionﬂ  
Transcript of Presentation  
Summary of Presentation 
Power Point Slides 

Video Presentation 
 Kathryn Laskey is a professor in the Systems E
ngineering and Operations Research Department 
at George Washington University. She received a 
B.S. in mathematics from the University of 
Pittsburgh, a master™s in mathematics from the Un
iversity of Michigan, and a Ph.D. in statistics 
and public affairs from Carnegie Mellon Universi
ty. Her research interests include Bayesian 
inference and decision theory, multisource fusi
on, uncertainty in artificial intelligence, and 
situation assessment.  

  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   498498DR. LEVIS:  Thank you.  We will proceed right 
away with Kathryn Laskey, who is on the faculty of the 
systems engineering operations research department at 
George Mason University.  That is 
where I also am in my 
real life.  Kathy. DR. LASKEY:  I am going to talk about multi-
source integration.  DR. LEVIS:  While Kathy is working on the 
hardware problem, I mentioned before some of the work my 
lab is doing on Bayesian network, 
et cetera.  I send my 
students to Kathy to learn that stuff.  That gets me off 

the hook. DR. LASKEY:  Before I plunge into my talk, I want 
to stop and say, these days it is hard to talk about multi-
source information fusion without talking about Bayesian 
networks.  The inventor of Bayesian networks was the father 

of Danny Pearl, so I would like to dedicate my talk to 
Danny Pearl and his father, an
d to say that I hope that Danny Pearl's memory will live on in those of us who apply 
his father's research to the problem of homeland security. I am going to talk about some basic requirements for inference and decision support for homeland security 

which you already heard some of in my comments at the 
microphone earlier.  Then I am going to talk about -- most 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   499499of my talk is focused on knowledge  representation, which 
is my area of research.   In particular, I liked David's remarks yesterday about the cathedrals.  I tell freshmen who are coming into 
my university, in our information technology engineering school, that they are living in a very exciting time.  If 

you think about the course of human history, there was the 
agricultural revolution, where we learned to apply 
technology to food production.  It enabled the emergence of 

cities.  Then there was the Industrial Revolution, where we 

learned to apply technology to the development of the 
production of physical systems.  Now we are moving into 
information technology, where we are learning to apply technology to information processing.  I believe that the 

impact on human society will be every bit as fundamental as 
in the agricultural and industrial revolutions. So I want to talk about representation of knowledge for the ability to do information technology. 
Then I will talk briefly about open challenges. This is a quote from the Washington Post on September 12, which pretty much encapsulates what the challenges are in front of us.  
We want to be proactive 
rather than reactive.  I'm not going to spend much time on 

this Vu-graph, because everybody said this already, but my The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   500500favorite phrase that I coined to speak about the issues that confront us with this needle and haystack problem is, 
data, data everywhere and not the time to think. The Joint Directors of Laboratories has developed a taxonomy of information fusion, broken it into levels.   Level zero is pre-detection.  That is, we are 
observing things that are observable in the environment, 
but we haven't yet said there is something out there, and 
can we fuse different sources to enable us to do a better 
job of detecting things that are out there.   Level one is detecting individual entities, like, I see a tank there, or I saw an animal with anthrax there.  
Level two is to support situation assessment, which is militarily significant for the Joint Directors of 
Laboratories, but for our problem, a significant 
configuration of entities in the environment that has some 
meaning.  So for example, I have a company of vehicles, 

about 30 of them, or I have 
a pattern of unusually high 
incidence of anthrax.   Level three is support of threat assessment, which is, what is the intention of my adversary, so there is a bioterrorist attack.   Level four is sensor management, tasking with collection assets.  That is the question of where do I put 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   501501my sensing resources so that I can do a better job of 
detecting what is out there. What is really needed in practice and what mathematicians can help with is a unified, theoretically based technology that spans all five of these levels.  
Right now, it is pretty ad hoc and things are separate.  We 

need to be able to span all the levels, and we need to be 
able to have a theoretically justified, unified approach. If we are going to do a good job of this problem, we need to support and not replace the human.  That means 

that we need to combine expert judgment with prior 
knowledge, apply expertise, but what is important is that we need to be able to 
apply expertise.  In the homeland 
security problem, it is essential to be able to fuse both 
hard and soft types of knowledge.  So not just the biology 

of disease transmission, but also, we need the knowledge 
of, for example, the political scientist about how 
conflicts evolve, the anthropologist, the social 
psychologist, the clinical psychologist on the mind of the 
terrorist.  We need to look at -- a lot of different kinds 
of knowledge have to be brought to bear, and they are not 
always easily quantifiable, but they have to be brought 
together in a common framework. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   502502We need to be able to present results so that 
humans can use them.  As had been mentioned before, we need 

huge volumes of data.  We need to span the five levels of 

fusion.  We need to perform effectively.  Although there is 
uncertainty, there are types of threats that we haven't seen before.  Configurations of things that are meaningless 

in isolation, but when you put them together, they are 
meaningful, and huge numbers of possibilities to consider. We also need to be able to learn from our experience.  Not just humans learning and not just data 

mining, but we need to be able to combine the human 
strengths of pattern recognition and the computer strengths of sifting through large quantities of data to have an effective learning capability that makes use of both human 
expertise and automated processing. Let me talk a little bit -- this is where I am going to talk about Danny Pearl's father.  I am going to 

talk a little bit about knowledge representation, but first 
let me talk about a paradigm shift that I see occurring in 
computing technology. The old paradigm is, you think of a computer as an algorithm running on a machine, executing deterministic 
steps, and it either gets the right or the wrong answer to 
the problem that you are solving.  We are using logic, but 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   503503a computer is an automaton that processes preprogrammed steps. There is a new paradigm that is occurring, actually.  We hear these buzz words like agent-based 
systems.  In fact, there is a recipe in recent years for 
getting a Ph.D thesis, I have noticed.  You take your 

problem, some very complex and high dimensional 
optimization or statistical inference problem and you map 
your objective function if it is an optimization problem, 
or your measure of your log likelihood if it is a 
statistics problem.  You call that energy or action, and 

then you invent a fictitious physical system, and you have these particles wandering around in the physical system, and you import methods from statistical physics to solve 
your problem.  We have got the explosion of micro chain 

Monte Carlo methods and statistics and variational methods.  

This is a recipe for getting a Ph.D thesis.  The Hotfield 

nets were one of them, Radford-Neal was another one. If you think about this agent-based computing, we think of agents making decisions to achieve their objectives, and instead of writing programs, we are designing dynamic systems which by the laws of physics will 
evolve in such a way that we will optimize whatever we want 
to optimize, or infer whatever we want to infer.   Then 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   504504we can put these in hardware.  People are building neural 
net chips in hardware.  In decision theory, we maximize 

expected utility or minimize expected loss.  In physics, we 

minimize action.  So let's think about building agent-based 
systems, and this paradigm shift actually is occurring.  
Instead of programming computers, we are designing 
economies of interactive agents.  Just like any paradigm 

shift, the old paradigm is a limited case of the new 
paradigm. Let me tell you very briefly what a knowledge based system is, because we are talking about representing 
knowledge.  It is a computer program that is supposed to 
behave intelligently, so if you are going to design intelligent agents, you have got to use knowledge based 
systems. So you need to have a representation language, 
which has a syntax as its grammar.  The ontology defines 

what I am allowed to talk about in my domain.  It is like 

my vocabulary, and it has the semantics, which defines the 
meaning. I now have a knowledge base and an inference engine.  The knowledge base is the main specific knowledge.  

The basic idea with the knowledge based system is to 
separate representation of a problem from solution of a The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   505505problem.  And mathematicians are good at transforming from 
one representation to another, so if I can represent a 
problem in terms that are meaningful to an analyst, but put 
it into a computable representation, it might take until the end of the universe to compute, but it is mathematically well specified, then a mathematician can 
take that representation and either approximate the 
solution or come up with a different way of representing it 
that is more efficient to solve it, and this is the kind of 
thing that we need to be able to do.  We need to have a 

unified theory for knowledge based systems. We see a synthesis occurring between traditional artificial intelligence, which looked at structured representations for knowledge, and complex search 
algorithms, probability and decision theory, which can deal 
with uncertainty and can deal with objectives and values.  

Bayesian statistics can bring observations to bear as a 
theory of belief dynamics, of updating with evidence, and 
then database management, which taught us to separate the 
logical view of the data from the physical representation on the computer, methods of access update, administration security and shared data repositories.  We can put all 

these things together into a theory of knowledge based 
systems. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   506506I am going to talk now about a Bayesian network.  
Then I am going to talk about how Bayesian networks are 
evolving into graphical modeling language for specifying 
agent-based systems. This is an example that has nothing to do with homeland security, but I have used it as a classroom 

example that illustrates the basic ideas.   Maria starts sneezing.  This is a Bayesian 
network about Maria's sneezing problem.  She might be 

sneezing because she is having an allergic reaction, or 
because she has a cold.  She wants to go visit her 

grandmother -- this is the utility value -- but she cares about the health of her grandmother, and she cares about 
pleasure from the visit.  If she has a cold, she doesn't 

want to go because she cares about the health of her 
grandmother. This is called an influence diagram or decision graph.  The probability part of it is called a Bayesian 

network.  So she starts sneezing, and she draws a plausible 

inference, so her probability of having a cold went from 
about eight percent to about 50-50 from sneezing.  So the 
utility shifts here, and she shouldn't go and see her 
grandmother. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   507507But then she sees scratches on the furniture, which as we have already talked about is distributed 
propagation algorithms.  It makes her think there is a cat 

nearby, which makes her think she is having an allergic 
reaction, which explains away the sneezing, so she doesn't need cold as an explanation anymore, so now it is okay to 

visit her grandmother again. This is a trivial example.  We have built much 
more complicated systems than this on much more interesting 
applications.  But it shows you how you can use these 

Bayesian networks to represent commonsense knowledge. Let's talk about what happen
ed here when Maria 
was sneezing.  The decision graph is both a knowledge 
representation and a computational architecture.  So it 

formulates somebody's model in terms that are meaningful to 
a human being.  We have worked with domain experts, and we 

can build a fairly complex domain model within a couple of 
days with an expert.  The expert can play with a model and 

make it in a day or two. I have had junior high kids playing with Bayesian networks, and they understand them and they like them.  I 
can get students after one or two classes to build passable 
Bayesian networks.  So it really is human understandable 

language for specifying very complex, hundreds of The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   508508variables, probability and decision models, and the output accords with human intuition. If there is just the probability nodes, that is a 
probabilistic inference problem.  You can also put decision 
nodes, and it is a decision theoretic optimization model.  
There are inference algorithms for computing the marginal 
distribution of one variable, given evidence on the other 
variables.  So we learn the probability.  We updated it, 

learned that Maria was sneezing and that changed our 
probability, and that was Bayes rule, and it was a 
distributed algorithm for applying Bayes rule. There are also what they call learning algorithms, which is parameter estimation, where you use data sets to update the parameters.  Most of the methods 

that are applied are getting increasingly sophisticated, 
but in the artificial intelligence field, most of the 
algorithms that are applied are fairly straightforward from 
a statistics perspective.  They tend to be very simple 

models and independent identically distributed observations 
with no missing data, things like that.  They are becoming 
more sophisticated now. From a mathematician's perspective, there are a lot of fascinating problems there.  In geometry, in 

inference, for example, if you take a Bayesian network and The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   509509you don't know the structure so you don't know what the arcs are, then you don't know what dimension your manifold 
is.   If you do these mixture models, where I have one 
probability of this model, one probability of that model, one probability of that model, there may be hundreds of 

thousands of them, you get something called a stratified 
exponential family, which is an interesting mathematical 
structure.  It would be interesting to do some theory on 

the properties of those things and the estimators that you 
get. What I just showed you was pretty much the state of the art up until about 1990, and is really exploring out now and being applied all over the place.  There are 

hundreds of papers on Bayesian networks now coming out 
every year.  But that was a one size fits all model, in the 

sense that the types of applications people do.  You might 

have a clinic where you have thousands upon thousands of 
patients coming in, but you have exactly the same symptoms 
for every patient, exactly the same background variables, exactly the same diseases that you are worried about. That is not good enough for this kind of problem.  
We don't know how many terrorists there are out there.  

There are lots of different stockyards that they might be The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   510510infecting.  There are lots of different plans that they 
might have.  There are just t
oo many things to have one 
grand Bayesian network to cover them all. 
There is also the temporal dimension which makes things much more complex. Let me talk about Maria again.  I am going to 
from the sublime to the ridiculous.  Our first variation is 

a very trivial variation.  We have Tran.  He is sneezing 

and he saw scratches, but he was recently exposed to a 
cold.  Unlike Maria, he is not allergy prone.  That is very 

easy. The second variation is, he is the one who saw the scratches, Maria didn't see the scratches, and he is in the room with her.  That is a little bit more complex.  The 

final variation I am going to talk about is that they are 
both sneezing, and this time they are both allergy prone, 
and we don't know about their cold history, and they both 
saw scratches, but they are a continent apart. Those three variations are going to illustrate slightly more complex types of reasoning that come up in 
the homeland defense area.   Variation one I can do just by adding a background variable, that somebody is or is not allergy The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   511511prone.  Maria is, and we don't know about Tran, so this one 
is not gray, and it is not either zero or one.   Then there is exposure to cold.  We don't know 
when Maria and -- we do know it on Tran, these guys are mirror images of each other.  It turns out that Maria 
should visit her grandmother and Tran shouldn't visit his.  

All we have done is added a few extra variables to cover 
all these situational factors.  That is what people have 

been doing with Bayesian networks.  You add variables that 

cover all the situational factors that you might want to 
model. In variation two though, that doesn't quite work.  
We have repeated sub-structures.  I have replaced cat 
nearby with Maria being near a cat and Tran being near a 
cat, and there is a cat here to the location of Maria and 
the location of Tran.  Maria is near Tran, so we find out 

if Maria is near Tran, then they both have to be near the 
cat. I've got two copies of the same model, and I have pasted them together like Legos.  That is the direction 
that things are moving.  Notice as a statistician, there is 
replication here for learning that this piece and that 
piece are the same, or close to the same or whatever.  It 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   512512is an interesting statistical model and problem to learn these kinds of models. This is what happens if we try to apply that model, but then we try to put them a continent apart, and 
have them both see scratches.  What happens is, they are 
both 50-50 near a cat.  That illustrates something that in 

the fusion literature is called the hypothesis management 
problem.  We haven't enumerated enough cats to cover the 

situation, so we have the hypothesized entities.   Here I have all this spaghetti up here, where I have got two possible cats, one of which might be the cat 

that is near Maria and one of which might be the cat that is near Tran.  It turns out that this model is essentially 
the same as variation one, variation two and variation 
three done right.  In other words, I can use this model for 

everything, but I don't need it if I only have one cat, and 
I don't need it if Maria and Tran aren't related at all.  

So the question is, how much of the model do I construct and how much do I prune away.  That is something that has 

got very interesting mathematical challenges. I like to let my experts specify the model in conceptually meaningful units.  So I've got my cats and 

allergies fragment, that talks about allergic reactions.  

I've got a spatial reasoning fragment, which is rather The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   513513rudimentary for this problem.  This just says that if I am 
near you and you are near somebody else, then they are near 
me, too. I've got my evolution of colds and time fragment, which is a very simple markup chain here.  I've got my 
value fragment, which says I care about my grandmother's 
health and I care about my 
pleasure.  I can paste these 
things together, and from a logician's standpoint this kind 
of model has first order expressive power, whereas the 
previous kind of model had propositional expressive power.  

This is the way things are moving in artificial 
intelligence. A simpler model give the same results as the more complex model.  From a mathematician's standpoint, we are 

building an infinite dimensional Bayesian network 
implicitly in our knowledge base.  We need to think about 

the mathematical properties of these algorithms. This is an architecture for a system that retrieves Bayesian network or decision graph fragments and 
pastes them together.  I will just show you that there is 
this architecture. Let's get to the challenges.  This is a bunch of 
applications that I have been involved in with various 
students and colleagues.  I can make these Vu-graphs 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   514514available to you.  I can let you read through some of 
these, but I want to move to a few Vu-graphs on challenges, 
and I am running out of time, so let's go ahead here. Model life cycle management as a systems engineer.  We want to be building reusable models.  So we 
need to have a library of fragments.  We need to have 

something that the database people call meta data, 
different describes the model's capabilities, inputs and 
outputs, and models that pass information between them.  

From that perspective, the modeling language provides a 
universal representation language that describes generic 
decision and inference problems.  We need software tools 
that are theory based. Inference and learning technology is probably more meaty for mathematicians.  Efficient solution methods, 

temporal reasoning is intractable.  Decisions over time is 

even more intractable.  Value of information as Tod 

mentioned is even more intractable.  Value computation.  

Standard probability theory assumes that I know all the 
logical consequences of my beliefs, but I don't know the optimum computation before I have done it. People have modeled -- Eric Corbett from Microsoft has done  a lot of work in value of computation, 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   515515applying value of information to decide whether to perform a computation  or not.   We need addual modeling.  That is a buzz word 
that came from a DARPA program in addual modeling, the idea of being able to take these model pieces and break out when we get new problems that we haven't seen before.  Some 

parts of the world don't change at all, and we want to 
leave those fixed, and we want to change only those parts 
that we need to change, and how do we structure out models 
so that they are easily changeable. Multi-resolution modeling.  I want to model at 
different resolutions because of computational efficiency or other factors.   The really important thing is 
deception.  If they know I am modeling them, how do I model 

the fact that they know I am modeling them.  Game theory is 

relevant there. Support for human-computer interaction.  We want 
to combine expert knowledge with designed experiments and 
observational data.  Most of the learning methods cannot 

handle anything more complex than independent, identically distributed observations and a conjugate prior.  You have 
got to get better than that. Human-computer interaction design for model input, model output, sensitivity and uncertainty analysis The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   516516and collaboration  among heterogenous and geographically 
dispersed analysts. I think that is the end.  Summary, one more.   
We are moving from hand-crafted special purpose models to reconfigurable model pieces that humans work on parts of the problem and then piece together with other 
parts of the problem.  It is something that we really need 

theory to understand what is going on.  That is the 

direction things are going.  There is lots of useful 

application experience. By the way, Clippy in your Microsoft office products is a Bayesian network, in case you didn't know. DR. CHAYES:  But the interface was not written by 
the Bayesian. DR. LEVITT:  Eric does not like the obnoxious 
little -- he says if they had used his decision theory on 
when to bother you, as well as the Bayesian stuff on what 

do you want to be doing, that people would like Clippy a 
lot better. DR. CHAYES:  Eric is very embarrassed by this.  
This is used as the example of his work, and he didn't have anything to do with the obnoxious part. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   517517Knowledge Representation and Inference for Multisource Fusion 
  Kathryn Laskey   Excellent inference and decision support for homeland security requires supporting expert, human judgment with data; extrac
ting key conclusions from volumes of 
heterogeneous data; and effective performan
ce in the presence of uncertainty and 
ambiguity. 

  
There are many recent advances in knowledge representation and inference technology, 

such as dynamic computing systems, whose solutions improve over time.  

  
We need to have a unified theory for knowledge-based systems, and in that spirit it was 
noted that a synthesis is occurring between traditional artificial intelligence (which looks 
at structured representations of knowledge) and complex 
search algorithms involving 
probability and decision theory (which can deal with uncertainty, as well as with 

objectives and values). The main links between
 the two arenas are Bayesian statistics, 
which can bring observations to bear in updating evidence, and database management. 
  
Dr. Laskey discussed Bayesian networks, whic
h essentially are causal graphs associated 
with underlying probability distributions.  
She offered some examples to illustrate 
Bayesian networks™ usefulness for repres
enting common-sense knowledge and assisting 
in decision-making. The decision graph is
 both a knowledge representation and a computational architecture, so it formul
ates somebody™s model in terms that are 
meaningful to a human being. It can be used
 for specifying very complex probability and 
decision models, with as many as hundreds of 
variables, and the output will still accord 
with human intuition.  
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   518518Valen Johnson   ﬁA Hierarchical Model for Estimating the Reliability of Complex Systemsﬂ 
 
Transcript of Presentation  
Summary of Presentation 
Power Point Slides 

Video Presentation 
 
 Valen Johnson is a professor of biostatistics at t
he University of Michigan. He received a Ph.D. in 
Statistics from the University of Chicago in 1989 
and was a professor of statistics and decision 
sciences at Duke University prior to moving to A
nn Arbor in the fall of 2002. He is a fellow of the 
American Statistical Association, past treasurer of
 the International Society of Bayesian Analysis, 
has served as an associate editor for the 
Journal of the American Statistical Association
 and 
IEEE Transactions for Medical Imaging
, and is a Savage Award winner. He is coauthor of 
Ordinal Data Modeling with James Albert and author of 
Grade Inflation: A Crisis in College Education
. His 
research interests include ordinal and rank data modeling, Bayesian image analysis, Bayesian 
reliability modeling, convergence diagnostics for Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithms, Bayesian 
goodness-of-fit diagnostics, and educational assessment. 
  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   519519DR. JOHNSON:  The title of the talk is Estimating the 
Reliability of Complex Systems.  This is joint work with Ty 

Graves and Mike Yamada at Los Alamos. Before I get into the talk, I would like to acknowledge some of the people we have been working with.  
A lot of the work started as an application of the nuclear 
weapons program at Los Alamos.  We were trying to model the 

reliability of nuclear weapons that can't be tested 
anymore.  But we have also been applying some of these 

applications through some Air Force problems, the F-22 
safety program.  We have been working with the Army, and 

the assessment division of the engineering directorate has provided some funding for this.  We are also trying to 
apply this type of methodology to the Ballistic Missile 
Defense -- or I guess, the Missile Defense Agency now. Here is a non-classified example of what we are doing.  This represents the system diagram for an anti-

aircraft missile.  This particular weapons system has 17 

components.  The fault diagram -- in this case, the way 

these fault diagrams work, this notion means that for the guided missile on this weapons system to work, all of the sub-systems down here work. The idea here is that we are going to in general, and in particular for nuclear weapons, we are going to have The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   520520prior expert opinion about the probability that any one of these particular sub-systems works.  The prior expert 

opinion can be very important in the nuclear weapons system 
and in the anti-aircraft missiles case, because you can't test or you can't get as much information from actual data as you would like.  So we need to use expert opinion. The expert opinion is going to come at different system levels.  You may have a physicist who can give you 

information at the systems level.  You might have an 

engineer who can give you information at a valve or 
something level.  So we need to incorporate all these 

different sources of expert opinion.  We also may have 
binomial data that has also been collected at different levels in the system.  It may also be collected from 

different systems.  So we want to incorporate that into 

estimation of system reliability. We need to handle sparse data.  I'll show you why 
that is important in a little 
bit.  Then in the weapons 
program, we may have five or six different weapons systems 

that are all similar, and we want to model the similarity across these different systems. My talk is going to be a little bit different 
from some of the previous talks, in that I am going to 
become somewhat specific in how we are modeling this The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   521521reliability.  Just a little bit of notation.  In some of 
the slides I am going to show in a minute, C
i is going to 
denote the component or the sub-component I have in the 

system.  The p
i will denote the probability that that sub-
component functions.  These are the numbers that we are 
really interested in.  We want to do inference on those. When we have data for a system, xi will denote the 
number of successful trials, and ni™s will denote the total number of trials.  So different types of information we 

might have. PARTICIPANT:  (Comments off mike.) 
DR. JOHNSON:  That is the probability that that 
component functions.  We are not going to know that, we are 
going to estimate that.  Generally you don't know that. DR. CHAYES:  So it is the real problem. 
DR. JOHNSON:  Real, but unknown.  The first sort 
of information is specific prior expert opinion concerning 
pi™s.  So you go to an engineer and you ask him, what is the 
probability that this valve functions.  The engineer in 

this case is going to tell me, the probability that that valve functions is A.  So maybe it is .93. We model this in a beta type density function, but we haven't fixed the K.  So A is the maximum value of 

this beta density.  We are going to model the precision of 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   522522this beta density.  As K gets bigger, the beta density 
collapses around this estimate.  We are going to see how 

consistent the expert is with the other data we have and 
with the other experts. For specific prior information, let me just emphasize that the A is fixed, but we are going to estimate 
the K, and we are going to use the beta density to do that. PARTICIPANT:  (Comments off mike.) 
DR. JOHNSON:  We have flexibility on how we can 
do that, but we have been assuming that the K is the same 
for the same expert.  So if an expert comes along and gives 

us guesses that are not consistent with the data, we down weight his guesses for all of the components, whether we have data on them or not. Generic expert opinion, if we go back to the fault diagram, what we want to do is, we want to allow 

experts to come in and say, maybe this control assembly and 
this guide assembly have similar success probability or 
similar reliabilities, but we don't know what they are.  He 

won't say it is .93, but he will say these two things are similar. If we do a similar thing here, again we are going to use  a beta density to estimate all the probabilities 

within a group of components that an expert has said should The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   523523be similar.  The difference now is that we don't fix C.  So 
we are going to have a precision parameter to say how 
tightly these components are grouped together, and we are 
going to have a C which we are going to also estimate from the data. So we generally will put a Jeffreys prior on C and we'll put a gamma prior on M.  But we are going to 

estimate both of those parameters.   Then finally what we do -- and we don't have data on all the nodes in this system.  We can't for example 

compute a system-wide probability if we only have data on 
five or six of these terminal nodes.  So we are going to 
assume another grouping type prior on the terminal nodes in our fault tree.  So that is the final piece of the puzzle 

until we get to the data.  Here we assume a Bayesian 

distribution as well. So we take a hierarchical specification, a lot of priors on the terminal nodes.  For all of the terminal 

nodes, those are the nodes on the tree that don't have any 
sub-components.  We take this type of beta.  We say we 
don't know what the parameters of the beta are, but we have a parameter B which we estimate, which is the mean 
reliability of all the terminal nodes.  The M is going to 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   524524estimate how tightly grouped they are together, whether they are all precisely the same or very much different. PARTICIPANT:  (Comments off mike.) 
DR. JOHNSON:  What we do here, we say the 
terminal nodes have some probabilities.  We don't know what 
the mean probability is.  We assume that B is drawn.  In 

the next stage of the hierarchy, we assume it is drawn from 
a beta density.  Generally what we assume here is a 

Jeffreys prior.  So C and D are taken to be one half. PARTICIPANT:  (Comments off mike.) 
DR. JOHNSON:  M is also a pre-primer.   
PARTICIPANT:  M is not drawn from -- M would be 
determined by --  DR. JOHNSON:  No.  We take a gamma prior 
typically for M.  As Kathryn mentioned, this is sort of 

like a Bayesian network.  A lot of these conjugate priors -

- we use conjugate priors because they are convenient, but 

it is not necessary.  The data terms of course are coming 

in as binomial observations.  I'll mention at the end how 

we are extending those also to time-bearing cases for this anti-aircraft missile data. Then finally, if you look in the reliability literature, you will find that there has traditionally been 
a consistency problem in these type of nets, because people The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   525525have introduced different probabilities in different levels in the system.  Then they use different priors and combine 

data in ways to give you incoherent results.   We have avoided this problem in our model by using the fault tree specification to relate the parameters.  So for example, for component four, I am not 

going to model the piece of four, because with the fault 
tree -- let me first say, if I had ten successes and one 
failure, then the binomial probably at p4 would be this, 
except from the fault tree.  When you look at p
4, p4 only 
works if component 8 and component 9 work.  So we just re-

parameterized.  We said p
4 is identically equal to p
8 times 
p9.  We are developing diagnostics to see when that actually 
holds as well. That is sort of an important point, because if you have one system level test, all this information is 
transferring itself all the way up and down the fault tree 
now.  So for example, if I have N trials at the system 

levels, the likelihood that comes from those N trials takes 
this form, where we have the product over the probabilities 
of all the terminal nodes minus that same probability.  So 
now we have information about all of the terminal nodes 

from one system test. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   526526The joint posterior distribution which is the thing that we are going to use to do inference on all these 
probabilities, is just obtained by multiplying the specific 
expert opinion, the generic expert opinion, the hierarchical specification on the terminal nodes and the data terms all together, so we are assuming essentially 
independence there.  We get a joint probability density on 

all the nodes in our system.  Ten 
years ago, that would 
have been a hard problem to address, but now of course with 
Monte Carlo algorithms, we can go through and sample these 

probabilities very easily.  We can update all the precision 

parameters, all the probability param
eters, and even the hierarchical means and the generic means. Let me go through a quick example of how this works.  We had some very unique data for testing this 

model.  We had data from an anti-aircraft missile system, 

approximately 350 component level tests were performed on 
the system.  I can't show you the actual data because it is 

proprietary.   But it also turns out that they have done 1400 system level tests.  So I have gone through and I have done 
the analysis just using the 350 component level tests, and 
then also doing it using the 350 component level test plus The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   527527the 1400 system level test to see how the two results compare. Here is what we ended up with.  We do have the 
1400 system level test for component one, where I have drawn X's through components where we had no component local data.  You can see where we get rid of the entire 

weapon test.   There may be problems in predicting the missile round and various other components if you look through 
this.  For example, component 8 and component 9 may not be 

identified because we just have the test up here.  So it is 

a fairly complicated problem, and it is also representative of a lot of the nuclear weapons system problems that we have, where we don't have test data for certain components. Here are the posterior distributions.  For the 
reliability of the system as a whole -- and again, I 
apologize for not being able to display the actual axes 
here.  These axes are between zero and one. We are using the 1400 system level test and the component level test.  We get a posterior distribution that 
looks like this black line, so that is the posterior distribution.  When we throw away all of the system level 

test and just use the component level tests, we get the red 
line.  As you expect, the posterior distribution based on 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   528528just the component level test is quite a bit broader than it is using system level data, but it is reassuring, in 
that it seems to cover the posterior distribution that we 
would have gotten using all of the system level tests.  So 
we were heartened by this. We had expected a priori that when we did this 
analysis, the posterior default system would be down here 
somewhere, just because of assembly problems, the fact that 
the components might not interact together.  We had 

anticipated having to put an assembly node into our default 
diagram to account for that.  But in this case, the data 

just didn't support that.   We tried this to see what the effects were on components where we have a lot of data.  For one of the 

sub-systems that had a lot of test data, the posterior 
didn't change much when we got system level tests and when 
we incorporated that information, whereas we were looking 
for components where there was no data, the posteriors did 

change somewhat, because the system level tests did provide 
that additional information. DR. BORGS:  (Comments off mike.) DR. JOHNSON:  That is a good question, and we 
wondered why that was happening.  It turns out, when we 

talked to the people who provided us with this data, they The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   529529had made improvements in the manufacture of the weapons system over time.  If you actually go through and do 

logistic regression just on a component level, where you 
have the time for each of these things.   Did I answer that question?  I think I answered a 
different question.   Some extensions that we are currently modeling.  
Some missile test data that we had, we had a time 
associated with all the binomial data, so we are modeling 
now -- instead of just having a beta distribution at each 
node where we have data, we are looking at a logistic 
regression model. We are incorporating data in other applications from computational physics models, where they run computer 
code, for example, to predict outputs of systems.  We have 

to incorporate the uncertainties in the input parameters to 
these codes into this.  Material degradation models, and 

then different types of engineering data. I think an important point to make is also that the model provides guidance where additional information can best be obtained.  So we can look at the posterior 
distributions and different components and see where we 
would like to get more data if we wanted to better estimate 
the reliability of the system as a whole. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   530530So I'll stop there.  There was a question that 
you asked. DR. BORGS:  (Comments off mike.) 
DR. JOHNSON:  That issue is involved in something 
we are working on actively.  That is fitting these time 
varying models.  It turns out the component level tests 

were done in a different time than the system level tests.  

So there was a time effect on these curves.   But I think the more appropriate answer here is just to say that there is uncertainty in the estimate of 
these probabilities.  Based on just component level tests 

in general, we are going to have a broader distribution for the system, and when we get the system level information, it is not always going to fall right in the middle of that 
distribution.   There are certain diagnostics we would like to 
do, for example, omitting some of the data in the nodes 
that we have data, and see if
 we predict well what that 
data would have done.  But the assembly error in putting 

these components together is an important thing to be considered, as is the independence of the expert opinions from each other and from data that they have already seen. PARTICIPANT:  I have got a practical question 
that is less related to the --  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   531531DR. LEVIS:  Will you please go to the microphone? DR. FREEDMAN:  (Comments off mike.)  Are there 
other experiences in our society or in the world which are 
-- that is, something was tested for some period of time and then for a long period of time thereafter, we didn't really test them.  We had to rely in some way on expert 

opinion, that we then model and put together to try to 
infer how a system worked.  My apprehension is that the 

farther away we get from actually testing something, the 
more we are deluded into believing that the aggregation of 
expert opinion and wonderful methodology still speaks 
truth.  What is the empirical basis to give us confidence 
that this speaks truth about how a system will perform? DR. JOHNSON:  I think your question is basically, 
if the test data and the expert opinion was all collected 
before 1992 when we stopped doing nuclear tests, do we 
really want to use it now.  And 
of course, at the lab that is a major focus of investigation, what is happening with 
these weapons systems as they age and they begin to exceed 
their intended lifetime. DR. CHAYES:  He is saying that the test data 
itself is -- DR. JOHNSON:  That is what I am trying to answer.  
There is a major effort in trying to tie the output from The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   532532computer codes, for example, that have been designed to run very accurate simulations of what happens in a nuclear 
reaction, to tie that back to the test data, as well as to 
tie it to any other data that they can collect now.  So 
some critical experiments where they may do hydro tests.   It is an extremely important problem, and people are not naive in thinking that they can just simply use 
data collected 15 years ago and put this into the model and 
think it is going to work.  But they are trying to use the 

data collected 15 years ago to validate their codes. 
So in the last slide where I said we are trying to 
incorporate different sources of information into this model, this binomial system, we are really trying to look at some fairly sophisticated ways 
of putting information 
into these different nodes that isn't really in a 
conjugated form. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   533533A Heirarchical Model for Estimating the Reliability of Complex Systems 
  Valen Johnson   Engineering problems may involve estimating th
e reliability of a system that cannot be 
tested. For example, at Los Alamos, efforts 
are under way to model the reliability of 
nuclear weapons. This issue also arises in handling Air Force projects, such as the F-22 safety program, and working with the Ar
my and the Missile Defense Agency.  
  
Consider a multicomponent system in which ev
ery component must work in order for the 
system to work.  In order to estimate the pr
obability that any one of these particular subsystems will work, as in the case of nuc
lear-weapons systems, prior expert opinion 
can be very important. This is because we can™t
 test, or we can™t get as much information 
from actual data as we would like, so we 
need to use expert opinion.   
Dr. Johnson described in detail his method for 
using different sources of expert opinion in the estimation of system reliability.  

  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   534534Arthur Dempster   ﬁRemarks on Data Integration and Fusionﬂ  
Transcript of Presentation  
Summary of Presentation 
Video Presentation 
 Arthur Dempster is a professor of theoretical 
statistics at Harvard Un
iversity. His research 
interests include the methodology and logic of
 applied statistics; computational aspects of 
Bayesian and belief function inference; modeling and analysis of dynamic processes; statistical 
analysis of medical, social, and physical phenomena.  
 The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   535535DR. DEMPSTER:  That's okay.  I notice that the 
talks have been getting shorter and shorter.  I think it 

has something to do with Saturday afternoon.  The schedule 

says I have five minutes, then I pass it on to Alberto.  I 
don't know what he is going to do. I have a few topics I wanted to touch on very briefly that I planned in advance.  Then I can come back 

perhaps to the three talks, again very briefly. First of all, on defense, I am completely non-expert in this area.  I have heard lots of wonderful 

things, beginning with our chairman.  I am glad to hear 

that there are positive activities as well as possible ones, seeking out and pre-empting possible dangers and thinking about strategies for doing this. A big theme is of course modeling the whole complex system and all its actors and characteristics and 
environments and dynamics and so on and so forth.  I 

perhaps would have liked to hear a little bit more about 
gaming, the opposite to people are developing strategies, 
and we have to cope with their strategies and back and forth, multiple feedbacks and so on.  Anyway, it goes much 
beyond passive description of the situation. One thing about complexity.  Jimmy Savage used to 
say, make your models as big as elephants.  Another thing 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   536536that I used to hear, Bill Cochran was my colleague in the late '50s, the late '70s, would quote Ari Fischer with the 
advice to make your causal thinking complicated, bring in 
all the causal mechanisms before you try to understand what 
is going on.   Obviously, the last question occurred to me when I listened to it, the idea of, we are well past the period 
of testing.  There are all kinds of dynamic changes that 

have gone on in the active weapons and the newly 
constructed ones and so on.  One would have to think of all 

the causal mechanisms that were operating there and build 
them into the mathematical models as they get more and more dependent on scientific expertise and such things.  So that 
is one set of comment on defense.   A second comment that isn't perhaps very much on today's topic, but I'll back up a 
little bit -- I think 
discussants have been allowed to do this by the chairs -- 
that is to say that data are dumb.  What I mean  by that 

is, in themselves, if they are just a string of bits, that 
means nothing at all and it is obvious.   But even if you have lots of structures that are 
set up wonderfully from the computer science point of view 
for access and information flow and manipulation, that is 
not getting at what is really going on here.  So the 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   537537necessary complement is scientific understanding and meaning.   This aspect I think was brought up by George Papanicoulou in the seismic problem, where the databases of course are huge.  But the real understanding came about 
through working through the science and improving that.  So 

in all these homeland security models, I think the science 
is somehow primary, and we should always keep that in mind. This session has been on fusion, and that is what 
I should try to address a little bit.  We are talking about 

fusing different measurement sources that are measuring 
objective things with error.  That is the kind of model 
that is important to develop and to try to pool. The other aspect of it though is that we need to be fusing the models that refer to measurement, the models 
of the underlying phenomenon, the models that represent the 
science.  That is an even bigger task.  I think again, we 

should be deliberately focusing on those kinds of issues. As to mechanisms for fusion, the way I look at it and am conditioned to look at it is that we have had 250 years now since Bayes presented the formal tool of conditional probability.  It was 200 years ago roughly that 

Gauss deliberately used that tool in order to propose Lee's 
squares for models with formal errors. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   538538Interestingly, it has been 150 years roughly since Bool set out the basic ideas of propositional logic, 
which is essentially a formal fusion tool of deterministic 
information.  About 35 years ago, I presented what seemed 
to me to be the natural combination of these two ideas in a single mechanism that seemed to me to be totally natural, 
and then 25 years ago Ben Schaeffer gave a new name theory 
of belief functions in his Theory of Evidence book to that 
conception. For me, it has always been just that, the fusion of Boolean logic with probability, so it is not different 
from probability.  But one does have to emphasize the word 
logic here, logic in a broad sense of trying to reason.  I 
do want to emphasize that I think of it as a set of tools 
for reasoning about a scientific phenomena that include 
deterministic models and uncertainty and probabilistic 
uncertainty and so on. One comment about it though is that this fusion idea rests very heavily on a concept of independence.  So 

the different information sources of evidential sources do have to have within them some representation that is independent from source to source before either Boolean 
logic or probabilistic combination or whatever you are 
doing, Bayesian combination, can operate. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   539539If we take a specific example like Val Johnson's, one should be thinking carefully about whether the evidence 
that comes in at higher levels in the tree are independent 
of one another.  He and I have 
discussed this.  He is well 
aware of course of that kind of issue.  So that is a 
technical thing that should be of great concern. I'll say a little bit about graphical structures.  
It seems to me that this technology, certainly the one I am 
familiar with, the belief function technology, has been 
closely tied to join trees, tree structures, that kind of 
thing, since the mid-80s when Schaeffer and Schnoy wrote a 
paper about it, and my student, Augustine Kahm, did a 
thesis in 1986 developing that subject.  That is not 
different from the better known Bayesian network theory.   In fact, it subsumes it.  In some ways, these 
conditional independence ideas go back to Phil David's '79 
paper.  I regard Judea Pearl as a good friend and very 

stimulating, and certainly has done a lot to move this 
theory out into the computer science world.  I am a little 

surprised that Kathy ascribes it to him, since some of us have known about it rather longer than that. A little bit about mathematics.  I don't profess 
to be a mathematician, although I do have a math stat 
degree from the Princeton math department way back.  I like 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   540540mathematics, and I especially like beautiful mathematics, which I think is part of its great power. I don't have a good sense that mathematical thinking has come to grips with computing and the data revolution and all those complexities and so on.  Maybe it 
is just the reductive aspect of the way mathematicians 
work, but to me, what I would like to see mathematics do is 
have new conceptions or frameworks for addressing 
scientific issues.  I include all of these homeland 

security issues as scientific issues, in the sense that 
they need to be described, and what you know about them set 
up and formalized as much as possible and so on. Anyway, there is certainly plenty to do for understanding computations.  You can set up a mathematical 

model and define an algorithm that will do it by brute 
force, but one big thing mathematics can do is provide 
clever ways around the difficulties and gain you orders of 
magnitude of speed. This MCNC approach that I am familiar with and that Val has used in his example is another area where there is a tremendous amount of mathematical development 
that can go on.  Mathematicians in mathematical statistics 

have emphasized properties and procedures, and there is 
continuing to be a lot of new
 work going on there, very 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   541541interesting, very important, as to the efficiency of methods not only of calculation, but also of scientific 
methods, issues of robustness and all that kind of thing. So perhaps I should turn a little to the speakers.  I think Alexander gave a very nice outline of 
one set of ways of thinking about these things, and Tod and 
Kathy the same.  I find that they are presenting very 

complex stories.  I didn't have them in advance.  Maybe 

that was a blessing. One reaction I have, I would have to make a mathematical model of each of their presentations, and then 
I could analyze it and draw some conclusions about what I thought.  But at the moment, I am left with trying to react 
to a very few different things. I certainly thought Tod's talk was extremely interesting.  He threw out all these different approaches 

to uncertainty.  I'm not so sure that what Lad Visati has 

been trying to do and what I am interested in doing are not 
miscible.  I think they may be miscible in certain ways. One kind of thing that I am thinking about these days is a mathematical model of object recognition, very abstract, away from the real problem or what features, the 
complexities or dynamics or this kind of thing.  But there 

was an example there of a medium characteristic.  This 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   542542object I am looking at might have a membership value of .9 for being medium.  I can treat
 that as a simple support 
function in the Dempster-Schaeffer theory, and I can 
discuss with Lad Visati, as I have done and will do more of in the next few months, exactly what the interactions are, since he is more interested in getting probability mixed in 

with his technologies.  So there is some hope I think of 

some of these different approaches perhaps coming more 
together. I did have the advantage of being at Los Alamos last week and talking to Tod Graves and Val Johnson on the 
paper, and I had a chance to look at it.  I think of it as 
a very nice case study type thing that can scale up to very complex examples.  It does make use of the graphical model 

formulation in a very beautiful and non-trivial way.   It brings in several different kinds of modeling.  
One is the traditional binomial sampling model.  What I 

found when I thought about it was that the Bayesian aspect 
-- it has got a Bayesian label on it, but what the Bayesian 
would do, the standard Bayesian, would be to take the samples, the binomial samples and the 13 unknown probabilities and say, how am I going to assign a prior to 
those 13 probabilities that I can mix with the data.  But 

those authors didn't do that.  They put in prior 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   543543information here and there, and I regard that as very much in the spirit of the belief function approach to things.  

So I don't think of it as belonging to Bayes in the 
classical sense.  It is much more moving towards the belief 
function approach. I thought the way they used beta priors with those capital K and capital N values in them was quite 
ingenious, although it seemed to me to mix a little bit the 
notion of expert opinion, the U of I.J. Good, the expert as 
a set of data.  Whereas, the other aspect of it, the 

hierarchical thing, was just shrinking towards a common 
mean, that aspect of it gets buried in the beta priors and it was a little hard to see, unless you are very familiar 
with what is going on there.  I misinterpreted it the first 

time I read the paper. That assumption, that the true values of P are drawn from some population, that is a judgment, not an 
expert opinion, not a sampling of likelihood term, but it 
is a kind of judgment on the part of the analyst who is 
constructing the model, to treat these things at that level as exchangeable.  That is a judgment by what I.J. Good 
called "U", in quotes, or Jimmy Savage someplace else 
called thou.   The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   544544So there is a kind of a philosophical attitude going on here, whereby there is objective science, 
something that I think Glen Schaeffer called nature, nature 
as the source of causation in the book, The Art of Causal Conjecture, that Tod mentioned.  There is objective science 
of that nature.  There is expert opinion, which is almost 

like data, and there is the U or the thou that makes some 
judgment that puts it all together into a model that you 
can have some belief in.  So you 
need to have some kind of 
a working philosophy there, which I think very few people 
have. Perhaps one of the reasons that what I regard as this very simple combination of probability and Boolean logic, Bayes and Bool, is understood is because what it is 
really talking about is this U performing some kind of 
logic.  If people started to think that way, they would 

understand this technology a little better. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   545545Remarks on Data Integration and Fusion  Arthur Dempster   Dr. Dempster spoke on a number of relate
d topics relevant to homeland security. 
 
Game theory. In order to devise an effective method for seeking out and preempting 
possible dangers, perhaps there should be more
 focus on game theory. We have to cope 
with the attacker™s strategies, and then back
 and forth with multiple feedbacks. It goes 
much beyond passive description of the situation.  
The primacy of science.   Data by themselves are just st
rings of bits that mean nothing at all without the necessary complement of scientific understanding and meaning. The 

science is primary, and we should always keep that in mind. 
 Fusion.   Dr. Dempster spoke of the need to 
fuse together measurement sources that 
measure objective quantities with 
some amount of error.  In addition, there was a need to 
develop ways of fusing together the models that refer to m
easurement with the models of 
the underlying phenomenaŠthe models that repres
ent the science. That is an even bigger task, but one researchers should be deliberately focusing on.  
Mathematics. 
 ﬁI don™t have a good sense that mathem
atical thinking has come to grips 
with computing and the data revolution,ﬂ Dr
. Dempster said. ﬁMaybe it™s just the reductive aspect of the way mathematicia
ns work, but what I would like to see mathematics do is have new conceptions or fr
ameworks for addressing scientific issuesŠ
including homeland security issues.ﬂ Alt
hough one can set up a model and define an 
algorithm that will do a computation problem 
by brute force, one big thing mathematics 
can do is provide clever ways around the difficulties and gain you orders of magnitude of 
speed. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   546546Alberto Grunbaum  ﬂRemarks on Data Integration and Fusionﬂ  
Transcript of Presentation  
Summary of Presentation 
Video Presentation Alberto Grunbaum is a professor of mathematics at
 the University of California, Berkeley. His 
research interests include analysis, probability, integrable systems, and medical imaging. Dr. 
Grunbaum™s current research is in medical imaging. He is studying the use of an infrared laser in 
place of X-rays. 
  The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   547547DR. GRUNBAUM:  Being the last speaker in this 
fantastic couple of days is a mixed thing.  On the one 

hand, you are going to remember everything that I say the 
very best, because there is nobody speaking after me.  On 
the other hand, the real question you have is, can you get me a taxi to go to the airport.  So I am not sure. I really enjoyed this tremendously.  I wouldn't 
claim to know anything about information fusion, even 
before or after the great talks.  But I am very, very 

interested in the issue that I think brought some of these 
people together here, coming from so many different parts.  

The issue is, is there any way of bringing mathematical types in general, that includes all sorts of different things, to think about this new unfortunately national 
effort of homeland defense. I share fully what George mentioned yesterday and Dave McLaughlin and some other people, that it is very 
important to keep in mind the physics, the biology, the 
chemistry, the computational background that are part of 
these problems.  Even when we formulate them as 
mathematical problems, that should be a very, very important element all the time. On the other hand, mathematics has this amazing, almost poetic ability of looking at a problem in a certain The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   548548context and then taking a step back, playing with data, and all of a sudden turning around into some other problem and 
saying, by the way, maybe I can use these tools in this different area.  That is the feeling that I have.  I will 
be pushing some of the community that I think I represent now, which is the community of inverse problems. There are a number of people that have worked in medical imaging, in geophysics.  Those are two good success 

stories of uses of mathematics in areas where, if you go 
back say 20, 25, 30 years ago, nobody would believe that 
math could contribute at all.  To convince a medical doctor 

30 years ago that mathematics could be useful you would be laughed out of any such medical meeting.  Things have 
changed a lot. Now, as we move in this poetic fashion from one publication to a different one, I think it is very 

important to remind ourselves that we have to go back and 
start from scratch and talk to the experts in this new 
field, because the problem may look the same from the 
mathematical point of view, but they have all very different features.   So I was actually very, very pleased when I heard 
our chairman talking about inverse problems, because I had 
prepared a slide about that ahead of time.  What I will do 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   549549-- I'm sure you all want to stay here until 9 p.m., but I 
want to get out before that, so what I will do is use the 

principle of the hammer and the nail and talk a little bit 
about a problem that I have been playing with for awhile, and hopefully the audience will tell me if it has any meaning whatsoever in terms of looking at a very 
complicated network and solving what from my point of view 
is actually an inverse problem.   I already mentioned that I could have picked another application, but this is one that I am more 
familiar with.  A number of pieces have been mentioned in 

these past two days that have appeared from the very beginning in the area of medical imaging, the question of high dimensionality being the main one. Back in the '70s, maybe even earlier than that, we finally realized something that by now everyone realizes 
is real, but it wasn't real at all back then.  If you have 
some function of two variables, we think about the 
information density of human tissue when you expose them to 
X-rays, if you measure all the line integrals and put in sources and detectors in the regimen that I have here, you have an expert source here, and measuring over there, you 
realize that they are not the same.  So there is a model 

that tells you -- that you can use to change the intensity The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   550550here to an intensity there, is the integral of this unknown function along the line A.  Do that, and then eventually by 

doing this with all different lines, you recover the 
function. Nowadays this is part of the culture.  An element 
that was mentioned yesterday in the very first session has 
to do with the training of analysts at NSA.  The issue of 

training radiologists is actually very similar; people look 
at the same set of pictures and draw very different 
conclusions.  So this is just an example that some of these 

things -- what is my thesis?  I am trying to say, if you 

are going around trying to look for a bunch of mathematicians that have already looked at some of these issues.  I have been fooling around for the last few years, trying to use laser instead of X-rays.  Now you have 

to be able to perform a discovery.  The phenomenon is that 

instead of having to begin with linear equations, from the 
very beginning, the thesis is so complicated -- again, you 

cannot ignore the thesis that determines everything.  The 
source is one, that is one to go, that is applied here 
repeatedly, and you put goggles to be able to see any of 

this, you are going to see light coming through your hand, 
except on the other side. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   551551So I want to take this 
as a study problem.  I 
want to make propaganda for this journal published in 
England.  I do this because I happen to be the editor right 

now.  We are finding that a collection, a whole community 
of people coming from many different areas, some of them even call themselves mathematicians, that have dealt with a 
number of issues that are very, very -- the way somebody 
was talking about at what level should we move in matters 
of analysis.  This is a very classical problem in medical 

imaging; should we go for higher spatial resolution or 
quantum resolution.  The truth is that we would like to do 

both of them at the same time.   In a very rare event, there is a difference in attenuation, in the order of one and two percent.  At the 

same time you want to go to reconstruction, you have 
fantastic spatial resolution and you want to be able to use 
it in an effective way.   Some of you may have seen a 

movie called the Brain Attack Team.  Nowadays if you suffer 

a stroke, they actually into your brain and they clean you 
up.  That requires very good t
ime and spatial -- what I 
want to do in the last slide, let's start from the beginning. Here is a problem that I want to share with you in the hope that this may be of some use in some of these 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   552552extremely complicated networks.  What I have drawn here is 
supposed to be a Markov chain with finite states base.  The 

states are of three different kinds, some of them in code.  

S is one.  Demographically this would mean these are the 
source positions.  There are all these states that are 
inside, there is an arrow connecting two states.  That 

means that you can make in one unit of time a transition.  

Then finally there are some detective states that detect 
those sites. What is it that I actually consider here?  I 
imagine that I have the 
seven one-step transition 
probability.  I didn't want to clutter this any further.  
This probability which is not known, which is -- then in the next state I keep on going, wandering around.  I can 

only make boundary measures.  So in the columns that we had 

in the very first transparency, we determine what are the 
new ones, the good ones, the red ones, or orange, on the 
other side.  Think of the source positions as the new ones.  

There is nothing that you can look inside.  Not assuming 

the sum of the probabilities from 
one age to all the -- 
that is a way of modeling absorption. The fact is, one can solve the forward problem completely, which is not entirely trivial, but that can be 

done.  What I have managed to do in some very simple cases 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   553553is describe the complete class of all solutions for the inverse problem.  If we don't make any assumptions -- of 

course, everything depends on the number of things that you 
have, but even the simplest cases are complicated like this, actually a little bit more complicated than this one, is data source positions, vector ones.  In that case there 

are 64 parameters, measuring the probability from going 
from every incoming to every outgoing and measuring the 
time of light, you cans love analytically in terms of 
explicit formulas, for 56 out of 64.   So I want to stop here.  Thank you for the 
fantastic two days.  If somebody would tell me, I have a 
problem that looks a little like that, please do it soon.  
That's all. DR. LEVIS:  Thank you very much.  Could you join 
us here at the table?  I believe the schedule is now to 

open the discussion.  But I first thank the speakers and 

the discussers for the last session. There are two kinds of discussions, but my suggestion is that we merge the two, both specific and general discussion, right now, if that is agreeable.  So 
please come to the microphone, identify yourself.  I am 

working with a handicap; those two things are blinding me, The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   554554so I can't even see you.  So please come to the microphone 
right there. PARTICIPANT:  I had a general question about your 
introduction in the first talk.  We saw the diagram for the 
possible threats to the United States and the five questions to which we knew none of the answers.  It makes 

it sound like homeland defense is not a really tenable 
proposition.  Is defense the right strategic paradigm?  

After all, the number of people who seem to be committed to 
doing these things is very small.  You are not talking 

about millions of people, perhaps a few thousands or a few 
tens of thousands.  Maybe the whole idea of trying to wall 
the country in is not strategically the right approach, and 
one should look for instance at the possibilities of an 

offense. DR. LEVIS:  I will answer diplomatically on that 
one.  I think I already gave the answer.  Many people cal 

this homeland security, as opposed to homeland defense.  I 

said, there are different meanings to the word defense and 
security.  But we are doing all of the above as far as I 
know, but I don't know everything that we do. PARTICIPANT:  Certainly the emphasis in the talks 
that we had today was very much passive waiting, lying The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   555555around and waiting to be hit next, and trying to prevent attacks. I'm not deprecating any of that.  But I think 
looking at the diagram that the first speaker showed us, an unimaginable number of threats coming from an unimaginable number of places, and looking at all the vulnerabilities of 

a complex society, I have to say, didn't look very 
promising.  I just wanted to posit that as a possibility, 

that that is maybe just the wrong strategic thing about it. DR. LEVIS:  I will give a very brief response and 
then refer it to the other speakers or members of the 
audience.   To begin with, and this
 is from limited 
knowledge, I am not an academic in real life, we are doing 
very well, actually.  If you consider how many things have 

not happened -- this is a issue of metrics.   Let me put it in a different way.  We have the 
police.  The real metric for the police, if I am happy with 

my police department, is not how many people they arrested, 

it is how many crimes they prevented by their mere existence.  When you go to the arrest, the crime has 
already occurred.  But it is very difficult to get 

measures, as you understand very well about this, about the 

things that have not happened. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   556556So the problem is very complex, it is very difficult, it is a large country.  There is no way that you 

can border it totally, disallow anybody to enter it and so 
forth, the way of life that has been discussed.  We have a 
huge intelligence establishment for which we pay a lot of taxpayers' dollars.  Part of their job is to do the 

anticipatory and not even suggest, just bring the data up 
front for the appropriate decision makers to decide whether 
to be proactive or not. I am speaking as an individual, but I don't think we are doing that badly, when you consider how many real 
instances of terrorism we have had in this country.  It is 
the most open country in the world that I know. PARTICIPANT:  I wasn't suggesting that we have 
done badly.  It was just a 
concern of mine towards this 
sort of strategy around a lot of what we heard today.  

There was a sense that we could not --  PARTICIPANT:  You are not by the microphone. 
PARTICIPANT:  There was just a very defensive 
kind of mindset, and I was just concerned that this feeling of vulnerability could itself -- I was just concerned about the strategy part. DR. DEMPSTER:  It seems to me to be the new thing 
that there are events of extremely low probability that The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   557557have extremely high costs.  That is what maybe we should be 
focusing on a bit. DR. LEVITT:  Alex mentioned something in his 
opening.  He said, I could tell you, but then I'd have to 
kill you.  I think the problem with the offensive stuff is 
that it tends to be handled by the intelligence community.  

I think there is an enormous amount going on, but I don't 
know much of it, and therefore I wouldn't know, as far as 
germane to this workshop goes, where the mathematical 
challenges lay in offensive activity, which I think are 
highly focused. However, I completely agree with the scope of homeland defense.  There is the newspaper version, or what 
I consider the public political version.  On the other 

hand, where I see the real payoff is that there is enormous 
amount, and there has been for man years, of data in 
automation, collection, and critical things going on, that 
really can be exploited.  I think that we don't know what 

the limits of automation might be, we don't have to have 
people, you are talking PCs and memory.  If we could deal 
with the inferential issues, so that we didn't generate false alarms all the time, that there might be a tremendous 
payoff. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   558558DR. LASKEY:  I wanted to comment on that, and say 
that I agree thoroughly with the points you made about not 
sitting around and just passively observing.  In fact, I'm 

sorry if my talk came across that way, because it wasn't how it was intended.  Inference can be used to passively 
observe, but you notice that level five of the five levels 
of fusion that I talked about was placing your sensors.  

Part of what you are doing is, you are not just passively 
observing, but you are watching and anticipating what is 
going to happen and preparing yourself to respond to it, 
but also at the same time, if we discover that if there is 
an Al-Queda cell that is planning something, I'm sure that 
our military people would go in and stop them before they had the chance to do anything about it. But it is not just waiting until the horse is gone to close the barn door.  The technologies that I was 

talking about would apply much more broadly. DR. LEVIS:  Other comments?  Questions to the 
speakers?  The timetable for the airplanes? I'd like to make one comment and a question, and 
then we can adjourn, if you like.  Earlier today there was 
a question about funding.  This is Washington, so I would 

like to address it very briefly. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   559559For mathematics, the Air Force has the Office of Scientific Research.  There is the Mathematics and Computer 

Science Division within it.  I think one person was present 

here today.  They are looking into those problems, and it 
is basic research. However, things have changed 
a little bit, and you have to write more than one paragraph or one opening 
sentence.  The old joke, everything looks like a worm.  You 

have to write a little more and show some understanding of 
how that work will have an impact.  Of course, good mathematics has a good impact, but that is not sufficient.  There is a lot of scrutiny for 
relevance.  So understanding the problem makes also a much 
better proposal, even though you are doing the mathematics 
that you want. People mentioned DARPA.  I have known DARPA for 
many, many years.  For DARPA you have to know the problem.  

There is a very small part of the DARPA budget that is in 
basic research.  Most of it is in applied research and 

demonstrations.  In the process of using those large three 
to five year demonstrations, a lot of research is being 
done, and I am sure some of you have participated.  But 
those programs are fairly focused in trying to solve a 
particular problem and make a demonstration.  So in order 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   560560to play, you don't have to know every aspect of the problem.  They are usually large themes, and you spend an 

awful lot of time going to meetings and coordinating on 
those things.   But there is a substantial amount of funding that allow the basic research to be done in the context of the 

applied research.  But you have to know -- the quick kill 

three program is, if you are going to have a new algorithm 
that is going to do it faster, cheaper, better and all the 
other things.  There is a substantial amount of funding.   The Defense Information Systems Agency together with DARPA, they have a joint program office called JPO.  
That office has kicked off a major homeland security initiative.  It is not exactly new money yet, there will be 

new money in the future, but right now they are earmarking 
existing money everywhere that could be pointed in that 
direction. I have been through that exercise, I write a lot of proposals.  I can see how we can take some of the work 

that we are doing, dress it up appropriately, and look at that problem.  But in order to get funding for that, I will 
have to be credible that at least I understand some aspects 
that are relevant to homeland security, not leave it to the 
reviewer to make the connection.  I have seen enough from 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   561561the inside, the paperwork, there is somebody that will have to write a paragraph that is that long on a form, 
explaining why your work is relevant to the problem.  So 

you are passing the buck to somebody else.  When you are 
doing that, things don't work very well.  It is much better 
if you write it yourself, if I write it myself and submit 
it and discuss it.  It helps the proposal along. But there is funding that is developing within 
the various -- I haven't checked with the Office of Naval 
Research, but I am sure they are looking at that problem in 
the mathematics section, but one has to be a little more 
closely aligned to the problem than was discussed in here, at a fairly abstract and high level. Thank you.  I don't have any money, by the way.  
Whoever would like to close --  DR. KELLER-McNULTY:  I guess I was voted in on 
this.  I am the only other bo
ard member besides you two here. I just want to first of all thank everybody for coming to the workshop.  I think it has been pretty 
exciting.  I know that I have learned a lot, and I have 
tried to listen carefully.  I think that there are clearly great challenges mathematically for us to try to address that can be very The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   562562supportive to homeland security.  I also think that there 
is a fair amount of what we already do that can almost be 
directly applied to some of the immediate problems, and it 

behooves us to seek out those opportunities and try to do that. We heard a lot of things in the last couple of days.  Some of the things that resonated with me were the 

following. First of all, we have to keep the human in the 
loop.  No one is talking about -- and some of our 

colleagues when we talk to them, some of our scientific 
colleagues, they get really nervous that we are trying to 
develop methods that somehow take them out of the decision making loop.  I think it was pretty clear from everything 
we heard that the human has to be in the loop, the science 
has got to be incorporated into the problem, the domain 

knowledge has got to be included in the solutions and in 
the frameworks we build to solve these problems. Which then of course points to one of the very 
first things that Alex said when he opened the final 
session, which was that you have got to know the problem.  
Clearly, if we want to get collective funding to work in this area, we had better darn well be willing to admit to 
knowing that we are trying to solve a real problem, and try 
to figure out how to pull the pieces together. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   563563The other thing that came out really clear to me is -- and something that we sometimes forget to talk about 
when we are talking to people about the problems in the 
work we are doing, is that quantification underlies almost everything we are doing here.  We tend to forget about it, 
because it is part of our being as mathematical scientists 
and as computer scientists.  But everything is about 

uncertain quantification. The question that came up about the nuclear weapons certification, it is not just about predicting a 
point value, whether or not we think these systems will 
work.  It is all about uncertainty quantification and 
knowing when we have to go back and start testing again, or collect other types of information.  That is true 

throughout all the homeland security problems. A lot of people talked about how we are in a stage and in an era of 
being swamped with data, we just have so much of it.  What was it that Art said?  That data 

is dumb, which is true.  Kathy commented that we have all 

this data, data, data, we don't have time to think.  That 
is true on a certain level, but as soon as we ratchet these problems up to the incredible dimensions that they are -- 
and Tod showed us what the dimensionality of the space is, 
there actually is a lot of data sparsity.   The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   564564In the last session, I think that Val's talk tried to show how we can try to put things together in the 
presence of a lot of data when you take some slices through 
the problem, but not a lot of data or information when you take other slices through that problem space.  So that is 
really important that we remember as well, that it is not 
just about massive data mining, but it is about how to 
integrate all of this information. The final thing I want to say is that what we are talking about is modeling complex systems.  Perhaps we do 

have to put hats on a bit like engineers and take a systems 
approach to looking at these problems and figuring out how we can build and develop the mathematical frameworks to actually make progress.  I don't think the problems are impossible.  I 
actually disagree with one of the last comments that was 
made from the floor, that a lot of what I heard at this 
workshop is about prediction and forecasting, how do we 
take what we have learned, what we are seeing, and project 
ahead and forecast ahead, to try to  understand what the 
next thing is that needs to be done or where the next vulnerability is. These are not easy problems.  We have to come 
together and work on them.  I ho
pe that we do.  I have been 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   565565pretty energized by this, and I look forward to continuing to interact with many of you on these. That's it.  Safe travel. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   566566Remarks on Data Integration and Fusion  Alberto Grunbaum  Mathematics has anmazing, almost poetic, ability
 to look at a problem in a certain area 
and then take a step back and suddenly realize that maybe we can use these tools for 
some other problem in a different area. Fo
r example, there are a number of people who 
have worked first in geophysics and then in medical imaging!  

 
He cautioned, however, that as he and his colleagues moved in this poetic fashion from 
one area of application to a different one, it was very important to remind themselves that 
they had to go back and start from scratch a
nd talk to the experts in this new field. The 
problems might look the same from the mathem
atical point of view, but they have all 
very different features. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   567567This article can be viewed online at 
http://www.businessweek.com/technology/content/apr2002/tc20020430_3678.htm 
 APRIL 30, 2002  
 By Stephen H. Wildstrom  
 Enlisting Math to Defend the Homeland America's number whizzes say their science ha
s a key role to play -- and they just met 
in D.C. to show their stuff
  At first glance, the notion of a conference on "The Mathematical Sciences' Role in 
Homeland Security" looks like a shameless atte
mpt to channel some of the mighty stream 
of security funding that has been rolling out
 of Washington since September. 11. "When I 
got the e-mail invitation," says Howard Schmidt, vice-chair of the President's Critical 
Infrastructure Protection Board, "I thought at first it was a joke."   
No joke. In fact, the Apr. 26-27 workshop sponsored by the National Research Council's 
Board on Mathematical Sciences & Their Appli
cations was deadly serious. It turns out 
that many of the diffuse and complex problems of homeland security are deeply 

mathematical in nature, and even some of th
e science's most abstruse branches, such as 
topology and high-dimension geometry, can be 
brought to bear on security problems.  
 
The most obvious application is the encrypt
ion techniques used to protect data from 
prying eyes. But encryption issues are so well known that they went largely unmentioned. 
Even crypto specialist David Wagner of the Univ
ersity of California at Berkeley devoted 
much of his presentation to other topics, from the mathematics of pow
er-grid reliability to 
the design of "inherently self-stable systems."  

 DATA EXTREMES.
  Not surprisingly, much of the discussion focused on the use of advanced statistical techniques to deal with two almost 
opposite problems. First, the 
growing use of cameras and other surveillanc
e techniques is overwhelming analysts with 
more data than they can hope to make us
e of. Mathematicians can help by developing 
data-mining techniques that help spot 
patterns in an ocean of seemingly random 
information.  

 
At the other extreme, epidemiologists chas
ing, say, an outbreak of anthrax must figure 
out whether they're dealing with a terroris
t attack or a random, natural event based on 
extremely scanty evidence. A situation that 
presents a large number of variables and a 
small number of data points is very poorly 
handled by traditional statistical analysis.   
Michael H. Freedman of Microsoft Research poi
nted out that techniques developed in the field of high-dimensional geometry are releva
nt here. Geometers have found ways that a 
space with a large number of dimensions can
 be approximated using a much smaller 
dimensional field of numbers that are far eas
ier to work with. In statistics, this is 
The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   568568generally analogous to reducing the number of variables.  
 WORKING BACKWARDS.  Freedman, a winner of the most prestigious prize in mathematics, 
the Fields Medal, added a touch of levity to an otherwise serious session by describing "the general world view of mathematicians." 
On his way from Seattle to Washington, he 
was selected for a secondary search at SeaTac 
airport. He pulled out his itinerary and said he was on his way to a conference on mathema
tics and national security. "The guard was very skeptical," Freedman said. "She asked, 'Are you a mathematician?' I said 'yes." She 
replied, 'Then God help us.'"  

 
Alexander H. Levis, chief scientist for the Air Force, suggested that mathematicians 
might find ways to apply to domestic security 
the statistical techniques that the military 
has developed for analyzing threats. One, using an approach called a Bayesian inference 
network, works backwards from a set of possi
ble events to assign probabilities to the 
potential actions that opponents might take.  

 
In the end, mathematicians don't suffer illusions
 that math alone is going to make the 
nation significantly more secure. Workshop 
organizer Jennifer Chayes, director of Microsoft Research's Theory Group, says she 
chose the topic for the annual workshop simply because it seemed natural and relevant. For example, Freedman's research 

specialty, the mathematics of 
quantum computing, could one 
day enable the solution of problems that today remain dauntingly complex.  

 
Practical applications remai
n, at best, years away. "I don't think," Freedman says, "that 
we can stop terrorism in time by building quant
um computers." All in all, however, the 
conference put the relationship between math
 and national security front and center. The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   569569Mathematical Sciences in Homeland Security Links 
[verified September 2003] 
  
Air Force Office of Science Resear
ch (AFOSR) http://www.afosr.af.mil 
 ANSER Institute for Homeland Security http://www.homelandsecurity.org/ 
 
Army Research Office (ARO) h
ttp://www.arl.army.mil/aro/index.htm ARO Broad Agency Announcement:  Instit
ute for Collaborative Biotechnologies 
http://www.arl.army.mil/aro/bi
otech/biotechfinalbaa.pdf 
ARO Computing and Information Sciences Division 
http://www.arl.army.mil/aro/computer/cis.htm 

ARO Mathematics Division http://www.arl.army.mil/aro/mcsc/math.htm 
ARO Mechanical and Environmental Sciences Division 
http://www.arl.army.mil/aro/ees/eng.htm 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC) Emergency Preparedness and Response 
http://www.bt.cdc.gov 

 Defense Advanced Research Projects
 Agency (DARPA) http://www.darpa.mil/ 
 
Department of Energy (DOE) National Security 
http://www.doe.gov/engine/content.
do?BT_CODE=NATIONALSECURITY 
 
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) http://www.dhs.gov/dhspublic/  
Department of Homeland Security Fellowship and Scholarship Program 
http://www.orau.gov/dhsed/ 
 Devlin, Keith.  Devlin™s Angle:  Mathematics 
and Homeland Security.  MAA Online, April 2002.  
http://www.maa.org/devlin/devlin_04_02.html 
 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Chem
ical Emergency Preparedness and Prevention 
http://yosemite.epa.gov/oswer/c
eppoweb.nsf/content/homelandSecurity.htm?OpenDocument 
 National Imagery and Mapping Agency
 (NIMA) http://www.nima.mil/ 
 National Institutes of Health (NIH) Hu
man Immunity and Biodefense Research Awards 
http://www.nih.gov/news/pr/sep2003/niaid-17.htm 
NIH Application of Use of Adv
anced Network Infrastructure Te
chnology in a Health Related 
Environment.  http://grants2
.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-
files/NOT-LM-02-001.html  
 
National Security Agency (NSA) http://www.nsa.gov/ 
 National Science Foundation (NSF) Awards in
 Response to the September 11, 2001 Attacks 
http://www.nsf.gov/od/lpa/news/medi
a/01/nsf_response_awards.htm 
NSF and Homeland Security http://www.nsf.gov
/od/lpa/news/media/01/nsf_response.htm 
NSF Data Mining and Homeland Security Applications 

http://www.nsf.gov/od/lpa/
news/03/fact030124.htm 
NSF Grants to Boost Home
land Security Research 
http://www.nsf.gov/od/l
pa/news/02/ma0231.htm 
Colwell, Rita.  ﬁMath Matters.ﬂ  Addr
ess at SIAM Meeting, July 10, 2002.  
http://www.nsf.gov/od/lpa/forum/colwell/rc020710siam.htm 
  Office of Naval Research (ONR
) http://www.onr.navy.mil/default.asp The Mathematical Sciences' Role in Homeland Security: Proceedings of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   570570 Senate Subcommittee on Science, Technology, 
and Space:  Hearing on Homeland Security and 
the Technology Sector. http://www.nsf.gov/od/
lpa/congress/107/hs_042
402cybersecurity.htm 
  
ﬁStatement for the Record Before the Govern
mental Affairs Subcommittee on International 
Security, Proliferation, and Federal Services Hearin
g on Critical Skills for National Security and 
the Homeland Security Federal Workforce 
Act.ﬂ http://www.nsa.gov/releases/20020312.pdf  US Department of Agriculture (USDA) Keeping America™s Food and Agriculture Safe 
http://www.usda.gov/homelandsecurity/homeland.html 

     
   