DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/10991A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information TechnologyModernization Program78 pages | 8.5 x 11 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-09224-1 | DOI 10.17226/10991James C. McGroddy and Herbert S. Lin, Editors; Committee on the FBI's TrilogyInformation Technology Modernization Program; Computer Science andTelecommunications Board; Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences;National Research CouncilA Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee on the FBIÕs Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramComputer Science and Telecommunications BoardDivision on Engineering and Physical SciencesTHE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSWashington, D.C.www.nap.eduA Review of theFBIÕs Trilogy Information Technology
Modernization ProgramJames C. McGroddy and Herbert S. Lin, EditorsA Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS                   500 Fifth Street, N.W.                 Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE:  The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the National
Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the NationalAcademy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.  The members of the committee responsible for the report

were chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.This study was supported by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) at its request under Award NumberA3D0316801.  However, in accordance with NRC policy, the FBI did not review this report before publication, and
the opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the authors anddo not necessarily reflect the views of the FBI.International Standard Book Number 0-309-09224-8 (Book)International Standard Book Number 0-309-53248-5 (PDF)This report is available from the National Academies Press, 500 Fifth Street, N.W., Lockbox 285, Washington, DC20055; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area); Internet, http://www.nap.eduCopyright 2004 by the National Academy of Sciences.  All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of AmericaSuggested citation: National Research Council, A Review of the FBIÕs Trilogy Information Technology ModernizationProgram, Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2004.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of distinguished scholars
engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their
use for the general welfare.  Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy
has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters.  Dr. Bruce M.
Alberts is president of the National Academy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the National Academy of
Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers.  It is autonomous in its administration and in the
selection of its members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federal
government.  The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting na-
tional needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers.  Dr. Wm.
A. Wulf is president of the National Academy of Engineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences to secure the services of
eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of thepublic.  The Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congressional

charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care,research, and education.  Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad
community of science and technology with the AcademyÕs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising thefederal government.  Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the Council has
become the principal operating agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of
Engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities.The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts and Dr.
Wm. A. Wulf are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.www.national-academies.orgA Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMMITTEE ON THEFBIÕS TRILOGY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION PROGRAMJAMES C. McGRODDY, IBM (retired), ChairEDWARD BALKOVICH, RANDRICHARD BASEIL, Holmdel, New JerseyMATT BLAZE, University of Pennsylvania
W. EARL BOEBERT, Sandia National LaboratoriesMARC DONNER, Morgan StanleyMICHAEL McGILL, Columbus, Ohio
JAMES NOGA, Massachusetts General HospitalCARL OÕBERRY, The Boeing CompanyKEN ORR, The Ken Orr Institute
JAMES PATTON, The MITRE CorporationMARK SEIDEN, MSB AssociatesGEORGE SPIX, Microsoft Corporation
CHARLES E. STUART, Competitive Enterprise Solutions, LLCGIO WIEDERHOLD, Stanford UniversityHERBERT S. LIN, Senior Scientist and Study DirectorKRISTEN BATCH, Research AssociateDAVID DRAKE, Senior Project Assistant (until November 2003)A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viCOMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARDDAVID D. CLARK, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, ChairERIC BENHAMOU, 3Com Corporation
ELAINE COHEN, University of UtahTHOMAS E. DARCIE, University of VictoriaMARK E. DEAN, IBM Research

JOSEPH FARRELL, University of California, BerkeleyJOAN FEIGENBAUM, Yale UniversityHECTOR GARCIA-MOLINA, Stanford University
RANDY H. KATZ, University of California, BerkeleyWENDY A. KELLOGG, IBM T.J. Watson Research CenterSARA KIESLER, Carnegie Mellon University
BUTLER W. LAMPSON, Microsoft Corporation, CSTB member emeritusDAVID LIDDLE, U.S. Venture PartnersTERESA H. MENG, Stanford University
TOM M. MITCHELL, Carnegie Mellon UniversityDANIEL PIKE, GCI Cable and EntertainmentERIC SCHMIDT, Google, Inc.
FRED B. SCHNEIDER, Cornell UniversityBURTON SMITH, Cray, Inc.WILLIAM STEAD, Vanderbilt University
ANDREW J. VITERBI, Viterbi Group, LLCJEANNETTE M. WING, Carnegie Mellon University
CHARLES BROWNSTEIN, DirectorKRISTEN BATCH, Research AssociateJENNIFER M. BISHOP, Program Associate
JANET BRISCOE, Administrative OfficerJON EISENBERG, Senior Program OfficerRENEE HAWKINS, Financial Associate
PHIL HILLIARD, Research AssociateMARGARET MARSH HUYNH, Senior Project AssistantALAN S. INOUYE, Senior Program Officer
HERBERT S. LIN, Senior ScientistLYNETTE I. MILLETT, Program OfficerDAVID PADGHAM, Research Associate
CYNTHIA A. PATTERSON, Program OfficerJANICE SABUDA, Senior Project AssistantBRANDYE WILLIAMS, Staff Assistant
STEVEN WOO, Dissemination OfficerFor more information on CSTB, see its Web site at <http://www.cstb.org>, write to CSTB,National Research Council, 500 Fifth Street, N.W., Washington, DC 20001, call at (202) 334-2605, or
e-mail at cstb@nas.edu.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiPreface
In September 2002, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) requested the assistance ofthe National Research Council (NRC) in providing expertise to assist it in its review of theTrilogy information technology (IT) modernization program.  In response, the NRC convened
a number of experts who met with the FBI.  The FBI briefed these experts on various aspects of

the program, and these experts responded to the FBI as individuals to those briefings.  (In
hindsight, many of these individually provided comments presaged the more formal findingsand conclusions presented in this report.)In July 2003, the FBI again requested the assistance of the NRC on the same topic, afterhaving made progress in its IT modernization efforts.  The committee
Õs charge was to providea more thorough review and set of recommendations on the FBIÕs information technologymodernization efforts, focusing primarily on the Trilogy program but addressing related issuesas necessary.In this second request, the FBI asked for a written report, thus invoking the regular NRCreport process.  To minimize the time needed to respond to the FBI, the Computer Science and
Telecommunications Board (CSTB) of the NRC selected a committee composed largely but notexclusively of the experts convened for the September 2002 meeting.The committeeÕs charge was to review the FBIÕs efforts on the Trilogy IT modernizationprogram, based on input provided to the committee by the FBI.  The FBI also requested a
review that could be done quickly and relatively inexpensively.  Accordingly, the committee

did not systematically develop information from non-FBI sources, nor did it undertake acomprehensive review of all FBI IT systems or plans for such systems.  Furthermore, the
committee was only able to sample the programs of interest, and thus it did not achieve a
comprehensive picture even of those programs.  Except as explicitly noted otherwise, the
briefings to the committee on October 27-28, 2003, and December 15-16, 2003, constitute thefactual base for this effort.  The committee
Õs conclusions and recommendations reflect itscollective experience with large-scale IT system deployments.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiiPREFACEThe committee wishes to thank Herbert Lin, the CSTB study director, for his efforts indeveloping coherent drafts from assorted e-mails and brief notes from committee meetings,and for being the prime driver of the early completion of this report. We also thank the CSTBstaff, particularly Kristen Batch for research support, and D.C. Drake for administrative
support.James C. McGroddy, ChairCommittee on the FBIÕs Trilogy InformationTechnology Modernization ProgramA Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ixAcknowledgment of ReviewersThis report was reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their diverse perspectivesand technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the National ResearchCouncilÕs (NRCÕs) Report Review Committee.  The purpose of this independent review is to
provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its published
report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards forobjectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge.  The review comments and draft
manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process.  We wish to

thank the following individuals for their participation in the review of this report:Steven Bellovin, AT&T ResearchEd Feigenbaum, Stanford UniversityStuart Feldman, IBMRobert Grossman, Open Data Partners, LLC
Beryl Howell, Stroz Friedberg, LLCSidney Karin, University of California, San DiegoKenneth Laudon, New York University
Michael Miravalle, Dolphin Technology, Inc.Joseph Smialowski, Fleet BankRobert Spinrad, Palo Alto, California
Howard Wactlar, Carnegie Mellon UniversityPatrick Webb, ConsultantTodd White, Emerio, Inc.Although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive comments andsuggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recommendations nor did they
see the final draft of the report before its release.  The review of this report was overseen by
A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERSGerry Dinneen (Lexington, Massachusetts).  Appointed by the NRC, he was responsible for
making certain that an independent examination of this report was carried out in accordancewith institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully considered.Responsibility for the final content of this report rests entirely with the authoring committee
and the institution.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiContentsEXECUTIVE SUMMARY1
1BACKGROUND9
1.1Preliminaries, 10

1.2Missions of the FBI, 10
1.2.1Criminal Investigation, 11
1.2.2Counterterrorism, 11
1.3Key FBI Processes, 12
1.3.1Investigation, 12
1.3.2Intelligence, 13

1.3.3Information Management, 14
2IT-RELATED ISSUES FOR THE FBI REQUIRING IMMEDIATE ACTION16
2.1Enterprise Architecture Issues, 16
2.1.1Creating an Enterprise Architecture That Serves FBI Objectives, 16
2.1.2FBI Activities with Respect to Enterprise Architecture, 22

2.1.3Data Management Issues Arising from the Absence of an Enterprise
Architecture, 242.2Designing IT Systems to Support FBI Strategy and Operational Needs, 26
2.2.1The Virtual Case File (VCF) Application of Trilogy, 26
2.2.2Data Management and the Integrated Data Warehouse (IDW), 29
2.2.3SCOPE, 34

2.2.4Mobile Computing, 35
2.2.5Security, 35
2.2.6Privacy, 39
A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiCONTENTS2.3Ensuring Effective Management of IT Development and Implementation, 40
2.3.1Overall Development Methodology, 40
2.3.2Contracting and Contract Management, 42
2.3.3Program Management, 43
2.4Ensuring the Growth of FBI IT Expertise and Dealing with External Factors, 45
2.4.1Human Resources, 45
2.4.2External Constraints, 47
3RECOMMENDATIONS48
3.1Regarding Enterprise Architecture, 48

3.2Regarding System Design, 50
3.3Regarding Program and Contract Management, 54
3.4Regarding Human Resources, 55

3.5Conclusion, 55
APPENDIX: Short Biographies57

What Is CSTB?65A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Executive SummaryTHE MAIN MESSAGEAlthough the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) has made significant progress in itsinformation technology (IT) modernization program in the last year or so, the committeebelieves that the FBIÕs IT modernization program is not currently on a path to success. To get
on that path, the committee recommends several key changes.First, foremost, and most critical in light of the impending rollout of the Virtual Case File(VCF) application, the FBI should not proceed with deployment of the VCF until it has a
validated contingency plan for reverting completely or partially to the Automated CaseSupport (ACS) system, if necessary, together with clear and measurable criteria to determinewhen the ACS can safely be turned off.  In the absence of a validated contingency plan, the FBI

runs a very high risk that its planned Òflash cutoverÓ from the old ACS system to the VCF willcause mission-disruptive failures and further delays.  This issue is a consequence of the fact
that the VCF has been developed without the benefit of prototyping, with the result that the
VCF application will not have been tested in an operational context.Second, the success of the FBIÕs information technology efforts will require the develop-ment of a close linkage between IT and a coherent view of the bureauÕs mission and opera-
tional needs.  The development of this strategic linkageÑthe enterprise architectureÑcannot
be delegated inside the bureau to the chief information officer (CIO) or outside to contractors.Only the senior leadership of the FBI can establish the policies, define the operational frame-
works and priorities, and make the tradeoffs that are necessary to formulate this strategicview.  To do so, they must be deeply and directly involved in its creation.
Third, because testing is such a critical dimension of system development and deploy-ment, the FBI must allow adequate time for testing before any IT application (including theVCF) is deployed, even if dates of initial operational capability are delayed.  Testing must
include a full systems integration test and adequate scale, volume, and stress tests.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2A REVIEW OF THE FBIÕS TRILOGY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION PROGRAMFourth, the FBIÕs contract management process is inadequate, and contract schedules lackthe specificity necessary to determine whether a project is making adequate progress withinschedule and budget constraints.  This weakness can be remedied through the aggressive useof standard contract and project management tools.Finally, while the FBIÕs IT team includes a number of very capable individuals, the overallhuman resource base for IT is not nearly adequate to meet the challenges it faces.  For Trilogyand subsequent IT projects to have access to the human talent they need to succeed, the FBI
must dramatically grow its own internal expertise in IT and IT contract management as quicklyas possible.BACKGROUNDThe FBIÕs Trilogy IT modernization program is intended to upgrade the IT infrastructureof the FBI by providing a high-speed network linking the offices of the FBI, modern work-stations and software within each office for every FBI employee, and a user application known
as the Virtual Case File to enhance the ability of agents to organize, access, and analyzeinformation.  However, the Trilogy program
Õs development and implementation have beentroubled.  The Trilogy program has been the subject of a number of General Accounting Office

(GAO) and Department of Justice (DOJ) inspector general investigations, as well as a source ofconsiderable concern to the U.S. Congress.  In July 2003, the FBI requested the assistance of the
National Research Council (NRC) to review the Trilogy program and the progress that had
been made, and further to consider other nascent IT efforts to support the bureauÕs newpriorities in counterterrorism.In response to this request, the NRC convened the Committee on the FBIÕs Trilogy Infor-mation Technology Modernization Program, consisting of experts with considerable experi-ence in large-scale IT deployments.  The committee met twice in 2-day sessions to receive
briefings from the FBI about Trilogy and other related matters, and except as explicitly noted
otherwise, those briefings constitute the factual base for this effort.THE SITUATION TODAYIn the wake of the events of September 11, 2001, the FBI is undergoing a significant expan-sion of its mission responsibilities and a reordering of its priorities to emphasize its counter-terrorist mission, though it still retains its very important criminal investigation mission.  TheFBI recognizes very well that it will become ever more dependent on information technology
in the future to manage the large quantities of information associated with these missions.It is challenging for any organization engaged in a complex set of activities to introducenew technologies and to reengineer its key processes to exploit them effectively.  It is doubly

challenging, as it is for the FBI, to do so when under intense operational pressuresÑthe FBIÕstraditional work must continue while new technology is introduced and while a culture moreadapted to the use of IT is evolved.  And it is triply so for the FBI in the face of the added strain

of its new focusÑpreventive counterterrorismÑin which mission success demands a differentmind-set, different operational skills, and the exploitation of an expanded set of informationsources.The FBI has made significant progress in certain areas of its IT modernization program inthe last year or so.  For example, it has achieved the modernization of the computing hardware
A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY3and baseline software on the desktops of agents and other personnel, and has taken majorstrides forward in the deployment of its networking infrastructure.  Nevertheless, as this
report documents, the committee believes that the FBIÕs IT modernization program is notcurrently on a path to success.  The committee
Õs review of the approach and methodologybeing used by the FBI has identified significant issues in four major areas: enterprise architec-ture, system design, program and contract management, and human resources.ISSUESEnterprise ArchitectureAs in any organization, private sector or government, the operational needs of the FBImust be the driver of its information technology investments.  If it is to be successful in its

efforts to exploit IT, the FBI must first and as a matter of its highest priority in its IT effortsformulate an enterprise architecture.  Such an architecture is necessary to provide a strategic
view of its mission and operational needs, and would begin with a detailed characterization of
the bureauÕs goals, tasks, strategies, and key operational processes.  This view links opera-
tional objectives and processes to IT strategy and will allow the FBI to specify how investmentis tied to the achievement of operational objectives.Based on presentations to the committee by the FBI (as well as a review of certain docu-ments produced by the FBI, GAO, and DOJ), the committee has concluded that the FBIÕsefforts and results in the area of enterprise architecture are late and limited, and fall far short
of what is required.  The committee was encouraged by early efforts driven by the recently
appointed executive assistant director of intelligence to develop a concept of operations of theintelligence process from which appropriate IT systems support can be architected and designed.
However and overall, the FBIÕs senior leadership is insufficiently engaged in the developmentof the enterprise architecture, with the result that this development task is delegated in largepart to outside contractors and to a CIO.  Though these parties are essential players, only the

senior leadership of the FBI can establish the key policies, set the operational priorities, andmake the significant tradeoffs that must be reflected in the complete enterprise architectureand IT system design.  Among the most important decisions to be made are the risk tradeoffs

involved in ensuring sufficiently broad controlled access to sensitive information.  Such deci-
sions must be made at the level of the senior leadership.System DesignAlthough the committee recognizes that the bureau has made significant progress on theVirtual Case File in the last year or so, it has concerns about the VCF and the Integrated DataWarehouse.The VCF has many positive attributes.  Based on a canned demonstration of a VCF mock-
up, the committee believes that the VCF should significantly enhance the information manage-ment capabilities of FBI agents in their investigative role.  However, the bureau-wide rollout

of this application is months delayed from its originally scheduled deployment in December2003.  Going forward, the committee has a number of concerns about the VCF.
First, the FBI described to the committee a plan for a Òflash cutoverÓ from the old Auto-
mated Case Support system to the VCF, rather than a limited initial rollout that would shakeA Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4A REVIEW OF THE FBIÕS TRILOGY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION PROGRAMout problems in an operational context.  The committeeÕs concerns in this area are heightenedby the fact that in the interests of rapid deployment, the current VCF schedule appears to givelittle consideration to testing and presumes success at every stageÑa highly risky approach.The current choice facing the FBI on this matter of scheduling is between (a)delaying VCF

deployment so that adequate testing can be completed, and (b) forcing operational users to dothe testing themselves after implementation, with all of the potential negative consequencesthat such an approach can produce.  The current plan is likely to result in (b).
With limited testing, and no experience gained from a limited initial rollout, the FBI wouldbe implementing what amounts to a prototype throughout the bureau.  This approach is
nearly guaranteed to cause mission-critical failures and further delays, with implications for
training, performance, coherence, internal morale, public image, and cost to recovery.Second, the VCF was designed to support the investigative mandate of the FBI.  The design
process was well under way prior to the expansion of the intelligence mission, and the require-
ments for the processes supporting the intelligence mission were not included in the VCFdesign.  For this reason, and because of the significant differences in IT requirements between
systems supporting investigation and those supporting intelligence, the committee strongly
recommends that the FBI refrain from using the VCF as the foundation on which to build itsanalytical and data management capabilities for the intelligence processes supporting thecounterterrorism mission.  Rather, the FBI should conceptualize an architecture for the counter-

terrorism mission from scratch, and then design explicit interfaces to the VCF when informa-tion must flow between them.Another application, still in the design stage, the Integrated Data Warehouse (IDW), alsoseems to suffer from a lack of deep consideration of how and what sources of data are used bydifferent operational elements and in different processes of the FBI.  For example, presenta-
tions to the committee suggested a mismatch between the expectation that intelligence ana-
lysts would have access to live databases containing the most current information and thereality of what the IDW as designed would actually provide.  That is, the IDW would provide
only the latest copies of production databases, replacing old copies of data with newer copies.
Thus, data could be there one day and not the next, since the IDW apparently was not designedto retain older or historical data.  While having only the most recent copy of data may be
appropriate for the purposes of an investigation (presuming the most recent copy is the most
accurate and reliable), this process may not serve intelligence purposes very well.Program and Contract ManagementThe committee has serious concerns about the approaches and processes used by the FBI todevelop and field both IT infrastructure and applications.In the committeeÕs view, a major weakness is that the FBI does not appear to employ user-vetted prototypes in its applications development process.  In practice, it is essentially impos-
sible for even the most operationally experienced IT applications developers to be able toanticipate in detail and in advance all of the requirements and specifications.  Therefore,
internal development plans, and the development contracts with supporting organizations,
should call for an approach that is based on a process of extensive prototyping and usabilitytesting with real users.  Doing so allows iterative development with strong user feedback andinvolvement, thus increasing the chances that what is ultimately delivered to the end users
meets their needs.  This point is relevant to many dimensions of system development, includ-A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY5ing the functionality desired in a new application, the convenience and intuitiveness of a userinterface, and the nature, scale, and mix of the data entry, management, and retrieval load thatthe networks and systems must support under real operational conditions.The committee believes that both contract management and program management needsubstantial improvement.  For example, while task orders viewed by the committee detailed
pricing to eight or nine significant figures, the corresponding contract schedules were almosttotally lacking in specifications, deliverables, and commitment to checkpoints.  Under these

circumstances, effective program and contract management is essentially impossible.  Current
contracting and management problems, aggravated by frequent turnover among key FBI staff,make it unsurprising that Trilogy is significantly behind schedule and over budget.Furthermore, the FBI appears overly dependent on outside contractors to undertake essen-tial tasks, such as identifying key operational processes, defining the FBIÕs IT concept ofoperations, and making decisions about the major tradeoffs that are inevitably required.  While

outside contractors play important roles, it is the senior FBI management who must lead inassuming responsibility for these tasks.Human Resources and External ConstraintsAlthough the committee did not undertake a comprehensive assessment in the humanresources area, presentations to the committee persuaded it that with a few exceptions, the FBIlacks a human resource and skill base adequate to deal with the bureauÕs IT modernizationprogram.  Specifically, the FBI is extremely short on experienced program managers and
contract managers and senior IT management team members with good communicationsskills.  At the same time, the FBI appears to have the authority to hire highly qualified IT

personnel without requiring them to make excessive financial sacrifices, and to borrow per-sonnel from other agencies and even from the private sector.  The committee is encouraged to
learn that an acting chief information officer was put into place at the beginning of 2004.Of lesser concern, but in the committeeÕs view still worth noting, is the fact that the FBI alsooperates under a number of external constraints that diminish its management flexibility.  For
example, it is the committeeÕs understanding that the FBI is unable to take actions such asreprogramming amounts in excess of $500,000 without explicit congressional approval.  This
constraint is inconsistent with the expectation that the FBI will move quickly and forcefully toreshape itself to deal effectively with new challenges.RECOMMENDATIONSThe first and most urgent recommendation, indeed critical in light of the impending VCFsystem rollout, is that the FBI not proceed with deployment of the VCF until it has a validated
contingency plan for reverting completely or partially to the ACS, if necessary, and clear andmeasurable criteria to determine when the ACS can safely be turned off.  Beyond this critical
recommendation, the committee makes a number of recommendations, grouped into four
areas, that will significantly increase the likelihood of success in and drive an accelerated pacefor the FBIÕs IT modernization efforts.  The most important of these recommendations are
described below, and they are, in the committeeÕs judgment, imperatives for the success of theFBIÕs IT modernization program.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6A REVIEW OF THE FBIÕS TRILOGY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION PROGRAMIn the area of enterprise architecture, the development of a complete enterprise architec-ture is central to the FBIÕs IT efforts.  The most important recommendations in this area (others
are presented in the main text) are the following:¥If the FBIÕs IT modernization program is to succeed, the FBIÕs top leadership, includingthe director, must make the creation and communication of a complete enterprise architecturea top priority.  This means that they must be personally involved and invested in the key

decisions that the process will require be made, such as the tradeoffs between the security ofand access to information in the various data sources that are used in criminal investigationand counterterrorism efforts.  While a contractor might well assist the FBI in developing the

enterprise architecture, no contractor will fully understand the operational issues that must bereflected in the enterprise architecture, nor be empowered to make decisions about how tomake the tradeoffs with competing concerns.  A small team, consisting primarily of senior

operational managers from the Criminal Investigation Division, the Office of Intelligence, andthe Counterterrorism Division, and a senior IT executive to translate what these managers sayinto architectural terms, should be able to develop the broad outlines of the operational aspects
of the enterprise architecture as well as a top-level schematic view of the systems design in amatter of 4 to 6 months of full-time work.  To decide on the many operational and policy
tradeoffs that will inevitably arise, this team must have direct access to and the frequent
involvement of the most senior management of the FBI, including the director and the deputydirector.¥The FBI should seek independent and regular review of its enterprise architecture as it
develops by an external panel of experts with experience in both operations and technology/architecture.  When the first draft of the enterprise architecture has been prepared, it should be
reviewed by an external panel of independent experts charged with helping the FBI to improve

how it uses IT in the long term.¥Given that the counterterrorism mission requires extensive information sharing, the FBIshould seek input on and comment from other intelligence agencies regarding its enterprise
architecture effort.  The reason is that the FBI
Õs information systems must have interfaces tothose agencies to ensure that the information resources of those agencies are appropriatelylinked to FBI systems so that those agencies are able to work collaboratively.In the area of system design, the most important recommendations (others are presentedin the main text) are the following:¥The FBI should refrain from initiating, developing, or deploying any IT applicationother than the VCF until a complete enterprise architecture is in place.¥The FBI should develop a process map for information sharing that clearly defines thecurrent state of and a desired end state for the information-sharing process so that the numer-ous information-sharing initiatives can be coordinated and properly monitored and managed.¥The FBI should immediately develop plans that address recovery of data and function-ality in the event that essential technology services come under denial-of-service attacks (e.g.,from viruses and pervasively replicated software bugs).In the area of program and contract management, the most important recommendations(others are presented in the main text) are the following:A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY7¥Because testing is such a critical dimension of system development and deployment, theFBI must allow adequate time for testing before any IT application (including the VCF) isdeployed, even if dates of initial operational capability are delayed.  Testing must include a
full systems integration test and adequate scale, volume, and stress tests.¥In future IT applications development, particularly of large-scale end-user-orientedapplications, procurement contracts should be conditioned on the development of small-scaleprototypes that can be built rapidly and tested with user feedback before committing to large-
scale development.¥For IT applications beyond the VCF, the FBI should exploit proven methodologies ofcontracting and contract management, including the use of detailed functional specifications,
specific milestones, frequent contract reviews, and earned-value metrics.In the area of human resources, the most important recommendations (others are pre-sented in the main text) are the following:¥For Trilogy and subsequent IT projects to have access to the human talent they need tosucceed, the FBI must dramatically grow its own internal expertise in IT and IT contractmanagement as quickly as possible.  In the short term, this effort will almost certainly involve
borrowing experienced and capable contract managers from other agencies.  In the long run,

establishing its own internal IT expertise will involve the creation of long-term high-statuscareer tracks with the FBI for IT personnel.¥Because of their importance to the short- and long-term success of the bureauÕs ITmodernization efforts, the FBI must permanently fill the positions of chief information officerand chief enterprise architect, and the committee concurs with the directorÕs judgment thatfilling these positions with appropriately qualified individuals ought to have the highest
priority.¥The FBI should develop an improved system for internally reviewing the state of progressin key IT programs and for communicating relevant findings to key stakeholders, thus pre-
empting the perceived need for and distraction of constant external investigations.The committee believes that the FBI has made significant progress in some areas of its ITmodernization efforts, such as the modernization of the computing hardware and baselinesoftware and the deployment of its networking infrastructure.  However, because the FBI IT
infrastructure was so inadequate in the past, there is still an enormous gap between the FBIÕscurrent IT capabilities and the capabilities that are urgently needed.Some useful and valuable returns from the investment in the Trilogy program appear to bewithin reach.  Nevertheless, the committee believes that a major effort is needed to bring the

FBI to the state where it can be characterized as an effective exploiter of information tech-nology.  The committee has made recommendations that, if adopted, will significantly in-
crease the likelihood that the FBIÕs Trilogy IT modernization program will enhance the FBIÕseffectiveness in carrying out its crime-fighting and counterterrorism missions.  But it empha-
sizes the difference between a pro forma adoption of these recommendations and an adoptionof these recommendations that is both fully embraced throughout the agency and aggressively
executed.  The former may be the metric that auditing and oversight agencies and offices often
use in assessing agency performance, but it is the attitude and willingness of senior staff to actthat really count.  The senior management of the FBI has a substantive and direct role to play
A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8A REVIEW OF THE FBIÕS TRILOGY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION PROGRAMin the FBIÕs IT modernization efforts.  This role either has not been understood or it has been
given a lower priority based on the perception of more immediate operational priorities.Given the importance of IT to the FBIÕs future success in carrying out its missions, the FBIÕssenior management must concern itself as much with developing a coherent vision for using
IT as with budgets, training programs, equipment, and organization.  As the complexities of
the FBIÕs evolving role are understood, the committee believes that investment by the FBIÕssenior management team in the IT process will yield major enhancements to mission achieve-
ment as well as substantial operational efficiencies.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.91Background
The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) is undergoing a significant shift of its missionresponsibilities and a reordering of its priorities.  For most of its history, the FBI has been

oriented primarily toward law enforcement and the investigation of criminal activities.  How-
ever, in the wake of the attacks of September 11, 2001, the threat environment has changeddramatically, and the FBIÕs mission has expanded to include as its top priority the detection of
potential terrorism against the U.S. homeland and the interdiction of terrorist activities beforethey cause damage.  Although the leadership of the FBI recognizes the need for upgraded
information technology (IT) to enhance its ability to collect, store, search, retrieve, analyze,
and share information in pursuit of its missions, the FBI has not been regarded as a sophisti-cated user of IT.  Indeed, for many years, the FBI has been criticized for inadequate attention
and competence with respect to its use of IT.For any organization engaged in a complex set of activities, the introduction of modern ITand the concomitant reengineering of the organizationÕs key processes to fully exploit thetechnology constitute a major challenge.  In the FBIÕs case, this transformation is being man-

aged under intense operational pressures: the FBIÕs traditional work must continue even asnew technology is introduced and a culture more comfortable with IT is evolved.  Compound-
ing this challenge is the added strain of the new focus on preventive counterterrorism, where
success demands a different mind-set, different operational skills, and the exploitation of aradically expanded set of information sources.The FBI has made significant progress in certain areas of its IT modernization program inthe last year or so.  For example, it has achieved the modernization of the computing hardware
and baseline software on the desktops of agents and other personnel and has taken majorstrides forward in the deployment of its networking infrastructure.  Nevertheless, in a number

of key areas, the FBIÕs progress has fallen significantly short of what it, and the nation, require.Organizations should invest in IT only if such investment will improve their operationaleffectiveness.  Therefore, the return on an IT investment must be measured in operational
A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10A REVIEW OF THE FBIÕS TRILOGY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION PROGRAMtermsÑmore and better results, increased responsiveness and agility, and improved efficiencyof operations.  Maximizing the return on a major IT investment thus requires an intimate anddynamic interplay between the technology and an organizationÕs operational strategy, and sothis report begins its discussion from the operational and strategy side.1.1PRELIMINARIES
Information technology most effectively facilitates the ÒbusinessÓ and 
ÒoperationsÓ of
organizations when it is explicitly designed to do so, whether the organizations are profit-and-
loss enterprises, not-for-profit private organizations, or government agencies.  Such design
requires careful specification of objectives, strategies for achieving objectives, and the processesby which strategies are realized.  Effective management also requires that a set of measures of

success be defined and tracked, using both outcome and process metrics.  This report makes
frequent use of the term Òoperational processesÓ to refer to the processes used within the FBI
to accomplish its missions.  (Some might prefer the term 
Òbusiness processesÓ; the meaning isthe same.)The committee views the FBI as being engaged in a number of important operationalpursuits that are tantamount to enterprise business objectives, even though those operational
pursuits do not have profit-making goals.  Thus, the FBI should engage in cost-effectiveness
analyses corresponding to cost-benefit analyses in commercial enterprises that will aim toincrease the return in improved operational effectiveness and efficiency that U.S. taxpayers
rightly expect for bureau expenditures.In general, organizations must develop their own metrics to quantify their objectives.Among the purposes of doing so are to be able to determine the extent to which a given
investment will help an organization better achieve those objectives, and to retrospectivelytrack the returns on such investments.  The committee recognizes that the ultimate goal of the
FBI is the prevention of undesirable events, and in this context, meaningful quantification of
that goal can be problematic.  Nevertheless, it is desirable and almost always possible to
establish reasonable intermediate quantifiable objectives that bear on operational efficiency,subject to the understanding that these measures reflect the underlying processes and do not
become goals in and of themselves.The committee believes that many management approaches, tools, and best practices fromthe commercial sector are applicable to the FBI, just as they are to the Department of Defense
and other government enterprises.  Many of the observations and recommendations in this
report are the result of the committeeÕs assessment of the FBIÕs current approach comparedwith successful approaches seen by committee members in both the for-profit and the not-for-
profit sectors.1.2MISSIONS OF THE FBI
The nature of an organizationÕs missions and its strategy and operational objectives are theprimary drivers of the kinds of information and communication it needs and the processes it mustexploit.  These needs in turn determine the architecture, design, and functioning of its IT systems.According to the FBI, its mission is Òto uphold the law through the investigation of viola-tions of federal criminal law; to protect the United States from foreign intelligence and terroristactivities; to provide leadership and law enforcement assistance to federal, state, local, andA Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BACKGROUND11international agencies; and to perform these responsibilities in a manner that is responsive tothe needs of the public and is faithful to the Constitution of the United States.Ó1  The first twoelements are highly operational: the investigation of criminal activity to support the prosecu-tion of criminals (Òcriminal investigationÓ for short in this report) and the prevention of
terrorism within the United States and against U.S. interests around the world (Òcounter-terrorismÓ in this report).  Supporting these missions and the achievement of the related
operational objectives of these mission segments is a set of key processes that are used to
different degrees in achieving the objectives.1.2.1Criminal Investigation
The traditional mission of the FBI is that of an investigative agency for the Department ofJustice of the United States.  This mission is focused on investigating and preparing much of
the information basis for the prosecution of crimes.  The information developed by FBI inves-tigators is provided to prosecutors who in turn determine if an individual will be prosecuted.
The FBI can initiate a criminal investigation when facts or circumstances reasonably indicatethat a federal crime has been, is being, or will be committed, and the investigation may beconducted to prevent, solve, and prosecute such criminal activity.2  As a practical matter, most
investigations are reactiveÑthat is, they are initiated in response to a specific occurrence ofcriminal activity.  (Note that the standard for 
Òreasonable indicationÓ is substantially lower
than that for probable cause.)  Once the FBI investigative activity has been initiated, the FBI

will use the resources legally at its disposal to gather relevant information related to thesituation.In those instances where a criminal act may be committed in the future, preparation forthat act can be a current criminal violation under the conspiracy or attempt provisions offederal criminal law or other provisions defining preparatory crimes, such as solicitation of acrime of violence or provision of material support in preparation for a terrorist crime.  The

standard for opening an investigation is satisfied where there is not yet a current substantiveor preparatory crime, but facts or circumstances reasonably indicate that such a crime willoccur in the future.31.2.2Counterterrorism
In the counterterrorism domain, the FBIÕs objective is to prevent acts of terrorism in theUnited States and against U.S. persons and interests throughout the world.  Accomplishing

this daunting objective requires, among many other activities, accessing, analyzing, and1See http://www.fbi.gov/priorities/priorities.htm.2A step short of a full-fledged investigation is known as a preliminary inquiry, which is a step taken when the FBI receivesinformation or an allegation not warranting a full investigationÑbecause there is not yet a Òreasonable indicationÓ of criminal
activitiesÑbut whose responsible handling requires some further scrutiny beyond the prompt and limited checking out of initialleads.  Such an inquiry is intended to allow the government to respond in a measured way to ambiguous or incomplete informa-tion, with as little intrusion as the needs of the situation permit.  This measured response is especially important when an
allegation or information is received from a source of unknown reliability.  A preliminary inquiry is intended to establish

whether or not a full-fledged investigation is warranted.3Information on investigations and inquiries is derived from The Attorney GeneralÕs Guidelines on General Crimes, RacketeeringEnterprise and Terrorism Enterprise Investigations, available at http:// www.usdoj.gov/olp/generalcrimes2.pdf.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12A REVIEW OF THE FBIÕS TRILOGY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION PROGRAMexchanging massive amounts of information, and close, daily coordination and cooperationamong law enforcement, intelligence, and many other involved organizations.4In this area, the role of the FBI is proactive and ongoing, and the execution of its mission is
not necessarily carried out in response to any particular external event.  (If a serious terrorist

event has already occurred, then it is reasonable to suggest that the execution of the counter-terrorism mission has not been fully successful.)  There is some overlap of activities between
the criminal investigation and counterterrorism missions, as discussed below, but the new
emphasis on counterterrorism requires a different mind-set among some FBI staff, some newor different operational processes, and new requirements for supporting IT systems.1.3KEY FBI PROCESSES
It is important to distinguish between missions and the key processes that support theaccomplishment of those missions.  In some cases, a key process supports only one mission; in
others, a key process may support more than one mission.  The key processes used by the FBI
involve, among other things, information acquisition and the workflow of information man-agementÑhow information is acquired, who must act on it, how information of all types flowswithin the organization, how it must be processed and analyzed, and what types of inferences
must be drawn.  For information-intensive missions such as criminal investigation and counter-
terrorism, modern IT and its proper design and exploitation are critical contributors to trulyeffective processes.This section describes some of the key processes within the FBI.  However, the reader
should keep in mind that the terminology used here reflects processes rather than organiza-tional titles.  That is, 
Òinvestigation,Ó Òintelligence,Ó and 
Òinformation managementÓ are meant
to refer to processes or functions rather than specific offices or divisions within the FBI.1.3.1 Investigation
The investigative process is the primary process supporting the law enforcement mission.Investigation develops information from a variety of sources, including but not limited toinformation gathered directly by special agents or other law enforcement agencies, informa-tion obtained through informants, information obtained from other agencies such as Customs
and Border Protection or local or foreign law enforcement agencies, laboratory-developedinformation, and publicly available information (e.g., information on the Internet or in thenews).  The collection and analysis of information are usually under the control of a special

agent leading and directly responsible for the investigation.  The information (or derivatives,
such as pointers to certain collected information) is placed in centralized FBI files for appropri-ate dissemination and use as part of the case file.The agent or group of agents assigned to a case is the focal point of FBI criminal and lawenforcement activities.  The agent is responsible for carrying out the investigative task and
4Another dimension of the counterterrorism mission is the active insertion of sympathetic parties (ranging from those wholisten to those who take a more active role in disrupting) into hostile organizations such as terrorist cells.  This type of ac
tivity isfar more controversial as it poses nontrivial challenges to the nationÕs core values, and history demonstrates that such actions canhave significant political repercussions when they are undertaken within the United States.  In any event, this report is delib
er-ately silent on this dimension of the counterterrorism mission, as it is largely beyond the scope of the committeeÕs charge.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BACKGROUND13managing much of the information involved.  In the case of a criminal investigation, the
information developed is then conveyed to the prosecutor for decision and action.  In the case
of a background investigation, the information is delivered to the requesting agency.  The
agent is the focal point of the activity with support from administrative staff, analysts, and
other FBI employees.  The investigative information is organized around cases, which serve as
the fundamental unit for information management.  Moreover, there are a variety of legal and
procedural requirements in place to ensure that developed information can be used in court to
support prosecutorial activities.The FBI relies extensively on a well-developed remote tasking practice whereby an agentin one location who needs information from another area can easily transmit a request, called
a Òlead,Ó to the appropriate field office where it will be followed up by a local agent.  This
practice is remarkable in that it allows the organization to function on a continental scalewithout a tremendous cost in time and money for travel or the overhead that would be
involved if headquarters had to be directly involved.  Yet the process provides the personal
contact that is essential to productive interviewing by FBI agents of suspects or individualswith leads.  For this practice to work as effectively as it manifestly does is a testimony to the

quality of training and the uniformity of culture within the FBI.  Nevertheless, a thoughtful
application of technology can support and enrich this practice, and make it even more effectiveand efficient.1.3.2Intelligence
Intelligence processes include information collection and analytical functions.  Informa-
tion gathered under intelligence auspices is frequently more tentative and expansive in scope
as compared with information collected under investigative auspices.  Rules on information
retention and use also differ in each domain.  Intelligence processes are used in both law
enforcement and counterterrorism missions, although the collection of information gathered
under intelligence auspices is not directly aimed at the support of prosecutorial activities.Intelligence in the counterterrorism context requires that voluminous information resourcesfrom internal and external sources be logically brought together and analyzed with the goal of
identifying potential threats of, or precursors to, terrorist activity.  The range of sources of
information that must be selectively probed and analyzed is enormous, and much of theinformation will be obtained not from government-owned sources but from publicly available
sources, such as newspapers in foreign languages, or the Internet.55To illustrate one problem, the name of an individual can be represented in multiple ways.  A specific name can have differentvariants (e.g., with or without a middle name, nicknames, short forms, order of given and family names).  An individual may beregularly identified with different name variants in different geographical locales (even within the same country).  Transliter
a-tions into Western languages (e.g., of Arabic, Chinese, or Cyrillic into Roman alphabets) add another layer of complexity.  Nam
estranscribed from voice (e.g., a wiretap) may be highly ambiguous in spelling.  The original material from which the name was
obtained (fax, Web, e-mail, and so on) may be rendered in a multitude of computer encodings.  Search engines used for intelli-

gence purposes must be able to reconcile all of these different encodings of a name when an analyst is searching on a given namefor references to a given individual.  When the committee asked the FBI about this issue during briefings, the reply received w
as,ÒWe intend to use Unicode to represent names.Ó  Unicode representations deal with part of the problem (the part dealing with
the ability to represent a name in its native alphabet), but not the other parts of the problem.  Note that these issues also a
rise incriminal investigations, but to the extent that investigations relate to crimes committed by people in the United States, issuesrelated to names rendered in non-native alphabets arise with much lower frequency.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14A REVIEW OF THE FBIÕS TRILOGY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION PROGRAMAnalytical functions in the intelligence process must analyze information of uncertainrelevance and quality.  The desired result is the distillation of conclusions that become increas-
ingly certain as they are further aggregated and refined.  Such analyses may, at different
stages, result in warnings and may initiate deeper and more focused investigations that may
eventually lead to prosecutions.The intelligence process generally requires that the FBI receive information from anddisseminate information to local law enforcement agencies, the U.S. intelligence community,
and often agencies of foreign nations.  The ability to share information at multiple levels of
security classification with a wide variety of collaborators is essential to the underlying intel-ligence process and to performance of the counterterrorism mission.  Information sharing

must generally proceed with much more caution in counterterrorism efforts than in mostcriminal investigations because of the sensitivity of information sources.  Yet strong capabilities
to access, manage, analyze, and communicate information across institutional boundaries are
key to the analytical function at the core of the intelligence process.Sharing information requires cooperative relationships with the intelligence and law enforce-ment 
communities across jurisdictional levels from local to international.  Furthermore, its
success demands a framework of policy and process to ensure appropriate balance amongtimely access, security, and privacy rights.  Trained analysts probe, tease apart, and develop
new information that can identify, confirm, or exclude a hypothesis or a threat.  IT should

serve to facilitate mutually cooperative relationships and analytical activities.In the law enforcement mission, special agents are in the lead, and analysts supportingthose agents must understand the investigative role of the bureau and the agentÕs operationalprocesses.  In the counterterrorism mission, analysts are primary, and the agents supporting
those analysts must understand that the primary role of analysts in counterterrorism is analo-gous to the role that agents play in pursuing the law enforcement mission.  (For example,

according to the FBIÕs Office of Intelligence, special agents constitute one of the best collectionmechanisms available to the intelligence community for counterterrorism work.)Most analysts have specialized expertise but must be able to easily cooperate with col-leagues on diverse topics.  An individual analyst at the FBI must be highly skilled in the
methods and processes that are used for both the criminal and the counterterrorism missions.Analysts must be comfortable with the IT that provides the means of access to raw information
and underlies tools to support the distillation, sharing, and analysis processes.1.3.3Information Management
The investigative and intelligence processes used by the FBI are information-intensive,and the bureau has recognized that state-of-the-art information management that exploitsavailable technology can significantly enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of these pro-cesses.  Furthermore, both counterterrorism and criminal investigation are evolving in a way

that spans traditional organizational boundaries in the FBI.  Special agents in charge (SACs)
are organized around geography.  Terrorism and crime no longer respect those boundaries,
and thus a bureau-wide technology deployment necessarily entails a set of systems and data
that can be accessed easily across the geographic reach of the FBIÕs missions.  (The FBI encom-
passes 56 field offices in major cities in the United States, approximately 400 resident agencies(i.e., satellite offices in smaller cities and towns), and foreign posts in 52 nations.)A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BACKGROUND156As used in this report, the term ÒplatformÓ refers to the computing infrastructure supporting FBI applications, specifically the
combination of a type of hardware, say a PC-compatible personal computer, and specific software, such as a specific operating
system, Web browser, and set of basic office applications.Driven initially by the need for improved support of the investigative process, the FBI hasembarked on a major IT modernization program, whose main focus today is the Trilogyprogram.  Trilogy has two major objectives.  The first is the creation of a more modern end-
user-oriented infrastructure, consisting of a secure wide-area network and related local area
networks, together with modern workstations, printers, scanners, and a base of commercialsoftware applications such as browsers.  This infrastructure is intended to provide an enhanced
platform for modern applications.6  The second objective of Trilogy is to provide enhanced
support of the investigative process.  This objective is the focus of the Virtual Case File (VCF)
that will provide via a browser interface a user-friendly capability for agents to electronicallymanage case-related information critical for criminal investigation.At this writing (late March 2004), neither the infrastructure deployment nor the VCFapplication is complete, although significant progress has been made on both.  In addition to
the original two objectives, a general requirement to support the counterterrorism mission has
also been placed on Trilogy, although specifications for that novel task have not been fullydeveloped.  The FBI has also embarked on the development and implementation of systems to
support its intelligence functions, which are also important to the counterterrorism mission.
Central to this thrust is the creation of a large data repository, referred to as the IDW, theIntegrated Data Warehouse, also in its early stages.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.162IT-Related Issues for the FBI
Requiring Immediate Action
Although limited in scope and time, the committeeÕs review of the approach and methodologycurrently being used by the FBI to drive the introduction of its new IT systems has raised a
number of significant issues.  To address these issues requires concerted FBI action in four
major clusters.  The issues in each of these clusters are serious in and of themselves.  Taken inaggregate, the detrimental impact of inattention to these issues on the FBIÕs IT modernization
efforts is enormous despite the progress that has been made.  These four clusters are:
¥Enterprise architecture.  An enterprise architecture maps the linkage between the FBIÕs
strategy and operational needs and its IT program.¥System design.  System design is the engineering of detailed IT solutions driven by the
enterprise architecture.¥Program and contract management.  Large-scale program and contract management processes
are critical to the success of IT modernization endeavors as massive as Trilogy.¥Skills, resources, and external factors.  The fourth and final cluster cuts across the first three
clusters and generally relates to human resources and skills, and to some of the externalconstraints faced by the FBI in its IT modernization efforts.The next four sections deal with these issues cluster by cluster.2.1ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE ISSUES
2.1.1Creating an Enterprise Architecture That Serves FBI Objectives
What Is an Enterprise Architecture?An enterprise architecture characterizes the enterpriseÕs missions, tasks, and operationalprocesses, and relates these tasks, processes, and operational objectives to IT strategy, invest-A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IT-RELATED ISSUES FOR THE FBI REQUIRING IMMEDIATE ACTION17ment, and design.  It provides substantial detail on the structure and standards used to imple-
ment the IT system.  The enterprise architecture is the framework that describes the way in
which an organization such as the FBI conducts its mission(s), how it organizes and usestechnology to accomplish its goals and execute key operational processes, and how the IT
system is structured and designed in detail to achieve these objectives.  In general, it should
also include documentation that explains the rationale behind important decisions and whycertain alternatives were chosen and others rejected.An enterprise architecture thus contains much more than information about technology.The enterprise architecture becomes the template on which the IT investment is rationalized,and the enhancements to the FBIÕs mission achievement, the return on the investment, aredefined and quantified using appropriate metrics.  When new needs emerge, as with the
counterterrorism mission, an enterprise architecture provides a point of departureÑa frame-work within which additional capabilities can be coherently designed.Absent an enterprise architecture, it is essentially impossible for any large organization,including the FBI, to make coherent or consistent operational or technical decisions about ITinvestments.  Among these decisions are the definitions of appropriate data structures and

linkages to other systems and data sources, policies and methods of information sharing,issues of security and the tradeoffs with information access, innovation, and the exploitationof evolving technologies, and metrics of effectiveness for the IT system and its use.The close link between good enterprise architecture planning and sound systems engi-neering practice on the one hand and success in large-scale IT deployments on the other hasbeen demonstrated in numerous examples in the private sector and in the federal govern-
ment.1  Further, the existence of the enterprise architecture can be a major contributor to the
confidence and trust that management, users, and implementers have in a project, as well asfacilitating cooperation among them.  A well-documented and communicated enterprise archi-

tecture is a prerequisite for driving cultural and operational change and innovation at a pacethat effectively capitalizes on the pace of technology improvement.  Good models depict the
as-is (todayÕs) environment as well as the to-be (future desired) environment, showing thetransition.The Structure of an Enterprise ArchitectureWhile technology capability is an important input to operational strategy, it is importantthat IT investment not be driven primarily from the technology end, but rather that opera-tional strategy drive technology investment and system design.  To this end, the committee
believes that a good starting point for achieving the required linkage is to think about architec-
tures in three conceptually distinct but interrelated forms:21For an example in a medical setting, see Jonathan M. Teich et al., ÒThe Brigham Integrated Computing System (BICS):Advanced Clinical Systems in an Academic Hospital Environment,Ó International Journal of Medical Informatics 54: 197Ð208 (1999).For a case study in which failure was closely associated with insufficient attention to architectural issues, see National ResearchCouncil, Continued Review of the Tax Systems Modernization of the Internal Revenue Service, Computer Science and Telecommunica-tions Board, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1996. For a case study in the private sector that demonstrates similarlessons, see Christopher Koch, ÒAT&T Wireless Self-Destructs,Ó CIO Magazine, April 15, 2004, available at http://www.cio.com/
archive/041504/wireless.html.2The architectural triad used here originates with the Department of Defense, which has used this framework to develop itscommand and control systems since 1997.  (A good reference on this subject is Architecture Working Group, Department of
A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18A REVIEW OF THE FBIÕS TRILOGY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION PROGRAM¥An operational architecture, which describes in graphical and narrative terms the keyoperational objectives; the operational elements, tasks, and processes used to achieve them; ahigh-level description of the types of information used and created; how and with whatconstraints information of various types must be exchanged; and the information flows in
these processes.  An operational architecture relates to specific mission scenarios and functions
and forms the basis for realistic process and information flow representation and prioritiza-tion.3  (An analogy for operational architecture in the construction domain is the concept of
operations for the various purposes a building will serve, and how various components of thebuilding will serve those needs.)¥A systems architecture, which describes at a high level the data repositories, systems,applications, connectivity, and communications infrastructure that supports the operationalarchitecture for mission needs.  The systems architecture defines the logical and physical
connection, location, and identification of the key nodes, circuits, networks, and platforms that
are associated with information exchange and specifies some critical system performanceparameters.  The systems architecture is constructed to satisfy operational architecture require-
ments using the standards defined in the technical architecture.  (An analogy for systems

architecture in the construction domain is the blueprints for a building that illustrate howcomponents fit together.)¥A technical architecture, which captures the key technical standards, protocols, and speci-fications required to implement the systems architecture.  A technical architecture is intended
to be a compact set of rules governing the arrangement, interaction, and interdependence ofthe parts or elements whose purpose is to ensure that a conforming system satisfies a specific
set of requirements.  It identifies system services, interfaces, standards, and their relationships.
It provides the framework for the derivation of engineering specifications that guide theimplementation of systems.  (An analogy for technical architecture in the construction domain

is the set of building codes for connecting subsystems and ensuring the operational effective-ness of the building with the community electrical, water, sewage, and roadway systems.)To indicate what some of the content of these three architectures might be, the committeeattempts to describe in Figure 1 some primary and supporting activities in the FBI as theymight contribute to one part of the architectural triad described aboveÑan operational archi-tecture.4  The purpose of Figure 1 is to focus attention on key structural elements of the FBI.
Figure 2 shows a subset of FBI activities and the potential scope of planned supporting ITDefense, C4ISR Architectural Framework, Version 2.0, December 18, 1997, available at http://www.defenselink.mil/nii/org/cio/i3/AWG_Digital_Library/pdfdocs/fw.pdf.  The descriptions of operational, systems, and technical architectures contained in

this report are adapted from this DOD document.)  Note, however, that the engineering methodology of defining a 
ÒfunctionalarchitectureÓ based on processes and information flows and then building a 
Òsystem architectureÓ with ever increasing technical
detail dates back to the mid-1970s.  And the use of structured analysis to form the basis for a technical system design has been inwidespread use throughout commercial and government organizations since the late 1970s.3As one possible scenario, the FBI told the committee that it has some 6 million documents found in Afghanistan.  How will the
information in these documents be extracted and managed?  Who will have access to what set of those documents?  What

circumstances will govern access rules?  How will the information contained in these documents be used with other informationto which the FBI has access?  Thinking through this scenario will provide a great deal of insight into information management
requirements.  The key point is that however the FBI decides to handle the information from these documents, it should be able

to articulate the rationale for doing so in terms that make sense from an operational point of view.4See, for example, Michael E. Porter, Competitive Advantage: Creating and Sustaining Superior Performance, Free Press, New York,1998.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IT-RELATED ISSUES FOR THE FBI REQUIRING IMMEDIATE ACTION19FBI Value Chain
Administration Management
Procurement Management
IT Management
HR Management
Financial Management
Supporting (Financial, HR, IT...) Assets
Process Management
Law Enforcement and Cyber Crime
Criminal
IdentificationCriminal
Investigation
Criminal
ApprehensionProsecutionSupport
IntelligenceRequirements
and
CollectionIntelligenceAssessmentIntelligenceProduction and UseCounter Intelligence and Counter Terrorism
Research and Laboratory
Law Enforcement and CT/CI Training
FBI Infrastructure Assetsprevent/reduce
normal and cyber

crime

(criminal investigation)
prevent/reduce
terror/foreign

attacks

(counterterrorism)
Goalto protect the US from
       criminals and criminal

       organizations
       cyber attacks

       terrorism attacks

       foreign attacks
Supporting

ProcessesSupport Asset
Information
ProcessManagementCoreBusiness
ProcessesQualityManagementProductInformation
Supporting
ActivitiesPrimary
ActivitiesactivitiesÑthe ACS, the VCF, SCOPE (the Secure Counterterrorism Operational PrototypeEnvironment, discussed below in Section 2.2.3), and the IDW.Figures 1 and 2 represent the committeeÕs (certainly imperfect) perspective on FBI opera-tions and the roles of IT systems in supporting FBI missions.  These figures are highly simpli-

fied (for example, they do not include the operational impact of providing law enforcementassistance to other agencies), and they lack any kind of supporting detail.  However, the
committee inferred the content of Figures 1 and 2, rather than receiving them from the FBI.  One
of the committeeÕs major concerns is that it was not shown anything produced by the FBI or itscontractors that approaches the content or substance of even these oversimplified figures.  In
FIGURE 1FBI value chainÑan example of a framework for Òthe view from 40,000 feetÓ of a serious enterprise
architecture. This adaptation of Michael Porter
Õs famous business value chain indicates the core processes of theFBIÕs two major missionsÑ(1) criminal investigation and (2) counterterrorism. In addition, the primary activities
include process management to monitor the performance of these two missions and quality management to providefeedback on the effectiveness of both the primary outputsÑinformationÑand how users actually use that infor-mation. At the top of the diagram are the traditional resources management areas: administration, procurement,
human resources, finance, and IT. These supporting activities ultimately must be integrated with the primary
activities shown in the bottom two-thirds of the diagram for the FBI to work most effectively.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20A REVIEW OF THE FBIÕS TRILOGY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION PROGRAMFIGURE 2The scope of key applications on the FBI value chain. This diagram overlays on the middle portion ofFigure 1 the FBIÕs currently existing IT systems (ACS and the SCOPE prototype) and the ultimate next-generationapplications (VCF and IDW 1.0) and their purpose in relation to the bureauÕs core processes. Clearly, the FBI has
hundreds of systems to be arrayed on a chart of this kind for it to be of most value. This task is not complex, and
the results would greatly facilitate understanding both the Òas isÓ and the 
Òto beÓ contemplated by the Trilogy
program and other FBI IT planning.other words, the fact that the FBI was unable to present its own version of these figures wastelling to the committee about a lack of clear architectural thinking.  Without such a top-level

description and understanding, all of the subsidiary steps in the design and implementation ofan enterprise IT system are at significant risk of failure.It is important for the FBI to create and use its own versions of Figures 1 and 2 to helpexplain its strategies, and to do the supporting work required to fill out their content.  Once
this is done, it does not matter if the FBIÕs own versions agree with the committeeÕs figures,and a detailed acceptance or rejection of the committeeÕs figures is not relevant.The committee recognizes that the framework described above is only one way to concep-tualize enterprise architectures.  For example, the Federal Enterprise Architecture (FEA) frame-
A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IT-RELATED ISSUES FOR THE FBI REQUIRING IMMEDIATE ACTION21work,5 to which the FBI has already committed itself, is used in many federal agencies.  Multi-
agency use of the FEA framework enables architectural efforts presented using its five-compo-nent framework to be directly compared across agencies.  Nevertheless, the committee be-
lieves that the architectural triad described above is conceptually clearer and more
straightforward than the FEA framework and that the FBI will make more rapid progressusing the triad even if some translation between the triad and the FEA framework will likelybe necessary at the end of the process.Recognizing the Role of Top Management in Creating an Enterprise ArchitectureAn enterprise architecture has far more operational content than technical content.  Accord-
ingly, the FBIÕs enterprise architecture must be based on mission needs and must be formu-lated, propagated, owned, and evolved by the operational leadership of the FBI at the highestlevels (the FBI director and the directors of the FBIÕs mission-oriented divisions).6An effective process requires that the enterprise architecture be created by a combinedeffort involving both senior operational management and key technologists.  The CIO plays akey role as the facilitator of the process; however, the creation of the enterprise architecturecannot be handed off to the CIO, and certainly cannot be outsourced.  The enterprise architec-

ture is central to an organizationÕs strategy, as well as important for process analysis, change,and planning.  Outside expertise can play a role in assisting and advising the enterprise
architecture process, but the FBIÕs top management team must manage, buy into, and executethe process.Although this task is critical, it need not be an enormously time-consuming one.  With
adequate time and focus on the part of senior operational management working with key IT
people, major progress could be made in a week of intense work, and the creation of a reason-ably complete operational architecture together with a top-level schematic systems architec-tureÑthe most critical part of the enterprise architectureÑshould be possible in a 6-monthtime frame.7  Further, committee experience indicates that progress is best made with the top-
level management team supported by an architecture team composed of a small number offull-time professionals dedicated to the task.  These individuals must understand operations
and have some appreciation for technology, rather than being technologists with only a looseconnection to the operational side.Given the fact that the leadership of any large organization, including the FBI, has manyongoing demands on it, the temptation is large to simply hire a CIO with a great deal oftechnology experience, delegate the task, and then forget about the problem.  Why must an
organizationÕs operational leadership be deeply engaged in the development of an enterprisearchitecture for IT?  Why can
Õt this function be outsourced?5The FEA is a business- and performance-based framework to support cross-agency collaboration, transformation, and gov-ernment-wide improvement.  See http://feapmo.gov/.
6In principle, it is also possible to begin with a vision of how technology might enable missions to be accomplishedÑthat is, toseek a technology-driven enterprise architecture.  But such an approach demands an extraordinarily high level of sophistication
about the capabilities and limitations of technology, and for reasons that this report documents, is not appropriate for the FBI.7The executive assistant director for intelligence testified to the committee that a small team working full time for about 10weeks was able to develop a concept of operations for the Office of Intelligence.  Thus, 4 to 6 months of work does not seem
unreasonable for developing the operational dimensions of a larger enterprise architecture.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22A REVIEW OF THE FBIÕS TRILOGY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION PROGRAMThe committeeÕs experience is that without the drive of operational missions, technologydeployments inevitably serve to automate existing functions at a relatively low level, and thusthe processes associated with these functions remain static.  Even worse, automation of exist-
ing functions can degrade the ability of an organization to carry out its missions.  The reason

is that the functions that an organization must serve are sometimes in tensionÑconsider anorganization that must keep sensitive information secure (a driver for restricted access), andyet make it available to everyone with legitimate need (a driver for broad access).When people deal with these competing demands, they make judgments and ad hocdecisions on the basis of their experience and expertise.  Despite the existence of functional
tensions in a non-automated system, human flexibility and adaptability generally ensure that
operations can function at an adequate level of performance.  Indeed, in most organizations,
what people actually do on the job varies from what is specified by the organizationÕs formalprocesses.  These variances do not arise because people are poorly motivated or lazy, but

rather because people are highly motivated, and the variances are usually necessary for realwork to be done.The fact that humans resolve these conflicts so smoothly, however, usually means that thetensions inherent in differing functions are hidden from view.  Technology deployments bring
out these tensions, and force someone to decide, in advance, how the tradeoff should beresolved.  When automation is implemented in an organization without the benefit of opera-

tional knowledge (i.e., without taking into account what the organization is trying to do), thetradeoffs involved in deciding what to deploy are made in a vacuumÑand often wrongly.Only the senior operational management is in a position to articulate explicitly how these
tradeoffs should be resolved.Beyond the need to develop an enterprise architecture to manage the IT investment process,it is important to recognize that the activity of developing an enterprise architecture often
results in a (highly desirable) reexamination of operational processes.  That is, by focusing on
what technology can and should do for an organization, attention is naturally drawn to theprocesses it is intended to supportÑand often the processes themselves are seen to be out-moded, unnecessary, or ripe for streamlining, often because they were based on the limita-tions of older technology or on requirements that are no longer current.  Such discoveries are
valuable in themselves in that they help an organization function more efficiently even apart
from its investments in technology.  Such opportunities can be expected to arise when exam-
ining the processes of investigation and intelligence at the FBI.Finally, as missions evolve, so must an enterprise architectureÑand in that sense, anenterprise architecture is never final.  Since it is only the senior operational leadership that can
make basic decisions about the organizationÕs missions, they will need to have a continuinginvolvement in the evolution of the enterprise architecture and a process to periodically revisit
it.  This point again reinforces the idea that an articulation of the operational dimensions of an
enterprise architecture cannot be outsourced.2.1.2FBI Activities with Respect to Enterprise Architecture
Based on FBI briefings and presentations to the committee, the committee believes that theFBIÕs efforts and results in the area of enterprise architecture are late, limited, and fall far shortof what is required.  Indeed, in spite of the fact that the Trilogy projects are far along and

substantial resources have been expended, the FBI has only very recently begun serious effortsA Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IT-RELATED ISSUES FOR THE FBI REQUIRING IMMEDIATE ACTION23to create its enterprise architecture, and no comprehensive enterprise architecture is in placetoday.8For example, the FBI reported to the General Accounting Office that it has completed andapproved an enterprise architecture Òfoundation document.Ó9  However, the FBI made no
reference to this document or its content in its October 2003 and December 2003 presentationsto the committee, despite its publication on August 23, 2003, and despite the fact that thecommittee raised questions about enterprise architecture many times during those sessions.
Ultimately, the committee learned of this document by reviewing a DOJ inspector generalreport, and it obtained a copy of the document in early 2004.Committee members have reviewed this document and believe that the document doesbegin to discuss at a high level some of the issues discussed above about linking the IT systemto missions and operational processes.  However, little follow-on work appears to have taken
place as of the time of this writing (late March 2004).In addition, the FBI has undertaken other efforts that could reasonably represent seeds ofarchitectural work that needs to be done more broadly.  The Office of Intelligence has embarked
on a laudable effort to develop the beginnings of its own architectural sub-framework, and
spokespeople from that office were able to relate IT requirements to operational process at ahigh level in a convincing manner.  Those responsible for the VCF project have also developed
an architectural sub-framework that appears adequate to support the initial rollout of the
application in 2004.  The VCF may well be a component that can be made, with some effort, to
fit into the enterprise architecture when it is created.  Nevertheless, these architectural efforts
Ñimportant though they areÑdo not substitute for an overall architecture that addresses themissions of the FBI collectively.The committeeÕs concerns about inadequate enterprise architecture work are reinforced bythe fact that only in the FY2005 budget enhancement request will the bureau include very
substantial funding for enterprise architecture related activities, and that this request wasunder consideration at DOJ and the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) as of September2003.  (The FBI is further seeking to obtain an interim system engineering, integration, and test

contractor to blend the Trilogy VCF, the Secure Counterterrorism Operational Prototype Envi-ronment (SCOPE), and the Integrated Data Warehouse (IDW), and several smaller efforts, intoa unified and functioning whole.10)Under the best possible circumstances, this FY2005 budget enhancement request will takeeffect October 1, 2004, suggesting that FBI effort in this area will not be substantial at least untilthen.  Moreover, the fact that this request has taken the form of a budget 
ÒenhancementÓ for
FY2005 implies that the FBI has given this task a lower priority than might be implied, forexample, by a request for authority to reprogram existing funds from FY2004 for this effort.  In
the absence of a serious enterprise architecture effort, even the interim plan to blend the VCF,
SCOPE, and the IDW will be very difficult to achieve.8In this regard, the committeeÕs conclusion echoes the primary finding of the General Accounting Office report The FBI Needsan Enterprise Architecture to Guide Its Modernization Activities (General Accounting Office, GAO-03-959, September 2003, availableat http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d03959.pdf).9See Response of the FBI to the GAO report The FBI Needs an Enterprise Architecture to Guide Its Modernization Activities, datedSeptember 22, 2003.  Available at http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d04190r.pdf.
10See Response of the FBI to the GAO report The FBI Needs an Enterprise Architecture to Guide Its Modernization Activities, dated
September 22, 2003.  Available at http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d04190r.pdf.
A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24A REVIEW OF THE FBIÕS TRILOGY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION PROGRAMBeyond the lack of anything resembling a complete enterprise architecture, of most con-cern to the committee is the fact that most of the senior operational management of the FBIdoes not seem to have been deeply engaged in either the nascent architecture efforts or inshaping the Trilogy effort.  For example, the 
Enterprise Architecture Foundation Document was
produced by an entity called the Architecture Governance Board, whose members are appar-ently drawn from the FBI IT communityÑand did not include senior individuals from themajor operational units of the bureau.  That is, it does not appear to reflect substantial involve-

ment by the senior operational leadership of the FBI and hence cannot be sufficiently completeto guide the FBIÕs IT development and deployment efforts.This must change.  For the IT modernization to succeed, frequent and engaged participation
by the FBIÕs senior operational management in the creation and review of an enterprise architec-ture is necessary, and must be followed up with ongoing and systematic monitoring of the FBIÕsand contractor plans and progress through implementation.  A properly designed process for

developing an enterprise architecture can allow senior management to play their essential rolewithout placing excessive demands on their time, and being actively engaged in the creation of anenterprise architecture does not necessarily mean that the senior operational management is
responsible for every step.  Rather, as the enterprise architecture is being created, the senior
operational management must be involved in sessions at which there is serious discussion of theenterprise architectureÕs contents, and where important decisions are made.  Many of these issues
and decisions involve policy questions, including a determination of whether a relevant policyexists and thus should be reflected in the enterprise architecture, or needs to be created.The committee believes that the absence of an enterprise architecture has been a majorcontributor to the problems faced by the implementers of the Trilogy program.  That is, the
lack of an architecture to guide the planning of an information and communication infra-structure has resulted in improvisation that has virtually no chance of resulting in a well-
ordered infrastructure for the enterprise to build upon.  In fact, merely providing parts (e.g.,
computers and accessories, piece-part applications, and so on) is like buying brick, mortar,and lumber and expecting a builder to produce a functional building without benefit of build-
ing codes, blueprints, or an understanding of how people will use the building.2.1.3Data Management Issues Arising from the Absence of an Enterprise Architecture
The FBIÕs lack of an enterprise architecture has manifested itself in many ways.  For
example, as noted above, the counterterrorism mission requires access to and the exchange ofcomprehensive and timely information.  Thus, it is easy to imagine that the FBI will, under
some set of circumstances, need to receive and/or send information from or to state and local
law enforcement agencies (e.g., local police departments), its counterparts in foreign nations,or other members of the U.S. intelligence community.11  The identification of precisely which
11A proof-of-principle project (the Gateway Information Sharing Project) was established in St. Louis in April 2002 to integrateinvestigative data from federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies into one database that will ultimately be accessible to
all participating agencies via a secure Internet connection.  The project merges investigative files and records from all level
s oflaw enforcement into a single, searchable data warehouse, providing investigators and analysts the ability to search the actualtext of investigative records for names, addresses, phone numbers, scars, marks, tattoos, weapons, vehicles, and phrases.  The

project is the result of cooperation between the FBI and a variety of state and local police departments in the St. Louis area andSouthern Illinois.  See DOJ press release of October 9, 2002, 
ÒAttorney General John Ashcroft Unveils Gateway InformationSharing Pilot Project in St. Louis, Missouri.Ó  Available at  http://www.usdoj.gov/opa/pr/2002/October/02_ag_590.htm.
A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IT-RELATED ISSUES FOR THE FBI REQUIRING IMMEDIATE ACTION25parties the FBI will share information with and the conditions under which information willbe shared has profound implications for its enterprise architecture, and is an issue that thesenior operational leadership must address.A second issue is a potential confusion between mission and process.  In discussions with
the committee, senior FBI personnel repeatedly stated that Òinvestigation and intelligence arethe same thing.Ó  While it is true that the 
mission of criminal investigation makes use ofintelligence processes, this fact does not mean that an IT infrastructure to support investigationshould be the same as an IT infrastructure that can support intelligence.  For example, the
measure of success of an infrastructure that supports investigation is whether it helps agentsto do their investigation more effectively, more efficiently, or with greater quality of output andnational impact.  Agents are the primary actors in criminal investigations, and they task
analysts; thus, the developers of an IT infrastructure for investigation should regard agents astheir primary customers.By contrast, the mission of counterterrorism is intelligence-heavy.  The measure of success
of an IT infrastructure for intelligence is whether it helps the analyst perform analytical functionsmore effectively/efficiently, e.g., helps analysts identify patterns, clues, or other information
generally indicative of events that have not yet occurred.  In the intelligence process, analysts
are the primary actors, in that they are the ones primarily responsible for analyzing a widevariety of information, from both open and classified sources, in order to identify impending
terrorist actions that must be disrupted or pre-empted.  Thus, agents will act on the information
given them by analysts, and those actions are generally mapped into a criminal investigation.Presumably, agents also serve as collectors in the counterterrorism mission, and therefore can
be tasked by analysts.The following are some important differences that must be kept visible in designing ITsupport for the investigation and intelligence processes:¥Analysts tend to place a higher priority on access to a broad array of informationresources, while investigators tend to place a higher priority on highly targeted information.¥Analysts may find ÒbadÓ or 
ÒuntrustworthyÓ information contextually useful, while
investigators may regard it as a liability and would want such information purged as soon aspossible.¥Analysts must understand context and how a situation changes over time; investigatorsoften place a higher value on information that can serve as evidence and fact.¥Analysts must handle and manage classified data, while investigators must generally,though not always, manage Òlaw enforcement sensitiveÓ or 
Òsensitive but unclassifiedÓ data,
which entails an entirely different set of requirements.12In general, criminal investigation and intelligence are sufficiently different processes thatthe FBI would be wise to view the development of an overall enterprise architecture, particu-larly at the systems level, as calling for two subarchitectures with well-defined interfaces
between them.  An interface between the two subarchitectures is defined by the data that they
exchange and share.  These interfaces will require enforcement and oversight so that only
12There are exceptions to these generalizations, of course (e.g., investigations for counterintelligence purposes often generateclassified information).  But in any case, these exceptions represent only a small fraction of the total information collected.
A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26A REVIEW OF THE FBIÕS TRILOGY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION PROGRAMnecessary data are passed between them, and it will take senior operational managementattention to define what data are ÒnecessaryÓ and what the policies are for the interface
engines.  Further, these interfaces have profound implications for the systems and technical
architectures in areas such as standards that facilitate data exchange.2.2DESIGNING IT SYSTEMS TO SUPPORT FBI STRATEGY
AND OPERATIONAL NEEDSThis section comments specifically on a few important applications design issues, includ-ing overall system structure; the design of data repositories; and workflow, security, andaccess, as well as a collection of specific deficiencies in the VCF and other applications.  In most
cases, these issues are a consequence of the lack of an enterprise architecture, and thus of the
disconnect between enterprise architecture and technology planning and design.2.2.1The Virtual Case File Application of Trilogy
The Virtual Case File, the user application component of Trilogy, is a custom-designedsoftware application that is intended to facilitate case file management by integrating datafrom older, separate investigative systems, including the Automated Case Support (ACS)system, and eventually replacing them.  The VCF is intended to create efficiencies in entering

case-related information by reducing the number of steps in filing documents and to facilitatethe storage and retrieval of data for wider access, tracking, and analysis of case-related data.13The VCF is a new IT application designed to be the primary operations system to supportthe investigative mandate of the FBI.  The design process was under way prior to the addition
of the intelligence mission, and the requirements for the intelligence mission were not included
in the VCF design.The VCF is a significant step forward from todayÕs ACS system, and considerable progresson the VCF seems to have been made since September 2002.  (The committee underscores the
term Òseems,Ó because it was shown only a mock-up of the application, and not the application
itself.  That is, the committee viewed a canned presentation, because no working application
was available at FBI headquarters.  The committee notes that there is often a significant
difference between the impression conveyed by a mock-up and what an actual application can
do in practice.)Perhaps the most importantÑand commendableÑdevelopment in the VCF effort is theappointment of a very experienced and computer-savvy FBI special agent as program man-
ager who has played a strong role in driving the design from user requirements.  To the
committee, this individual appeared eminently capable of articulating user needs based onoperational experience rather than speculation, and the committee believes that it is this
managerÕs operational insights that served as an implicit enterprise architecture (more pre-cisely, a subarchitecture) for the VCF and that have consequently been a primary driver ofsignificant progress.  As such, the VCF has the potential to serve agents well in their criminal

investigation mission.13For further information about the virtual case file, see U.S. Department of Justice, Office of the Inspector General AuditDivision, The Federal Bureau of InvestigationÕs Management of Information Technology Investments, Report No. 03-09, December 2002,
pp.91, 94-99, available at http://www.usdoj.gov/oig/audit/FBI/0309/final.pdf.
A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IT-RELATED ISSUES FOR THE FBI REQUIRING IMMEDIATE ACTION27Nevertheless, the committee is deeply concerned about certain aspects of the VCF effort.In the wake of the VCF prime contractorÕs failure to meet a critical delivery date for the TrilogyVCF component rollout,14 the FBI has had to delay achievement of full system capability.  In a
memo delivered to the committee on February 11, 2004, the FBI noted that the revised sched-
ule for Trilogy calls for achieving full system network capability (i.e., full functionality to28,000 FBI employees at 612 sites) by April 30, 2004.  Based on the VCF developer
Õs originalestimate that it would require 6 weeks of full system capability for testing the VCF, and
assuming full system capability by April 30, 2004, it was estimated that the earliest activationof the first release of the VCF would be approximately mid-June 2004.  Subsequently, the FBI
advised that such an assumption would be incorrect given the level of immaturity of the VCF
application delivered to the government in December 2003 and through continued evaluationof the application.  The VCF vendor is scheduled to present to the government an estimated
time to complete on April 8, 2004.The details of the new VCF plan have not been made available to the committee.  But in
briefings held in October 2003, the FBI described to the committee a plan that would imple-ment the VCF in what it describes as a Òflash cutover.Ó  That is, the VCF would be rolled out
for employee use all over the bureau simultaneously (or nearly so).  The date for this cutover
has been postponed, but the committee is concerned that, because of schedule slippage, theamount of testing will be reduced even further below what is already an inadequate level.
With limited testing, and no experience gained from a limited initial rollout, the FBI would beimplementing what amounts to a prototype throughout the bureau.  This approach is nearly
guaranteed to cause mission-critical failures and further delays, as discussed below in Sec-
tion2.3.1, with significant implications for training, performance, coherence, internal morale,
public image, and cost to recovery.The committee is also concerned that the VCFÕs current design and technical specificationslack the flexibility needed to incrementally improve the application to support additionalfunctions important for the field agents and FBI management.  This inflexibility will make
further rounds of fixes and enhancements difficult.  (Note that the comments below are based

on a VCF mock-up in a canned presentation to the committee, rather than the committeeÕs ownexploration of a working VCF prototype.)Based on the committeeÕs understanding of and perspective on the VCFÕs current design,some of the potentially important issues related to the VCF include the following:¥As described to the committee by the FBI and its contractors, the current implementa-tion of the VCF appears to have embedded the workflows describing how information is to beentered, reviewed, and used.  Embedding the workflow in the application (that is, hard-wiring
it) will make any such changes in the future much more difficult (more expensive and slower)
to implement.  Such changes are likely to be driven by changes in the operational processes
that the VCF supports.1514See U.S. General Services Administration press release, ÒContractor Misses IT Delivery Date,Ó November 3,
2003.  Available at http://www.gsa.gov/Portal/gsa/ep/contentView.do?pageTypeId=8199&channelId=-13259&P=
%7C40E6C831B9572449852568AF00594486&contentId=14244&contentType=GSA_BASIC.15To illustrate how workflow changes might become necessary, note that FBI practices seem to be built around the assumptionthat only supervisor-approved documents have any status as information worthy of access by parties other than the originalcreator.  However, in today
Õs world of greater information sharing, an unapproved draft may well have information that mightA Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28A REVIEW OF THE FBIÕS TRILOGY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION PROGRAM¥The VCF does not have an Òoffline useÓ mode.  Without an offline mode, an agent
working a case cannot take copies or extracts of case materials into the field for reference, norcreate content offline that will then be synchronized into the VCF server when coming online.TodayÕs administrative procedures may prohibit such practices, but if mobile computing andremote access for agents become desirable and necessary (as discussed in Section 2.2.4), theinability to access the VCF in an offline mode will become critical.  Remote operation, whether
offline or via a communications link, has proved to be a major enhancer of productivity in a
wide variety of situations.¥In the VCF, documents are indexed with terms that are manually specified by super-visory agents without any auxiliary capability for the automatic generation of index terms.
Manual indexing reflects todayÕs practice in the FBI, but modern indexing software can do avery good job of finding index terms in a corpus of text automatically.  Manual indexing will
fail to supply terms that are outside the context of the human indexer, as many counter-
terrorism activities are likely to be.  Today, full-text index systems that index every word in a
document are the foundation of powerful search engines, such as Google, and are beingexploited to a higher level in extracting meaning automatically in some experimental systems.
It is true that basic automatic indexing systems are unable to provide index terms that are notexplicitly represented in the text; for this reason, automatic indexing is not a replacement formanual indexing as much as it is a very fast and powerful supplement for it.¥The VCF appears to lack broad automatic notification of changes that are made.  Case
owners are made aware when documents are added to a case file, but no other parties arenotified.  In an environment in which many people (investigators and analysts) may use a case

file, such lack of notification places a large burden on those users to check the contents of thecase file periodically.  They will waste time in checking a file that has not been altered and lose
currency between the point of update and their access to the file.  Lack of notification is thus an

inhibitor of collaboration.¥The VCF appears to lack useful capabilities such as bookmarking, favorites, or historyfeatures for an individual user.  Without such features (commonly available on most Internet

browsers), users are poorly equipped to remember where they are or where they saw interest-ing information.  This fact is particularly significant when the volumes of information with
which one is working are large.  Such capabilities would be useful now, but will be expected

by any user in the future.¥The VCF appears to be weak in its ability to sort data.  The ability to sort columns of
names or dates or other such information is quite valuable when one has only a vague memory
of a name or a date associated with it.  For example, a user may remember that a document
was from the June 2001 time frame.  If the system does not allow a sort by date, the user is
forced to search explicitly for all documents dated June 2001.  This does not appear to be a

drawback, until one realizes that his memory may be incorrect, and in fact the documentappeared on May 31.  By arranging the entries according to date, the user can rapidly scan
both sides of the putative date index, and the negative impact on information retrieval of
errors in recollection can be reduced.prove useful to another agent or to another case, and procedures may need to be changed to accommodate a different sharingarrangement.  Other examples might be the need to cope with shifting organizational structure and roles, or with new missions
and legislation or regulation.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IT-RELATED ISSUES FOR THE FBI REQUIRING IMMEDIATE ACTION29¥The VCF interface presented to the committee was inconvenient in some respects.  For
example, the committee saw no evidence that hot links to organizational and user informationwere provided, even though such information could be supplied easily.  To increase the VCF
Õsconvenience, a case file should have listings of everyone who accesses the file and should
provide online contact information about those users to facilitate contact.One might draw an analogy between the VCF and ÒblogsÓ (i.e., Web logs).  Today, mem-
bers of the Internet community often use blogs to observe and comment on some theme, or todiscuss various topics.  The VCF captures observations about a case, and may include a
commentary describing the investigatorÕs reasoning.  Some blogs support cross-referencing
and commentary by contributors other than the primary author.  The VCF, particularly whenseen through an analytic lens, might benefit from richer discussion and content, dynamiccross-referencing of cases, and external commentary on the reasoning behind a case or cross-
references.  The culture of blogs and the technology to support them may provide a rich source
of external ideas for the future functionality of the VCF, as well as commercial technology forfuture implementations.  An example is the Really Simple Syndication protocol used with

blogs to notify interested parties of changes, thereby eliminating the need to constantly revisita blog to understand what has changed.All of the above issues can be addressed in subsequent releases of the VCF.  A more staged
rollout of the VCF would likely have resulted in more focus being put on these and other still-to-be-identified shortcomings.  The VCF will certainly require ongoing multiple releases, and
it is essential that the FBI substantially enhance its capabilities in design and implementation
for these ongoing investments.2.2.2Data Management and the Integrated Data Warehouse (IDW)
The FBI has a tremendous quantity of data, most of which comes from its investigativeprocesses.  This data must be organized and managed in a way optimized to promote the
effectiveness of the bureauÕs agents and intelligence analysts.  Access capabilities required for
intelligence analysis to determine possible events in the future often differ greatly from the
access capabilities required for reliable case records management, which has the mission oforganizing and retaining information to meet rules-of-evidence requirements.  Accordingly,
because it need not follow rules of evidence, the intelligence process may have different trust
models governing browsing of information.Thus, the information requirements of the investigative and the intelligence missions ofthe bureau are very likely to require very different work processes and information access.  It

is very likely (nearly certain) that different data models will be required in order to provideefficient support for these separate missions.  Furthermore, each mission of the bureau has
unique constraints for access to the information and will require different security models and
different tradeoffs between security and accessibility.  Implementation of these models is
likely to show that distinct systems, with overlapping contents and interface engines to managedata sharing and inter-organization handoffs, will be needed to assure manageability in the
presence of conflicting constraints.The Integrated Data Warehouse (IDW) will serve as a repository to store external datafrom a variety of sources that come into the agency at different frequencies, such as criminalA Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30A REVIEW OF THE FBIÕS TRILOGY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION PROGRAMinformation from other government agencies and visa data.16  The IDW will remain separate
from the VCF but will replicate much of the data in the VCF.  With proper security and sharing
rules placed on the data, the IDW is intended to allow teams of analysts and agents to runqueries horizontally across the data, and to share subsets of the data with other government
agencies.17According to briefings to the committee, the IDW is intended to be a resource for intelli-gence efforts (among other roles), and to be used by FBI analysts and shared with other
intelligence agencies.  For such analyses data from non-FBI-sources will have to be included in
the IDW.These briefings also suggested that data modeling efforts for the criminal investigationmission were just getting started.  Further, the data models of the IDW presented to the
committee (and the VCF for that matter) were far too abstract to be very useful, though thepresentation from the intelligence side recognized that there were differences in need between
the investigative and intelligence analysis functions.18Three examples will suffice to illustrate a disconnect that needs to be resolved between thedata models as described to the committee and operational needs:¥Presentations to the committee raised the issue of data currency.  That is, intelligence
analysts seemed to expect to have access to live databases containing the most current infor-
mation, while the design of the FBIÕs data warehouse incorporated copies of production data-bases.  If the warehouse is intended to contain copies, the issue is raised concerning the
frequency at which the warehouse copies are refreshed from production databases.¥The IDW appeared to have been designed to overwrite old copies of databases withnewer copies, so data can be there one day and not the next (that is, the IDW is not equippedto handle time-series of versioned data).  While having only the most recent copy of data may

be appropriate for the purposes of an investigation (presuming the most recent copy is themost accurate and reliable), this assumption is almost certainly not valid for intelligence purposes.16The committee notes that the IDW acronym itself is subject to some confusion.  Director Mueller has made reference in
congressional testimony to an ÒIntegrated [italics from the committee] Data Warehouse [that] will link 31 FBI databases for single-
portal searches and data mining.Ó  The DOJ inspector general report states that 
Òthe FBI expects to use the network to transportthe Investigative [italics from the committee] Data Warehouse, which will link 31 FBI databases for single-portal searches and data
mining,Ó and the FBI briefed the committee on IDW referring to the 
ÒInvestigative Data Warehouse.Ó  Whether this inconsistent
use of the acronym is inconsequential or reflects a deeper confusion within the FBI about the purview of data to be contained inthe IDW remains to be seen.  For Mueller
Õs testimony, see http://www.fbi.gov/congress/congress03/mueller032703.htm; forthe DOJ IG report, see http://www.usdoj.gov/oig/audit/FBI/0336/exec.htm.17Robert S. Mueller III, ÒCongressional Statement on Federal Bureau of InvestigationÕs Fiscal Year 2004 Budget,Ó House
Appropriations Committee, Subcommittee on the Departments of Commerce, Justice, and State, the Judiciary and RelatedAgencies, March 27, 2003, available at http://www.fbi.gov/congress/congress03/mueller032703.htm.18Data models are generally used by system architects and designers in an iterative refinement process that starts with aconceptual data model, which deals with the key business concepts of the database, and then proceeds to a logical data model,which allows designers to reason about the primary relationships among the key data tables and elements, and then finally endsup with a physical data model, which documents the database implementation details.  Modern computer-aided software

engineering tools often facilitate the refinement process, reducing the labor required to construct and manage the three levels of
model.  Rather than include any specific recommendations about data modeling, the committee notes that the FBI
Õs enterprisearchitecture effort should identify a data modeling framework to be used by developers and implementers.  An essential element

of data modeling is a data dictionary, which defines the basic structure and organization for the database with which it isassociated.  The construction of data dictionaries for the various databases is an essential prerequisite for sharing data betw
eendatabases.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IT-RELATED ISSUES FOR THE FBI REQUIRING IMMEDIATE ACTION31¥Some of what was presented when the committee asked about data models were notdata models at all, but rather hierarchical XML descriptions of various criminal justice docu-ments (e.g., arrest forms, booking reports, sentence orders, and so on).To illustrate what a high-level enterprise perspective on data management might entail,consider that IT systems for the FBI must serve multiple operational functions.  From the
committeeÕs perspective, the major classes of data are data to be kept in:¥The active case records used by the field agentsÑthese are to be served by the VCFsystem under development.¥A broad-based data warehouse to serve intelligence tasks now assigned to the FBIÑthese were served by the SCOPE prototype demonstration and are to be served by the IDWfollow-up projects.¥A reliable repository of record that will provide a formal backup source for prosecutionof criminal cases, intelligence investigations, and internal audits.  It is restricted to holding
data for which the FBI is formally responsible.  As such, it will be smaller, less visible, and

more stable than other FBI data systems, will be highly reliable and capable of becoming theFBIÕs replacement for paper documentation, and will spare other FBI IT systems some of themore stringent requirements that can inhibit their operation.¥A wide variety of management and administrative databases for personnel, capital andregistered item inventory, evidence tracking and inventory, and so on, to allow FBI head-quarters to carry out its responsibilities.Data in each of these classes are not entirely independent of each other, and thus applica-tions to manage these types of data must have linkages among them.  (For example, informa-

tion related to a given legal discovery motion or Freedom of Information Act request may becontained across these different types.)  In addition, there may well be linkages to data
contained in databases operated by other agencies (e.g., data supporting FBI intelligence tasks
may well originate in databases operated by the CIA).  However, the fact that the applications
must have linkages among them does not mean that the databases must be co-located orshould be managed by the same staff under the same access rulesÑa point especially likely toapply to data-linking connections to intelligence agencies.To understand fully the high-level requirements for these applications, their objectivesmust be made explicit.  Based on what it learned from the FBI about its data handling needs,

the committee infers the following list of objectives for systems that handle each major class ofdata described above.The VCF should:1a.Serve the field agents and their supporting analysts, wherever they are, in tasks of
information collection and analyzing the collected information on their cases.1b.Be available 24/7.
1c.Allow convenient upgrading of services as needed by the agents and enabled by technology.

1d.Provide linkages to data in the IDW and other FBI databases, and allow insertion of
records from other sources that have been determined to be pertinent to a case by theresponsible agent and his/her supervisor.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32A REVIEW OF THE FBIÕS TRILOGY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION PROGRAM1e.Purge closed cases, but keep track of them for analysis purposes.
1f.Keep all the information secure vis-
‹-vis outsiders (i.e., outside the FBI).1g.Keep some elements secure vis-
‹-vis most FBI personnel.1h.Be flexible enough to accommodate changes in operational processes that may be
made in the future.1i.Resist tampering with records.
1j.Support an appropriate degree of auditing when information is entered or changed.

1k.Support audits for system use (a security measure).  (System use refers to read access,
write access, and search results.)The IDW should:2a.Serve broad intelligence functions of agents and analysts.
2b.Acquire, integrate, and store data from other sources of potential relevance for broader
analyses, such as sources from the Department of State, Immigrations and CustomsEnforcement, and foreign sources.2c.Allow mining of information that is not (yet) related to a specific case within the time
that might be needed to mobilize a team to respond to an incident (say, within 20min-
utes).  (This time appears to be an achievable goal with current technology for obtain-

ing and integrating data from known remote sources.)2d.Have the capability to store tentative conclusions, and to purge such information if it
is determined to be misleading.2e.Be flexible to support an increasing variety of data mining and analysis tools to be
installed as they are found to be useful.2f.Protect its content so that it is secure vis-
‹-vis outsiders and unauthorized insiders orturncoat insiders.2g.Not contain information that would be forbidden to any FBI personnel.
2h.Support an appropriate degree of auditing when information is entered or changed.

2i.Support audits for system use (a security measure).  (System use refers to read access,
write access, and search results.)The repository of record should:3a.Serve broad intelligence functions of agents and specialized, authorized personnel,
including internal audits.3b.Serve legally required documentary archival storage requirements, with complete
audit trails, primarily to provide backup for cases under prosecution or review,

including sensitive information that would be unwise to have available within systemsthat allow broader access.3c.Maintain extremely high reliability and integrity, even at the expense of 24/7 avail-
ability and flexibility.3d.Be fed primarily from the VCF, and exclude material that is not the responsibility of
the FBI.3e.Support tools used solely for records management and not for investigation or analysis.
(That is, only tools for records management should be run against the data in theA Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IT-RELATED ISSUES FOR THE FBI REQUIRING IMMEDIATE ACTION33repository of record, though the contents of the repository of record may be an inputto a larger pool of data that can be analyzed with arbitrary tools.  Thus, the data
models of the repository of record should be developed in a way that anticipates thisuse/interface.)3f.Be reorganized only rarely.
3g.Not be used as a working resource by FBI personnel.
3h.Be maintained at a very high level of security.

3i.Support appending of contents rather than record purges for updates.
3j.Resist tampering with records.
3k.Support an appropriate degree of auditing when information is entered.

3l.Support audits for system use (a security measure).  (System use refers to read and
write access.)Administrative databases should:4a.Serve a variety of FBI management and administrative functions.
4b.Be maintained and updated primarily by FBI personnel at headquarters.
4c.Be accessible to field personnel for determining the location of their colleagues,
resources, and equipment.4d.Manage the operational security issues associated with making such data available
(in 4c).4e.Be available at close to a 24/7 schedule, although updating of information may be
constrained to business hours.4f.Be secure vis-
‹-vis outsiders.4g.Not contain information that would be forbidden to any FBI personnel.

4h.Evolve to align with Department of Justice standards for administrative support sys-
tems (e.g., finance, e-mail).4i.Support an appropriate degree of auditing when information is entered.
The FBI may disagree with this listing of essential objectives, which the committee hascreated based on limited knowledge and in the absence of an FBI enterprise architecture.
Agreement in detail is unimportant, but the FBI must develop its own list of essential objec-tives, including priorities, tradeoffs, and explicit analyses, based on its own understanding ofits essential operational processes and how it expects to use these databases.  In any event, the

diversity of requirements makes it clear that these storage applications must be implementedin separate systems, and that different policies will be needed to ensure the proper balance ofaccessibility, security, availability, and reliability.It is likely that there will be a fair amount of duplication of contents in these databases.However, the cost of replicated storage is less than the cost of the manpower needed tomaintain a single complex system with multiple and potentially contradictory objectives.
Replication also mitigates some security problems, such as denial-of-service attacks (see Sec-tion 2.2.5).  With multiple copies, there is also a significant probability of inconsistent or out-
of-synch information.  This is especially true with information that can change over time.

Cleaning and validating information will become a separate process unto itself.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34A REVIEW OF THE FBIÕS TRILOGY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION PROGRAMThe IDW has a broad role, and correspondingly broad objectives and access needs.19  The
committee understands the intent behind the broad access needs of the IDW and other systemsfor managing operationally relevant data, but from a pragmatic standpoint, it will be difficult todesign a single system to meet these access needs while still retaining necessary security measures.Consider, for example, the statement that Òthe ownership of FBI information is corporate; noindividual division or employee ÔownsÕ FBI information.
Ó  Such a principle is attractive, for entirely
understandable reasons.  But the agents who collect the data will undoubtedly be concerned

about maintaining control over data distribution and protection of sources and methods.Today, these issues are managed through informal information-sharing networks of agentsand analysts that operate not only on the basis of formal access control provisions such as level
of security classification but also on personal knowledge and trust of the individuals involved.Information management systems that do not provide these agents with some control overthe release of certain kinds of information may increase the likelihood that important informa-
tion may not be entered at all.  Agents or other information collectors may be inclined to keep
two sets of recordsÑone for official use and one for more sensitive information, allowing themto maintain control over the disposition of sensitive information.This record-keeping challenge, whether based on realistic concerns or perception, is unlikelyto be overcome by fiat.  That is, a directive that agents and other collectors record officially allinformation, regardless of the sensitivity of its source, is likely to be quietly disregarded in
many instances.  Such disregard would not necessarily be gratuitous, but rather an entirely
understandable reaction of collectors in the field who might be reluctant to trust the security oftheir sources to another party.2.2.3SCOPE
The FBI demonstrated the Secure Counterterrorism Operational Prototype Environment(SCOPE) to the committee.  This demonstration illustrated the analytic tool suite with syn-

thetic data.  The analytic tools were based on commercially available products that included
support for data visualization, relationship analysis, and automated language translation.Because this demonstration was not done using operational data or the Trilogy network, the
committee cannot comment on the performance or scalability of this approach.19For example, a July 2003 draft Integrated Information Sharing Plan lists the following eight guiding principles that the FBIexpects to apply to its information-sharing strategy.¥All FBI data is to be shared within the FBI, with very few exceptions.¥The ownership of FBI information is corporate; no individual division or employee ÒownsÓ FBI information.
¥The FBI will have a single, integrated information space, in which the default will be to share with agencies with dueconsideration for the protection of sources and methods, and the security and prosecutive objectives of investigations.¥The FBI will not filter information internally but instead will create an overarching FBI-wide policy that balances the needfor cross-correlation with the risks of misuse.¥The view of what the FBI collects and what the FBI creates will look very similar.¥All data collected must also be recorded, searchable, retrievable, and easily cross-correlated.¥FBI employees will have the ability to conduct federated queries across multiple systems to identify relationships.¥Technology will be in service of people instead of people in service of technology.  The FBI must have interconnectivity with
Intelligence Community systems.  Additionally, the FBI must leverage existing technologies instead of rebuilding them.
The committee did not review this draft plan.  The text above is contained in a DOJ Office of the Inspector General report, 
TheFederal Bureau of InvestigationÕs Efforts to Improve the Sharing of Intelligence and Other Information, Report No. 04-10, December 2003,available at http://www.usdoj.gov/oig/audit/FBI/0410/findings2.htm.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IT-RELATED ISSUES FOR THE FBI REQUIRING IMMEDIATE ACTION35The committee believes that the FBI has an important opportunity with SCOPE.  Here, the
FBI is not burdened by a legacy of analytic tools and data models.  It has a unique opportunity
to assemble and integrate the most promising analytic ideas and tools.  A well-conceptualized
enterprise architecture and data models are critical to successfully exploiting this opportunity
and creating an environment that can incorporate the best analytic ideas and products overtime.  (This point reinforces the immediate need to develop and understand the data models
and the workflow.)The FBIÕs use of commercial products is laudable.  This willingness to look beyond conven-
tional sources for the best available ideas can provide the FBI with an analytic advantage.  The
commercial market for such tools is being driven by much broader trends than just counter-
terrorism.  These trends include the private sector
Õs desire to analyze and support market data,and the increasing globalization of markets.  By harnessing the commercial market for analytic
tools, the FBI can gain access to far more creativity than it could ever capture with internally
developed tools.Commercial products can also be expected to incorporate the best practices in human-computer interfaces.  Even if the FBI does not use commercial tools, it should study their

human-computer interfaces and incorporate the best ideas into the tools it develops internally.An approach rooted in commercial products does not rule out one-of-a-kind tools that areinternally developed.2.2.4Mobile Computing
The FBIÕs interest in wireless data communications appears to be driven primarily byoperational continuity considerations.  For the most part, the FBI
Õs experience with wirelessdata communications has been through personal digital assistants (PDAs) used by a smallnumber of senior leaders.  Anecdotal reports suggest these individuals have found that wire-
less data communications enhance the conduct and accelerate the pace of day-to-day business.To make further progress in this area, the FBI is planning a trial of PDAs at a field office.Such a trial can be the basis for establishing a baseline characterization of agent and otheractivities in that office to understand if the deployment of PDAs has any impact.  Thinking

about how to create a baseline characterization of office activities, which in the future mightinvolve mobile computing platforms such as PDAs or laptop/tablet computers, can also con-tribute to quantifying an officeÕs implementation of the FBIÕs operational processes that are thecritical input to the FBIÕs enterprise architecture.  The planning and results of this trial shouldbe coordinated with the FBIÕs enterprise architecture efforts.2.2.5Security
Loosely speaking, the security of an information system or network refers to its ability tocontinue to support authorized parties when it is under attack and its ability to resist theefforts of unauthorized parties to compromise its operation or data.  For this report, it is

helpful to conceptualize security issues along two dimensionsÑthose that arise from thedisconnect between the FBIÕs operational mission needs and its enterprise architecture, andthose that arise from inadequate thought about the implementation of whatever security
policy is adopted.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36A REVIEW OF THE FBIÕS TRILOGY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION PROGRAMThe disconnect between the FBIÕs operational mission needs and enterprise architecture isreflected in the FBIÕs expression to the committee of a philosophy of zero tolerance for securityrisk, seeking not to manage risk but to avoid it.  Given that the FBI
Õs information systems areprime targets for criminals, espionage organizations, saboteurs, and terrorists (some possessing
significant technical and human resources), the sentiments underlying this view are quiteunderstandable.  Nevertheless, the only approach that truly provides 
zero risk is one thatdestroys all information as soon as it is collected or that otherwise makes information entirely
inaccessible to anyone.A zero tolerance for security risk is doubly problematic in an environment in which infor-mation must be shared.  There is a deep and unavoidable tension between information sharing

and information security, and while there are mechanisms that allow design architects tomitigate this tension (a matter of implementation discussed below), some tensions areunavoidable, and at some point the senior leadership must decide what degree of security risk
is acceptable and under what circumstances in return for the advantages of broad-basedinformation sharing.For example, it is the committeeÕs understanding that agents and intelligence analysts arenot routinely provided with Internet access for security reasons.  It is certainly true that a lack
of Internet access will prevent Internet-based security compromises, but it also impedes theuse of the Internet to search for potentially valuable publicly available information.  (For

example, FBI agents assigned to field divisions without Internet access must go to publiclibraries to search the Internet, and must use various commercial e-mail accounts.)  This is a
reasonable policy only under the implicit assumption that publicly available information is
not useful in either intelligence or investigationÑand this assumption is simply not tenable forthe counterterrorism mission.Furthermore, isolating FBI staff from the Internet precludes their being educated by casualexposure to the best new ideas and tools emerging in the global Internet community.  While
there are individuals with deep expertise, often gained by dedicated people spending theirown time and money, and there are specific provisions for controlled access to the Internet,
there is no substitute for the institutional and cultural impact of broad availability of Internetaccess to all FBI staff.Another important issue with profound consequences for security is raised by the attemptto make a single physical IT infrastructure serve the needs of both intelligence analysts andlaw enforcement investigators.  Much intelligence information is classified, with rigid security
requirements imposed by legal and national policy.  However, much of the data related to

investigations is unclassified (sensitive but unclassified (SBU) or law-enforcement sensitive).Devising technologies and policies to manage both kinds of data under one rubric is thuspotentially contradictory, unless one is willing to accept the severe operational penalties of
treating unclassified information (SBU or law-enforcement sensitive) as classified.Intelligence analysts also have a need for relatively unfettered ÒbrowsingÓ through infor-
mation.  However, sensitive information (e.g., identities of informants) can be derived or

deduced from aggregation and inference from large amounts of apparently unrelated data.There are ways to manage these tensions, such as allowing intelligence analysts access toÒpointersÓ to protected internal information rather than the information itself, so that the
analyst can make a direct request for access to the party responsible for protecting that infor-mation.  In the area of unclassified versus classified data, it would help to attempt to balance
the threat of misuse or inappropriate access against the benefits of allowing more use, e.g., byA Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IT-RELATED ISSUES FOR THE FBI REQUIRING IMMEDIATE ACTION37remote agent access in the field; this process is known as a risk management assessment.Nevertheless, the tension cannot be eliminated, and only the FBIÕs senior operational manage-ment is in a position to judge how this tension should be resolved.A third security tradeoff will manifest itself when mobile computing becomes an issue.The value of mobile computing is likely to be high, but mobile computing is inherently morevulnerable than office-based computing, and the senior operational leadership will have todecide if the increased security risks are worth the added operational flexibility.  Empirical

data and a formal evaluation process for mobile computing would be useful inputs to theleadership.  The FBI
Õs PDA experiment will help the leadership to think through how todifferentiate and measure communications that involve classified information, SBU informa-
tion, and unclassified information, each of which has different security requirements.In the absence of any specific information on the subject but based on previous experience,the committee suspects that a significant fraction of, if not most, FBI data communications
traffic need not be carried at the classified level.  If the measurements associated with a PDA
trial support this conjecture, the FBI may be in position to take advantage of wireless datacommunications in designing an infrastructure, systems, and processes to implement its enter-
prise architecture.  Such systems and policies could differentiate between SBU and unclassified
communication, handle them differently, and significantly improve FBI metrics for efficiencyand effectiveness.  If this conjecture turns out to be true, the FBI would also have to establish

a clear policy governing SBU communications.The committee is also concerned about a number of security issues related to implementa-tion.  These include:
¥The use of passwords for authentication.  The weaknesses of passwords as an authentication
mechanism are well known (e.g., they are easily compromised without the ownerÕs knowl-edge),20 and yet no thought seemed to have been given to alternatives.
¥The lack of consistent security models between the IDW and the VCF.  In particular, this
inconsistency suggested that searches of data contained in the VCF from the data warehouse
side would not be made visible to case owners.  Moreover, as long as security mechanisms
only provide access control, and do not log the information that is accessed, then misuse ofsystems by authorized users will not be visible until the information turns up in the wrong
places.  (And, of course, logs must be reviewed regularly by automated log analysis tools
supporting human analysts.)¥The operating system monoculture.  The Trilogy IT modernization put into place a single
operating system environment, and the security vulnerabilities of an operating system mono-culture are well known.21  Such an environment carries with it the risk that a single exploit,
such as a worm or virus, can result in global failure of the Trilogy network.22  The technology20See, for example, Department of Defense, Password Management Guidelines, April 12, 1985, available at http://www.radium.ncsc.mil/tpep/library/rainbow/CSC-STD-002-85.html.21National Research Council, Cybersecurity Today and Tomorrow: Pay Now or Pay Later, Computer Science and TelecommunicationsBoard, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 2002.22Note also that security risks may be especially great during a time of transition between old and new systems.  The reason isthat anomalous system behavior can have multiple causes, and may reflect operator inexperience, inherent system bugs, oradversary-planted exploitation.  Uncertainty about the actual cause may lead to inaction for a longer period of time than would
be the case during normal operation.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38A REVIEW OF THE FBIÕS TRILOGY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION PROGRAMdeployment plan relies on isolation from the Internet and diligent network monitoring andresponse to protect against such problems.  But neither of these approaches, taken singly or in
combination, can eliminate the risk of catastrophic failure, and recent worm/virus experiencehas shown that self-propagating, malicious code can enter isolated networks through an
unwitting laptop user connecting to the isolated network after having been connected to, andinfected through, the Internet.  Furthermore, the propagation speed of modern worm/virus
code is sufficiently rapid to overwhelm any monitoring and response center staffed by humans.¥Seemingly inadequate contingency plans for operating under attack.  A basic principle of
managing a critical operational network is that plans for maintaining operation in the face of acompromised element must be made in advance.ÑHow are nodes in the network protected against other nodes that may have beencompromised?  Rather than a simple perimeter defense, a principle of mutual suspicion
should apply that does not allow an attacker who has breached the perimeter to have free
access to the entire network.23ÑHow will the FBIÕs public-key infrastructure be managed in the face of an insider threat?ÑHow will key revocation be handled?  Emergency re-keying?  Access overrides (i.e.,how will authorized parties obtain access if access tokens and/or information are lost?)ÑHow will worms and viruses be purged from the system if they are introduced?ÑHow will the network respond to a denial-of-service (DOS) attack?  There are manydifferent flavors of DOS attacks, ranging from a deliberate attack on the inside of thenetwork to an attack occurring on the ÒoutsideÓ of the network that merely consumes
bandwidth and degrades the performance of the public links that carry the virtual private
networks of the FBI.¥Missing or incomplete validation of a security architecture, which the committee inferred onthe basis of presentations to it.  Specifically, the FBI did not provide to the committee evidence

that it had validated:ÑThe putative design principle for security, which seemed to be characterized by anapproach of Òbuild to DISA (Defense Information Systems Agency) gold standard andback off until tools work.ÓÑThe model of the threat that faces the FBIÕs IT systems.  (Note that a threat model
must include threats emanating from both inside and outside the organization.)ÑThe use of the electronic key management system developed by the National SecurityAgency (NSA) in the context of the specific needs of the FBI.In each of these cases (the design principle, the threat model, the use of the NSA electronickey management system), the approach may be plausible and ultimately desirable.  But a
process of systematic validation is necessary before those conclusions can be drawn.  More
generally, a security architecture is based on an understanding of the data flows in the organi-
zation (derived from the enterprise architecture).  Based on these data flows, the databases
that need to be isolated are identified.  When necessary, controlled interfaces between isolated
and non-isolated databases are also identified.  These interfaces are then mapped onto the

physical network configuration to decide what links/nodes must be encrypted, physicallyprotected, or both.  Lastly, the security architecture requires both a plan for managing encryption
keys and a vulnerability assessment (i.e., a paper attack on the paper architecture).23To illustrate, this principle might call for the use of firewalls on every node of the network and anti-virus protection runningcontinuously on all computers connected to the network to mitigate denial-of-service or intrusion risks.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IT-RELATED ISSUES FOR THE FBI REQUIRING IMMEDIATE ACTION39¥Potentially inadequate proactive counterintelligence against inappropriately trusted insiders.As the Robert Hanssen case illustrates, security must be maintained against deliberateexfiltration of sensitive or classified information.  Counterintelligence tools for this problem
include logging of access, analysis of logs, and possibly filtering of outgoing information.
Note also that notifying the owner of a sensitive information item that some other party hasaccessed that information is a potentially powerful way of raising red flags.¥Potentially inadequate security of hardware and software implementation.  When hardware is
deployed and software is written by outside contractors, there are greater risks that hostileparties working for the contractors may seek to insert trapdoors and other ways of bypassingsecurity in the systems being deployed.  As a general rule, these risks can be managed, but the

weakness of the FBIÕs contract management abilities may mean that the FBIÕs efforts in thisarea are not up to par (e.g., as with Defense Department special access projects).  The same
considerations apply to commercially acquired infrastructure software.  Though it might be

difficult for an attacker to compromise a component of such software, the possibility cannot beruled out.  Moreover, even security patches and upgrades are not always guaranteed to workproperly, which means that installation of such upgrades cannot be undertaken blindly or
without explicit thought from IT-savvy managers.2.2.6Privacy
As part of the FBIÕs briefings to the committee, the FBIÕs privacy office addressed thecommittee, from which the committee concluded that the FBI did have some sensitivity tosome of the relevant privacy issues.  However, the committee has not undertaken a compre-
hensive study of protection of individual and corporate privacy in the context of the FBIÕs ITmodernization program, and thus the comments below can only suggest some of the issuesthat may be involved.¥The FBI must proceed with great sensitivity to privacy issues as the counterterrorismmission assumes greater importance, and both substance and perception are important in thisdomain.¥There are many substantive issues associated with privacy.  For example,
ÑThe FBI privacy office seemed to the committee to be geared primarily to protectingpersonally identifiable information from being improperly shared outside the FBI (e.g.,
with contractors), and in the short presentation to the committee, its approaches to thisproblem seemed reasonable.ÑAnother privacy issue not addressed in briefings but of great concern to the privacy-sensitive segment of the public is the protection of the public from the abuse or improperuse of such data by rogue FBI employees acting on their own or through some officialthough perhaps not publicly acknowledged FBI program.  The committee has no comment

on this issue, other than noting that the simple exhortation Òtrust usÓ is not likely to be
reassuring to this segment even if in fact the FBI is doing everything possible to preventsuch abuses from happening.2424Note also that Section 223 of the USA PATRIOT Act allows individuals to recover monetary damages and litigation costsfrom the United States in the event that information or records are willfully and improperly disclosed, a fact that increases theimportance of keeping good records of who is accessing what data and under what circumstances.  In addition, federal employees
found to have improperly disclosed information are also subject to administrative action under the PATRIOT Act.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40A REVIEW OF THE FBIÕS TRILOGY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION PROGRAM¥Perception is at least as important as substance.  That is, a technically well-conceived
privacy protection program solves the substantive problem.  But even with such a program in
place, the FBI must also pay attention to external perceptions, because those are a majorinfluence on the public trust that the FBI must maintain in order to be effective.2.3ENSURING EFFECTIVE MANAGEMENT OF
IT DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATIONThis section addresses a variety of serious management issues in the FBIÕs IT moderniza-tion program.  Issues and problems identified here relate to the management approaches and
processes used by the FBI across the implementation life cycle, including requirements deter-mination, development methodology, contracting and project management, system rollout,
training, evaluation, and metrics of effectiveness.  While the committee
Õs comments regardingimplementation are derived from its consideration of the Trilogy infrastructure and VCFprojects only, the committee believes that dealing systematically with these issues is essential
to success in follow-on efforts such as the IDW and SCOPE.2.3.1Overall Development Methodology
In the committeeÕs judgment, the FBIÕs management approach to the Trilogy moderniza-tion violates a number of basic principles that should govern the development of large systems.Principle 1: Any organization that depends on the continued operation of its IT systems and ismodernizing those systems should plan on the simultaneous operation of both old and new systems forsome period of time, so that failures in the new system do not cripple the organization.Large-scale deployments involving new technology almost always come with problems(e.g., system crashes, unacceptably slow performance), and there is some risk that the problems
will be so severe as to prevent the effective use of the entire system for some period of time.
Accordingly, there must be backup and contingency plans in place that anticipate a widerange of failure conditions.  However, the committee saw little evidence that such plans had
been formalized, and indeed has been informed that the current transition plan does not
envision the availability of the ACS after the cutover to the VCF, even though the hardwaresupporting the ACS is neither being redeployed to support the VCF nor being immediatelydecommissioned.Effective transitions are usually managed gradually.  Even where the transition is abrupt,
maintaining the function of the old system for some period as a fallback option is goodpractice.  Any ACS-to-VCF transition without a backup plan is far too risky for the FBI and for

the nation, especially in light of the FBIÕs myriad and critical operational responsibilities to thenation that will continue during any such transition.The costs of maintaining a fallback plan and a supporting infrastructure are small com-pared to the operational costs associated with large-scale VCF problems.  Moreover, because
the hardware supporting the ACS will not be converted to support the VCF, there is a residualand pragmatic disaster-recovery capability to revert to the ACS.  But contingency plans that

anticipate a continuing if temporary need for the ACS must be made before the transition to
exploit this residual capability, or else the use of the ACS in this contingency mode will suffer.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IT-RELATED ISSUES FOR THE FBI REQUIRING IMMEDIATE ACTION41Expenditures to maintain an infrastructure that can support concurrent use of the ACS and theVCF for a limited transition period would be a worthwhile insurance policy.Principle 2: Any organization undertaking a large-scale IT system development and deployment,but especially an organization without a strong track record in IT development and use, should develop,test, evaluate, and iterate a small-scale prototype before committing itself to an organization-wideprogram.The development methodology for Trilogy seems to be based on a one-way non-iterativeprocess where rigid specifications are generated in advance.  Subsequent changes can then be
argued to be Òspecification changesÓ that open the door for schedule delay and increased
expense.  In truth, it is essentially impossible even for the most operationally experienced
applications developers to be able to anticipate in detail all of the requirements and specifica-
tions in advance.  Therefore, development contracts should not make such an assumption, but
rather should call for an approach to specification of user requirements that is based on aprocess of extensive prototyping and usability testing with real users.25To the best of the committeeÕs knowledge, apart from SCOPE, no prototype has beendeveloped for any of the major components of Trilogy (the Trilogy network or the VCF) or forthe IDW.  As the FBI recognized in developing SCOPE, the advantage of a small-scale proto-

type is that it can be iteratively developed with strong user feedback and involvement, thusincreasing the chances that what is ultimately delivered to the end users meets their needs.This point is relevant to many dimensions of system development, including the functionality
desired in a new application, the convenience and intuitiveness of a user interface, and thenature and mix of the operating load that the system must support under real operationalconditions.In some instances, the intimate involvement of project managers with extensive opera-tional experience can play an important role in some of these dimensions (e.g., defining therequired functionality); indeed, the committee believes that it is the involvement of such an
individual in the development of the VCF that has been responsible for what success it is likelyto have when it is deployed.  Nevertheless, in the end there is no substitute for realism in the
evolution of a prototype.Principle 3: In large-scale system development and deployment, testing should account for as much
as 35 to 50 percent of the project schedule if a successful deployment is to be achieved.Testing is necessary to shake out bugs and flaws in a new system, and flaws will often beinvisible until after actual users deal with actual data.  The 35 to 50 percent figure above is an

experience-based rule of thumb that is widely accepted among those involved with large-scalesystem design.  Moreover, an organization without a strong track record in IT could reason-
ably be expected to require even more time for system testing and integration.  Testing is a
25These comments do not mean that prototyping is a panacea that guarantees success.  While prototyping usually has high
value in developing requirements for user functionality, it produces results that are only as valid as the user group selected forinvolvement.  Furthermore, obtaining realistic results from prototyping exercises requires using real-world data.  Finally,
prototyping is most valuable when understanding user requirements is the task at hand; it is less useful for determining reliabilityand response times for applications that will be deployed on a large scale.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42A REVIEW OF THE FBIÕS TRILOGY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION PROGRAMcritical dimension of system development and deployment requiring a well-developed testingstrategy and a progression from unit testing to full-blown integration testing, and usually callsfor dress rehearsals for system use.The project schedule for completion of Trilogy as it was represented to the committee inOctober 2003 appears to leave inadequate time for testing.  The committee was shown briefing
charts indicating that the FBI allocated less than 10 percent of its schedule for testing, andunder schedule pressure the contractor was trimming that amount even further.  It was also

surprising for the committee not to see, at a very late stage in VCF development, any kind ofrisk-based prioritization for the items remaining to be done.  Instead, these items were lumped
together in the category Òunfixed bugs.ÓTo provide a simple example of the need for testing, it is important to realize that the termÒworksÓ (as in the system 
ÒworksÓ) has a wide spectrum of possible meaning.  Consider a
simple system, consisting of a network transport layer that moves packets and is responsible
for encryption and decryption and an application running on top of it.  Beginning with the
least demanding definition, the expression Òthe system worksÓ can plausibly mean that:
1.The transport layer 
Òlights upÓ but does not move application packets.  Nodes can find
each other, basic protocol functions such as ÒpingÓ work, and bits flow between a
subset of the network and on the whole network.2.Definition (1), and in addition data packets move between a subset of the network and
on the whole network.3.Definition (2), and in addition encryption and decryption are successful between nodes
on a subset of the network and on the whole network.4.Definition (3), and in addition the transport layer can move application packets under
simulated ÒrealisticÓ load between nodes on a subset of the network and on the wholenetwork.5.Definition (4), and in addition users in different locations can use the application to
pass the appropriate information among each other.6.Definition (5), and in addition the system functions with actual users using actual data.
7.Definition (6) with realistic numbers of users and the full complement of files.
8.Definition (7) with some reasonable assurance of the overall security of the applica-
tions, as opposed to the encrypted transport of bits alone.In the absence of a clearly specified test plan that is acceptable to all users, it is possible tomake a claim that the system ÒworksÓ according to any of these definitions, even though the
point of failure in the development of many systems is encountered when they are required tocontinue to function under load.  It is unclear for Trilogy which definition of 
ÒworkingÓ is
being used by those claiming that a system is working.  In the case of the Trilogy infrastructure
network, the VCF application is not yet available, and so it is clear that the higher levels offunctionality (definition (5) and above) have not yet been attained.2.3.2Contracting and Contract Management
Both key contracts for Trilogy (Trilogy infrastructure and the VCF) were awarded on a costplus/cost reimbursable basis.  Only optional 
ÒtoolsÓ were awarded on a fixed-price basis.
While the task orders (T0001AJM026 and T001AJM028) for both phases of the Trilogy programA Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IT-RELATED ISSUES FOR THE FBI REQUIRING IMMEDIATE ACTION43detail the firm fixed price to eight or nine significant figures, the task order schedules werealmost totally lacking in specifications and a commitment to checkpoints.  For example, the
documents list a large number of plans to be created, with dates ÒTBD.Ó  (The committee
believes that one reason underlying the lack of detail in these critical documents is that the
underlying architectural work has not been done.  In the absence of such architectural work,
system specifications are hard to develop with any coherence.)  Under these circumstances,
effective program and contract management becomes essentially impossible.  This weakness,

aggravated by turnover among key FBI staff (e.g., the FBI chief information officer), makes itunsurprising that Trilogy is significantly behind schedule and over budget.To illustrate some of the problems with contract management, the FBI told the committeethat the Trilogy network had been made operational on March 28, 2003, only because FBIpersonnel in the program office were pressed into overtime service to compensate whencontractors failed to meet commitments.  While such efforts point to the FBI
Õs admirablededication to duty, the need for the program office to stand in for a contractor is a sign ofcontractor failure.  If these 
Òabove and beyondÓ efforts of FBI staff could be converted into
penalties for (or dismissals of) the contractors, it would send a very positive signal that the FBI
program office is becoming serious about contract management.For a contract of this magnitude and importance to the FBI and to the United States, it isimperative that senior management of the FBI monitor contractor progress closely and step in
when necessary to forestall difficulties seen down the road, although day-to-day involvementis not necessary.  Senior-level contract managers, experienced and empowered, should be
assigned for the duration of the project, and should provide periodic actionable status infor-
mation to FBI senior management.  In briefings, it appeared to the committee that contractorsmay be viewing this project as governmental Òbusiness as usual,Ó without due regard to the
critical importance and congressional visibility of TrilogyÕs success or failure.  Clear and
detailed schedules with intermediate milestones, earned-value metrics, and severe penaltiesfor missed delivery dates and missing functionality are desperately needed.2.3.3Program Management
In the committeeÕs judgment, the FBIÕs program management of its IT projects is weak, andhas been weak for over a year (based on the individual observations of many of the committeemembers who participated in the September 2002 meeting).  Weak program management

leads to a reactive mode in dealing with issues and a lack of overall project control.  Continued
cost overruns and delays often result from a lack of effective program management.  By
contrast, effective program management with effective management of costs and proactively
managed IT projects significantly increases the likelihood of success.For the committee, one of the most serious issues is that many essential tasks have beenoutsourced to vendors (e.g., development of data models and architectures).  In essence, the

FBI has left the task of defining and identifying its essential operational processes and its ITconcept of operations to outsiders.  This is not to say that outside contractors should have no
role at all in these tasks, but rather that it should be the FBI, not the contractors, that defines
and drives the process.A small but telling example of the FBIÕs dependence on contractors is that the FBI reportedno contract provisions calling for the escrow of source code for the applications.  Escrow calls
for the deposit of source code files and appropriate documentation with a mutually trustedA Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44A REVIEW OF THE FBIÕS TRILOGY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION PROGRAMthird party during and after the completion of the contract.  In the event that the vendor
becomes unable or unwilling to continue to provide service to the FBI (e.g., the developer mustbe replaced because of poor performance, or the developer goes bankrupt), the source code isreleased to the FBI so that it can seek another vendor to assume the first vendorÕs responsibili-ties.  Source code escrow is a common, even routine, commercial practice.
Program management is a well-understood discipline and set of processes.  A strong
program management function must be established and supported by FBI management at all
levels to provide appropriate oversight and management of FBI IT projects.  An effective
program management function will provide the FBI with a focal point for monitoring andcollecting project data and allow for the reporting of the progress of active IT projects based on
well-defined metrics.  (Note that program management entails a set of skills and background
different from those associated with operational experience in doing investigation or intelli-gence analysis.  That is, a single individual may have strong program management skills and

extensive operational experience, and arguably a Òprogram managerÓ ought to have both
qualities, but there is no a priori reason to expect that someone with the former will necessarilyhave the latter.  In any event, a program manager should at least have access to both sets of

expertise.)For program managers to be effective, they must participate deeply in the negotiation ofcontracts with outside vendors.  The contracts must include performance measures for key

deliverables, milestones, and service levels with penalties and escalation procedures.  Contracts
should ensure that the vendor suffers severe penalties if it is not meeting the performancemeasures, and major vendor failure should result in a penalty that allows the FBI to transition
to a new vendor with little or no financial impact to the FBI.Program managers are responsible for validating, monitoring, supporting, and assisting inthe area of project and life-cycle costs.  They may also supply information that can alter project

priorities, based on resource availability or interdependent project conflicts.  Most important,
program managers are responsible for implementing an appropriate methodology for projectmanagement, including at least the following:¥Establishing a framework for all project communications, reporting, procedural, andcontractual activity;¥Developing task-specific project plans with timelines, critical paths, and specific deliverables;¥Conducting project team meetings, setting schedules and agendas, and managing themeetings;¥Monitoring milestones and deliverables and ensuring tracking to timelines;¥Providing project status updates to key stakeholders;¥Identifying deviations from plan and addressing issues on a timely basis for resolution;¥Managing project budgets; and¥Creating an environment where the project team can succeed.An important point is that effective program management generally requires close andfrequent interactions between managers and the project team and among team members.Besides well-trained staff, the team also needs an environment that facilitates working effec-
tively, such as proximity of offices, meeting spaces, and areas in which information can bepassed informally over lunch or in a chance hallway encounter rather than relying only onA Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IT-RELATED ISSUES FOR THE FBI REQUIRING IMMEDIATE ACTION45formal channels of communication such as e-mail, phone calls, voice mail, teleconferencing,and meetings of high-level managers.26A particularly useful management tool is a project charter.  The charter includes detailed
project requirements, resources, and the related roles of the project team, along with identified
milestones and deliverables.  Risk, issue and scope management, and communication plans
are included.The project charter is designed to do several important things.  The charter should:
¥Facilitate communication among stakeholders.¥Document approved purpose, scope, objectives, cost, and schedule baselines.¥Document the agreement between groups.¥Define roles and responsibilities inclusive of the overall project governance.¥Document planning assumptions and decisions.¥Provide the baseline for scope and expectation management.In effect, the charter establishes a baseline of understanding among all stakeholders andespecially between the project manager and the project sponsor(s), business owner(s), andvendor(s).  The success of the project may be measured against this charter.  Just as impor-
tantly, any changes must reference the charter.2.4ENSURING THE GROWTH OF FBI IT EXPERTISE AND
DEALING WITH EXTERNAL FACTORSThe FBI recognizes, and the committee agrees, that the FBI is severely lacking in many ofthe technical and management skills to successfully plan, contract for, and implement a projectof the breadth and scope of Trilogy.  This situation must be remedied both to complete the
initial phases of Trilogy, and more important, to deal with the issues described in the preced-
ing sections.  In addition to filling the top jobs such as the CIO with people who are willing toand capable of effectively managing the larger issues, a number of other gaps and constraints,some not of the FBIÕs making, must be addressed.2.4.1Human Resources
With a few exceptions, the presentations to the committee persuaded it that the FBI lacks ahuman resource base adequate to deal with its IT modernization program.  The FBI lacks

experienced IT program managers and contract managers, which has made it unable to dealaggressively or effectively with its contractors.  Inexperienced managers generally lack the
ability to assume proactive management roles and are often held hostage to the perspectives of
the contractor.Given the importance of IT personnel and analysts to the FBIÕs broadening missions, suchindividuals must have career track opportunities that have status and respect that are compa-26Although many large organizations are able to effectively manage large-scale efforts with geographically dispersed staff,success in this regard requires a considerable degree of IT sophistication and adherence to well-defined and well-understood ITpolicies and practices.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46A REVIEW OF THE FBIÕS TRILOGY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION PROGRAMrable to those of traditional personnel tracks (such as agents) within the bureau.27  Such trackswould also enable stability in IT jobs that require extended oversight and long institutionalmemory.On the positive side, the committee wishes to single out as especially noteworthy thepresentations it heard from the head of security for the IT modernization program, the execu-tive assistant director for intelligence, and the VCF project manager.  These presentations
reflected serious thought about their respective responsibilities from the user perspective.  For

example, the executive assistant director for intelligence presented a coherent and well-articulated concept of operations, as well as a clear vision of how to draw talent from the restof the FBI.  The presentations of the head of security, though not long enough to provide very
much detail, were well-considered.  And, the VCF project manager
Õs operational experiencehas been invaluable in keeping the VCF intellectually on track.Although the committee met only a few of them, it believes that the FBI has an importantIT resource in its younger agents.  The FBI agents now being hired are in their late 20
Õs, and, aswith others in their peer group, have been heavily exposed to modern forms of informationtechnology for most of their lives.  Given this fluency with information technology, it is likely
that these newest agents will be the most enthusiastic about embracing new technologies toenhance their effectiveness.  (Of course, the flip side is that if the organization in which they
serve is unable to provide technology tools that they believe they ought to have and perceive
to be adequate, they are likely to be disappointed in the organization, with all of the conse-quences regarding morale, work attitude, and retention.)Finally, the committee notes that the FBI has the authority to obtain IT personnel from theprivate sector.28  Under the Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA), the FBI can borrow per-
sonnel from other government agencies (federal, state, and local), from institutions of highereducation, and from federally funded research and development centers.  Generally, these

arrangements call for the ÒhomeÓ agency or institution to pay the salary of the employee while
on detail status, though the FBI could agree to reimburse the home agency as part of the termsof the cooperative agreement.  IPA details cannot exceed 4 years in duration.
Under the Information Technology Exchange Program (ITEP), the FBI can enter into acooperative agreement with a private sector organization for the exchange of personnel who
work in the field of IT management, are considered exceptional performers, and are expected
to assume increased IT management responsibilities in the future.  While on detail to the FBI,
the private sector organization employee may continue to receive pay and benefits from his/her employer, and the assignment may be made with or without reimbursement by the FBI for
the pay, or a part thereof, during the assignment and for any contribution to the private sectororganizationÕs employee benefit systems.  ITEP details cannot exceed 2 years in duration.
The FBI also has the authority to hire IT employees outright.  Senior IT positions in the FBI
fall under the FBIÕs Senior Executive Service (SES) pay scale, the range of which is $103,700 to$157,000.  In exceptional cases, the FBI can pay up to $174,500, though this step requires Office
of Personnel Management and Office of Management and Budget approval.  The FBI is also

authorized to pay a lump-sum recruitment bonus of up to 25 percent of the annual rate of basic27Note that the problem of enhancing the status of workers in a critical but supporting field is common in many organizations,both inside and outside the federal government.28Information on FBI hiring authorities is derived from a memo from the FBI to the committee transmitted on February 11,2004.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IT-RELATED ISSUES FOR THE FBI REQUIRING IMMEDIATE ACTION47pay to an employee, including individuals covered by the SES, who are newly appointed to adifficult-to-fill position.The FBI also has available positions classified as Scientific or Professional positions that areabove the GS-15 level but do not meet the SES functional criteria.  These positions encompass
the performance of high-level research and development in the physical, biological, medical,or engineering sciences, or a closely related field.  The pay scale for such positions in the
Washington, D.C., area ranges from $117,627 to $144,600.In the judgment of the committee, these rates of pay should be sufficient to attract highlyqualified IT talent.  While it is true that highly qualified senior IT personnel in the private
sector can command significantly higher salaries, stock options/bonuses, and the like, the FBI
also offers opportunities for public service that compensate, in part, for the lower salary scales.These opportunities include the chance to have a substantial impact in service to the nation inan area of extraordinary import.  The recent shift in the opportunity environment for IT people

has no doubt increased the relative attractiveness of government service.2.4.2External Constraints
The FBI also operates under a variety of constraints that originate externally to the bureau.Two of the most significant are the following:¥Lack of management flexibility.  Agile organizations are managerially flexible so that they
can take prompt action.  It is the committee
Õs understanding that the FBI is unable to takemanagerial actions such as reprogramming amounts in excess of $500,000 without explicitcongressional approval.  This constraint and others with a similar micromanagement flavor

are inconsistent with the expectation that the FBI will move quickly and forcefully to reshapeitself to deal effectively with the terrorism challenge.¥Audit pressure.  The FBI reported that it had undergone more than 100 investigations and
audits in the IT area.  While it is true that the FBI
Õs performance in this area is seriouslydeficient (and this makes the FBI an attractive target), responding to such investigations usesthe time of senior management, both in preparation and presentation of material to those
investigators.  And because personnel in the IT field are scarce within the FBI, the pace of work
is slowed by such investigations.  A better use of an equivalent amount of talent and energy
would be to assist the FBI in dealing with its problems.  Nevertheless, it remains the case that

some audits, such as the one prepared by the General Accounting Office as The FBI Needs anEnterprise Architecture to Guide Its Modernization Activities of September 25, 2003 (released to the
FBI August 22, 2003), contain valuable guidance.A third area of concern is the presence of inflexible and stringent rules for personnelqualification, though the committee is not certain whether these rules originate within the FBI
or outside it.  Stringent rules reduce the pool from which potential employees are drawn, andinflexible rulesÑeven undertaken in the name of upholding standardsÑmay inappropriatelydisqualify otherwise qualified individuals.  Of course, job applicants whose history indicates a

substantial variance from the standards for employment are unacceptable.  But a rule of
reason ought to apply, and an otherwise-qualified applicant whose history is only minimallyat variance with those standards should not be automatically excluded.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.483RecommendationsThe FBIÕs current approach to IT modernization is not working as well as it must tosupport the FBIÕs missions in criminal investigation and preventive counterterrorism.  Based

on recent history, its approach is not likely to be much improved without major changes.  The
committee believes that a culture change within the FBI relative to IT is absolutely imperative.While the FBI needs to keep the forward thinkers among its force of experts, it will be severely
handicapped unless it also culls out the elements in its leadership structure that are unable tolead the changes necessary to effectively implement an information age organization.The first and most urgent recommendation, indeed critical in light of the impending VCFsystem rollout, is that the FBI not proceed with deployment of the VCF until it has a validatedcontingency plan for reverting completely or partially to the ACS, if necessary, and clear andmeasurable criteria to determine when the ACS can safely be turned off.Beyond this urgent recommendation, the committee makes a number of recommenda-tions, grouped into four areas, that will significantly increase the likelihood of success in anddrive an accelerated pace for the FBIÕs IT modernization efforts.  These recommendations fall

into two categories.  Category 1 recommendations are, in the committeeÕs judgment, impera-
tives for the success of the FBIÕs IT modernization program, and are listed in the ExecutiveSummary.  Category 2 recommendations involve Òbest practicesÓ or sound advice that the

committee believes are appropriate to the FBIÕs situation.3.1REGARDING ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE
If the FBI is to be successful in its efforts to exploit IT, the formulation of an enterprisearchitecture must have the highest priority in its IT efforts.  Of course, an enterprise architec-
ture can be expected to grow and evolve to reflect the increasing responsibilities of the FBI andthe increasing role that IT will have in satisfying these responsibilities, but a baseline enter-A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECOMMENDATIONS49prise architecture is a crucial starting point.  To deal with the issues related to enterprise
architecture, the committee makes the following recommendations.Category 1 recommendations on enterprise architecture¥The committee believes that if the FBIÕs IT modernization program is to succeed, theFBIÕs top leadership, including the director, must make the creation and communication of acomplete enterprise architecture a top priority.  This means that they must be personally
involved and invested in the key decisions that the process will require be made, such as the
tradeoffs between the security of and access to information in the various data sources that areused in criminal investigation and counterterrorism efforts.  Indeed, it is critical that the
director be well versed in, and comfortable with, the operational aspects of the enterprise
architecture and their overall linkage to the high-level system design.Only when the FBIÕs leadership takes intellectual ownership of the bureauÕs enterprisearchitecture can it be used to make top-level management decisions and to ensure that IT
investments realize their full potential.  While a contractor might well assist the FBI in devel-
oping the enterprise architecture, no contractor will fully understand the operational issuesthat must be reflected in the enterprise architecture, nor be empowered to make decisions
about how to make the tradeoffs with competing concerns.The committee believes that a small team, consisting primarily of senior operationalmanagers from the Criminal Investigation Division, the Office of Intelligence, and the Counter-
terrorism Division, and a senior IT executive (e.g., the CIO) to translate what these managerssay into architectural terms, should be able to develop the broad outlines of the operationalaspects of the enterprise architecture as well as a top-level schematic view of the systems
design in a matter of 4 to 6 months of full-time work.  To decide on the many operational andpolicy tradeoffs that will inevitably arise, this team must have direct access to and the frequentinvolvement of the most senior management of the FBI, including the director and the deputy
director.A reasonable first step in developing the FBIÕs enterprise architecture would be to define,by job, the information necessary for each FBI division to accomplish its task.  The output of

this effort will not be sufficient to guide implementation detail, but will provide an under-standing of the information flows for investigative and intelligence data, identify existingresources, and indicate how the information needs of major categories of users can be satis-
fied.  Further, it will provide a basis for the partitioning of implementation tasks, and identify
unmet needs.¥The FBI should seek independent and regular review of its enterprise architecture as it
develops by an external panel of experts with experience in both operations and technology/architecture.  When the first draft of the enterprise architecture has been prepared, it should be
reviewed by an external panel of independent experts charged with helping the FBI to improve

how it uses IT in the long term.  This could be the FBI
Õs Science and Technology AdvisoryBoard, an ad hoc committee or a contractor familiar with successful DOD architecture efforts,or even an ad hoc committee such as this one, but the important point is that an external
inspection of the draft enterprise architecture is a sensible safeguard under any circumstances.¥Given that the counterterrorism mission requires extensive information sharing, the FBIshould seek input on and comment from other intelligence agencies regarding its enterpriseA Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50A REVIEW OF THE FBIÕS TRILOGY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION PROGRAMarchitecture effort.  The reason is that the FBI
Õs information systems must have interfaces tothose agencies to ensure that the information resources of those agencies are appropriatelylinked to FBI systems so that those agencies are able to work collaboratively.Category 2 recommendations on enterprise architecture¥The FBI should build on the early efforts under way in the intelligence area in defininga subarchitecture for the intelligence process, rather than begin with the (implicit) architectureof the VCF.  The vision for, and basic architecture of, the Trilogy system
Ñincluding the VCFÑpredates the post-9/11 restructuring of the FBIÕs mission priorities and relationships to intelli-gence.  At that time, the FBI
Õs (and TrilogyÕs) focus was on support for the law enforcementmission.  The change in the  FBI
Õs mission since 9/11 underscores the need for agility and forthe separation of mechanism and policy in the information system architecture; many func-tions that would have been prohibited by policy before 9/11 are now accepted as essentialparts of the FBIÕs operation.¥The FBI should make heavy use of scenario-based analysis in its development of anenterprise architecture.  Scenario-based analysis calls for understanding relevant scenarios in
sufficient detail that one can actually understand the information flows, analytic processes,
and top-level decisions that must be made in those instances.  Doing so will help the FBI to
identify specific roles for IT in supporting operational needs.¥The FBI should give high priority to reducing the management complexity of its ITsystems, even at the expense of increased costs for hardware that may appear duplicative orredundant.  The successful management of a complex IT system usually requires a large
degree of technical sophistication that the FBI lacks at present.  As one example, the FBI should

avoid the temptation to make the IDW the single repository that contains all data regardless ofsensitivity or type.  Section 2.2.2 points out that the access and security requirements for
intelligence data and investigative data are very different, and storing both types of data on
the same system will entail the implementation of a very complex set of access rules and asignificant cost in human effort to maintain and enforce those rules.  The cost of the extra
complexity entailed by the single-repository concept will, in the long run, far outweigh the
cost of the ÒextraÓ hardware.
Box 1 provides a sampling (not an exhaustive or complete list) of some of the elements thatthe committee would expect to see in the FBIÕs enterprise architecture.3.2REGARDING SYSTEM DESIGN
To deal with the most important of the system issues described in Section 2.2, the committeemakes the following recommendations:Category 1 recommendations on system design¥The FBI should refrain from initiating, developing, or deploying any IT applicationother than the VCF until a complete enterprise architecture is in place.  The committee hopes
that the initial operating capability of the VCF will soon be demonstrated.  If successful, it will
A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECOMMENDATIONS51BOX 1: A Sampling of Items That Should Be Present in the Enterprise ArchitectureAn enterprise architecture is generally represented as a set of operational diagrams accompanied byappropriate narratives that show the operating elements or nodes constituting the enterprise, the data/
information flow requirements between the nodes, and other data reflective of the operational structure.  Itis the central document describing the operational, system, and technical views of the enterprise.  Central
to an enterprise architecture is a clear description of key processes and how they can be supported and
enhanced by appropriate application of technology.  The enterprise architecture specifies the overall design
and the set of building codes to which deployed systems must conform in order to make the IT investmenteffective.The following listing is a sampling (not complete in any way) of items that the committee would expectto see in the FBIÕs enterprise architecture.a.All significant information inputs are shown, with identification of sources and restrictions on their use,
if any.b.Processes that are primarily investigative and those that are primarily counterterrorism- or intelligence-
specific are identified.  Some processes and flows may be in both domains.
c.Some supportive operational processes interact with the investigative and counterterrorism processes
and are labeled as being in the support business category.d.The VCF is shown as one of a number of information sources that feed the intelligence process.
e.The VCF is shown as the primary source of information for the investigative process.
f.Different subarchitectures are reflected for each major operational process found in the FBI (e.g., for
the intelligence and investigative processes).  The VCF system is seen to span investigative processes,
but does not play a primary role in implementing analytic processes.g.Interfaces between subarchitectures are defined and specify the data flows between them (e.g., the
relationship between the records management process and the intelligence and investigative processes).Standards for data exchange are explicitly acknowledged.h.Responsibility for the contents of all persistent storage systems or their segments (e.g., data cleansing
and validation) are assigned, documented, and represented.i.Data access constraints, such as law-enforcement-sensitive data and levels of classified and open
data, are explicitly identified.  Different approaches to security (e.g., risk management versus risk

avoidance) are articulated explicitly and provide the framework that allows management to makedecisions about tradeoffs.j.Data storage applications are logically disjoint whenever they have different governing policies (or else
a credible argument for doing otherwise is demonstrated).k.The relationship between the VCF and records management systems is explicitly represented, and
responsibilities for maintaining evidence for investigations are highlighted.l.Data models for the different processes are specified.  Any significant differences in data models that
need to be unified to serve both the investigative and analytic functions are represented.m.Access requirements for data supporting the various processes are clearly specified, including any
audit trail requirements.n.Release constraints for data and results emanating from the various processes are clearly specified,
including any audit trail requirements.o.Policies for replication of information among data storage applications are specified.
p.The use of an electronic key management system developed by the National Security Agency in the
context of the specific needs of the FBI is explicitly rationalized.q.Process and data interfaces with other law enforcement organizations (international, state local, and
tribal) are identified.r.Specific databases and controlled interfaces between them (if any) are identified.

s.A map between these interfaces and the physical network configuration shows what links/nodes must
be encrypted, physically protected, or both.t.A key-management plan (for managing encryption keys) is created.

u.A vulnerability assessment (i.e., a paper attack on the paper architecture) is conducted.
A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52A REVIEW OF THE FBIÕS TRILOGY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION PROGRAMprovide such a major step forward from the ACS that it would be a mistake to halt VCFdevelopment and deployment at this time.  But in the committee
Õs view, the benefit of design-ing future applications within the enterprise architecture framework is so large, and the risk ofdesigning without that framework in place so high, that no additional development should
proceed until the framework is in place.1¥The FBI should develop a process map for information sharing that clearly defines thecurrent state of and a desired end state for the information-sharing process so that the numer-
ous information-sharing initiatives can be coordinated and properly monitored and managed.This recommendation is derived from the DOJ inspector general report2 but is one that the
committee fully supports.  In a letter to the DOJ inspector general dated December 11, 2003,

the FBI stated that it had already completed a detailed blueprint and process map on itsintelligence and information sharing process,3 but as of December 2003, neither the committee
nor the DOJ inspector general had been able to review this document.4¥The FBI should immediately develop plans that address recovery of data and function-ality in the event that essential technology services come under denial-of-service attacks (e.g.,from viruses and pervasively replicated software bugs).  In addition, the FBI should deploy

technically distinct platforms (that is, computing nodes that are based on a different operatingsystem) for the hosting or backup of critical services or data, so that in the event of a globalattack on the Trilogy network, these services are more likely to be maintained and the uninfected
platforms can serve as a ÒbeachheadÓ from which cleanup operations can be mounted.
Category 2 recommendations on system design¥The FBI should develop a future release plan for the VCF that specifies what capabilitieswill be added to it, and in what order and time frame.  The committee believes that future
releases of the VCF, other than those needed to reach initial functionality, should be delayeduntil an overall enterprise architecture is in place.  Further, the FBI should ensure that the first

enhancements to the VCF are to make the system consistent with the overall enterprisearchitecture (rather than only to add additional functionality).  After that, capabilities to be
considered include the addition of a separate workflow engine (a high priority, as described
below) and the creation and integration of interfaces to the IDW.  Developing the plan in the
context of the enterprise architecture is critical to aligning the development activities of theIDW, SCOPE, and the VCF, and other systems and to optimizing what will likely be significant
investments downstream.¥The FBI should plan to rework the next version of the VCF to include a workflow engineas a high priority.  By incorporating a workflow engine, the FBI will make the VCF more agile
1The GAO position, as documented in the GAO commentary on the FBI response, is that it is acceptable for the FBI to beÒpursuing near-term IT upgrades before it completes and is positioned to use an architecture,Ó even though pursuing these
upgrades Òwithout a blueprint that provides an authoritative, commonly understood frame of reference that translates strategyinto implemental actions . . . [will increase] modernization risk.Ó  (Response of the FBI to the GAO report 
The FBI Needs anEnterprise Architecture to Guide Its Modernization Activities, dated September 22, 2003.  Available at http://www.gao.gov/new.items/
d04190r.pdf.)  The committee concurs with the GAO position only for the VCF application and believes that for all other
applications, the risk of proceeding without an enterprise architecture in hand is too high.2DOJ report available at http://www.usdoj.gov/oig/audit/FBI/0410/app8.htm.3FBI letter available at http://www.usdoj.gov/oig/audit/FBI/0410/app7.htm.4See http://www.usdoj.gov/oig/audit/FBI/0410/app8.htm.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECOMMENDATIONS53in its support of evolving FBI policies and practices, reduce the expense of evolving the VCFapplication, reduce the risk of delaying implementation of new policies and practices, andextend the lifetime of the VCF application.  (Note that commercial workflow engines are
available that can be configured to support a myriad of workflow arrangements without
modifying the application programs they serve.  Workflow engines are a common technology
that is employed by many organizations, especially those that are large, complex, and geo-graphically dispersed.  Furthermore, IT staff might well include specialists trained in human

computer interaction who can understand process flows and how to build systems that reflectnew protocols of agents and analysts.)¥The FBI should adopt a risk management approach to security, for only in doing so willit understand the operational penalties it pays for risk avoidance.  Acceptance of this premiseresults in several immediate items of high priority.ÑThe FBI should establish a clear policy governing sensitive but unclassified (SBU)and law-enforcement-sensitive communications (and data more generally).  Such a policycan be risk-based.ÑThe FBI should reconsider, in the light of a better understanding of the risk/benefittradeoffs to its missions, the very constrained access that FBI staff have to the Internet.ÑThe FBI has stated that it is in the process of acquiring a risk management tool thatwill assist it in determining where IT vulnerabilities should be mitigated through risk/cost
trade-offs, thereby ensuring IT continuity of operations, and that this tool will be inter-faced with tools that the FBI uses to develop and manage its enterprise architecture efforts.These efforts should continue, although the committee notes that the threat driving the
need to ensure continuity of operations in the face of attack differs in kind from the threatof compromising sensitive information.If the FBI is not comfortable with moving to a risk management approach to security, at thevery least it should review security practices in a risk-versus-reward framework with an entireend-to-end consideration of the information gathering and information management require-ments of the FBIÕs staff.¥The FBI should encourage creative experimentation with exploitation of IT in the field,such as the PDA experiment mentioned in Section 2.2.4 above.  The committee did not review
this area in detail, but it believes that such experimentation, with appropriate safeguards, has
enormous potential for helping the FBI to understand how its operational processes might beimproved through the use of IT.  Further, the learning from these efforts to anticipate the
technological future should be brought forward and become an important input into the
bureauÕs strategic planning process in order to accelerate its pace of modernization.  (In this
regard, a useful philosophy is the one underlying the Department of DefenseÕs AdvancedConcept Technology Demonstration programs, which are based on an integrating effort,
undertaken by an ultimate user, to assemble and demonstrate a significant new militarycapability in a realistic environment, based on maturing advanced technologies, to clearlyestablish the capabilityÕs military utility.5)5For more information, see http://www.acq.osd.mil/asc/.
A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54A REVIEW OF THE FBIÕS TRILOGY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION PROGRAM3.3REGARDING PROGRAM AND CONTRACT MANAGEMENT
To deal with the most important of the program management issues described in Sec-tion2.3, the committee makes the following recommendations.
Category 1 recommendations on program management¥Because testing is such a critical dimension of system development and deployment, theFBI must allow adequate time for testing before any IT application (including the VCF) isdeployed, even if dates of initial operational capability are delayed.  Testing must include a

full systems integration test and adequate scale, volume, and stress tests.¥Evolution is an essential component of any large systemÕs life cycle.  Future develop-
ment contracts for user applications should be premised on the use of small-scale prototypes
that can be built rapidly and tested with user feedback before committing to large-scale devel-opment.  Therefore, in future IT applications development, particularly of large-scale end-
user-oriented applications, procurement contracts should be conditioned on the development
of small-scale prototypes that can be built rapidly and tested with user feedback before com-mitting to large-scale development.¥For IT applications beyond the VCF, the FBI should exploit proven methodologies ofcontracting and contract management, including the use of detailed functional specifications,specific milestones, frequent contract reviews, and earned-value metrics.  Given the FBI
Õsproblems with the management of the Trilogy program, the next contract review should focus
on continuity and availability.  Contracts already in place should be renegotiated to include
best practices such as code escrow and support-service-level agreements to protect the FBIagainst operational failures that can adversely impact the availability of and support for
products that the FBI will depend on.  The FBI should consult with both other government
agencies and the private sector to develop a set of best contracting practices before undertak-ing its next contract review.Category 2 recommendations on program management¥The FBIÕs contracting strategy should be tied to features of its enterprise architecture;e.g., it should identify opportunities for multiple, smaller contracts with well-defined
deliverables and major progress checkpoints.  This strategy should also highlight areas in
which the FBI requires in-house or trusted technical expertise to define and manage keyconcepts that govern contracts and relationships between contractors.  (This kind of informa-

tion derives from the architectural triad described in Section 2.1.1.  For example, the system
architecture should define the major systems to be built.  The technical architecture should
define the key interfaces between systems that have to be carefully managed to get indepen-
dently developed component systems to work together.  In addition, the FBI should have in-
house expertise regarding operations as they relate to the overall infrastructure, whereas theFBI may be able to leave to contractors the expertise relevant to functionality in specific
instances and specific applications.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECOMMENDATIONS553.4REGARDING HUMAN RESOURCES
To deal with the most important of the skills issues described in Section 2.4, the committeemakes the following recommendations.Category 1 recommendations on human resources¥For Trilogy and subsequent IT projects to have access to the human talent they need tosucceed, the FBI must dramatically grow its own internal expertise in IT and IT contractmanagement as quickly as possible.  To deal with human resource shortages in key areas (e.g.,

program management, data architecture, data modeling, and data warehousing), the onlyfeasible short-term fixes are to borrow experienced personnel from other agencies or to obtainassistance through a memorandum of understanding or agreement (MOU/MOA) from another
government agency with substantial experience in the relevant matters.  The expectation
would be that these arrangements would last for a couple of years, during which time the FBIcould train permanent replacements in long-term career tracks with the FBI.Note that this recommendation is still consistent with the notion of using outside exper-tise, when it is appropriate, as long as the FBI does not cede overall management and themaking of the key decisions.  For example, the FBI could in principle outsource in a secure

facility the day-to-day operation of its information systems and thus conserve its scarce ITtalent to work on matters more closely related to operations and strategy.¥Because of their importance to the short- and long-term success of the bureauÕs ITmodernization efforts, the FBI must permanently fill the positions of chief information officerand chief enterprise architect, and the committee concurs with the directorÕs judgment thatfilling these positions with appropriately qualified individuals ought to have the highest
priority.  At this writing (late March 2004), an acting CIO and an acting chief technology officer
have been appointed.  The appointment of these individuals is promising, and unverified
reports suggest that they are committed to completing the enterprise architecture in a matter
of months, although the committee underscores once again the need for the operationalmanagement to be heavily involved in the creation of the enterprise architecture.¥The FBI should develop an improved system for internally reviewing the state of progressin key IT programs and for communicating relevant findings to key stakeholders, thus pre-empting the perceived need for and distraction of constant external investigations.Category 2 recommendations on human resources¥The FBI should seek relief from excessively tight constraints on reprogramming allo-cated funds, or at least seek to streamline the approval process.3.5CONCLUSION
The committee believes that the FBI has made significant progress in some areas of its ITmodernization efforts, such as the modernization of the computing hardware and baselinesoftware and the deployment of its networking infrastructure.  However, because the FBI IT

infrastructure was so inadequate in the past, there is still an enormous gap between the FBIÕscurrent IT capabilities and the capabilities that are urgently needed.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56A REVIEW OF THE FBIÕS TRILOGY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION PROGRAMThe committee has made recommendations that, if adopted, will significantly increase thelikelihood that the FBIÕs Trilogy IT modernization program will enhance the FBIÕs effective-ness in carrying out its critical crime-fighting and counterterrorism missions.  But it empha-
sizes the difference between a pro forma adoption of these recommendations and an adoption
of these recommendations that is both fully embraced throughout the agency and aggressivelyexecuted.  The former may be the metric that auditing and oversight agencies and offices often
use in assessing agency performance, but it is the attitude and willingness of senior staff to act
that really count.  The senior management of the FBI has a substantive and direct role to play
in the FBIÕs IT modernization efforts.  This role either has not been understood or it has been
given a lower priority based on the perception of more immediate operational priorities.
Given the importance of IT to the FBIÕs future success in carrying out its missions, the FBIÕssenior management must concern itself as much with developing a coherent vision for usingIT to advance the bureauÕs strategic view as with budgets, training programs, equipment, andorganization.  As the complexities of the FBI
Õs evolving role are understood, the committeebelieves that investment by the FBIÕs senior management team in the IT process will yieldmajor enhancements to mission achievement as well as substantial operational efficiencies.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.57AppendixShort BiographiesJames C. McGroddy, Chair, retired from IBM as a senior vice president, research at the end of
1996, after leading its research laboratories from 1989 to 1995.  During his tenure, which
spanned the period of IBMÕs most difficult challenges, he led a major restructuring of itsresearch efforts, building a model and management system that is now widely emulated.  One

of the measures of success was the creation during this period of two new laboratories, one inBeijing and one in Austin, Texas.  His leadership was recognized by his being awarded the
Frederik Philips Medal of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers and the George
Pake Award of the American Physical Society.  He is currently an advisor to several govern-
ment agencies, is a participant in a number of National Research Council groups, and serves asan advisor and a visitor at a number of universities in the United States and Europe.  McGroddy

is the chairman of the board of MIQS, a company providing clinical information systems andelectronic medical record capability aimed at improving the quality and cost-effectiveness ofthe care of the chronically ill.  As chairman of the board of the Stellaris Healthcare Network in

2000 and 2001 and as former chairman of the board of Phelps Memorial Hospital Center, hehas been heavily involved in the restructuring of the local health care delivery system inWestchester County.  He is a director of Paxar, Inc., and of Advanced Networks and Services,
Inc. He is also a trustee of his alma mater, St.  JosephÕs University in Philadelphia, as well as amember of the advisory boards of a number of start-up firms and university departments.McGroddy originally joined IBM in its Research Division in 1965 after receiving a PhD in
physics from the University of Maryland.  He earned his BS in physics from St. JosephÕs
University in Philadelphia in 1958.  In his first years at IBM, he focused on research in solid
state physics and electronic devices, and as a result of achievements in these areas was named
a fellow of both the IEEE and the American Physical Society.  In the 1970-1971 academic year,he was a visiting professor of physics at the Danish Technical University.  Returning to IBM,
he served in a number of management positions in research, development, and manufacturing
before being named IBMÕs director of research in 1989.  He is a member of the U.S. National
A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58A REVIEW OF THE FBIÕS TRILOGY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION PROGRAMAcademy of Engineering.  McGroddy chaired the CSTB committee that produced the report
Realizing the Potential of C4I: Fundamental Challenges.Ed Balkovich is a senior engineer at RAND.  His current research focuses on telecommunica-
tions and information technologies, and infrastructure.  Prior to joining RAND, he was a
director in the technology organization of Verizon Communications (formerly Bell Atlantic).While at Verizon, he led technology assessment activities focused on the use of IP networks in
telecommunications.  His work included the design and deployment of Verizon
Õs first voiceservices for IP networks, and prototypes of video, voice, and VPN concepts delivered by DSLaccess and IP networks.  In addition to technology assessment, he also played a significant role

in understanding and explaining the policy implications of emerging technologies and IPnetworks.  His policy contributions concerned both regulatory and law enforcement issues.
While at Verizon, he served on the CSTB committee that produced Realizing the Potential of C4I:Fundamental Challenges, and a follow-up workshop convened to explore a security recommen-dation made in the committeeÕs report.  Before joining Verizon, he was a member of Digital
Equipment CorporationÕs Cambridge Research Lab.  While at Digital he was the first associate
director of MITÕs Project Athena (which developed X-windows, Kerberos authentication, andZepher messaging).  He contributed to various engineering and research projects, as well as
customer applications spanning the areas of clustered computing, telecommunications, virtual
private networks, and electronic publishing.  His work with customer applications helped to
define and create an internal consulting organization supporting leading-edge applications ofcomputing and networks by customers.  He worked in the aerospace industry prior to joining

Digital.  In addition to his industrial experience, he has held research and academic appointments
at MIT, Brandeis, the University of Connecticut, and the University of California.  He 
holdsdoctorate and masterÕs degrees in electrical engineering from the University of California, 
SantaBarbara, and a bachelorÕs degree in mathematics from the University of California, Berkeley.Richard J. Baseil was most recently with the MITRE Corporation, managing MITREÕs systemsengineering of IT for the U.S. Army.  He was also with Cisco Systems, working on voice
services over data communications networks.  Previously, he was vice president in Telcordia
TechnologiesÕ Professional Services organization.  Mr. Baseil has managed product testing and
quality analyses of telecommunications switching, signaling, transport, and customer-premisesystems, with an emphasis on hardware and software interoperability.  He also advises tele-
communications service providers on improvements to their procurement processes for network
systems.  Mr. Baseil played a major role in defining the industry need for, and subsequently
establishing, a multi-company Internet work interoperability test planning effort in the UnitedStates, and he managed the Telcordia staff and the interconnection facility used by industry
participants to conduct nationwide signaling and interoperability testing.  Mr. Baseil has
30years of IT and telecommunications experience, having had responsibility for switching
systems engineering, signaling network engineering, operations systems engineering, operating
services system requirements, network database requirements, ISDN data services engineer-ing, billing services, and some early descriptive work on next-generation switching systems.Mr. Baseil holds bachelorÕs and masterÕs degrees in electrical engineering from the New JerseyInstitute of Technology.  He served on the CSTB committee that produced 
Realizing the Potentialof C4I: Fundamental Challenges.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX: SHORT BIOGRAPHIES59Matt Blaze, a professor at the University of Pennsylvania, studies the use of cryptography incomputing and network security.  His research focuses on the architecture and design of
secure systems based on cryptographic techniques, analysis of secure systems against practi-cal attack models, and finding new cryptographic primitives and techniques.  He is the co-

inventor of the field of trust management, and he headed the KeyNote project at AT&TLaboratories.  His recent work and collaborations have led to the creation of new cryptographic
concepts, including remotely keyed encryption, atomic proxy cryptography, and master-key
cryptography.  His research has also been influential in IP network-layer, session-layer, and
file-system encryption.  Blaze has discovered weaknesses in a number of published and fielded
security systems, including a protocol failure in the U.S. Clipper key-escrow system.  Blaze has

long been active in the debate on encryption and security policy, has testified before Congressseveral times, has participated in influential public-policy panels and reports, and created theWeb resource crypto.com.  He holds a PhD in computer science from Princeton University.
W. Earl Boebert is an expert on information security, with experience in national security andintelligence as well as commercial applications and needs.  He is a senior scientist at Sandia

National Laboratories.  He has 30 years of experience in communications and computer secu-rity, is the holder or co-holder of 13 patents, and has participated in CSTB studies on securitymatters.  Prior to joining Sandia, he was the technical founder and chief scientist of Secure

Computing Corporation, where he developed the Sidewinder security server, a system thatcurrently protects several thousand sites.  Before that he worked for 22 years at Honeywell,
rising to the position of senior research fellow.  At Honeywell he worked on secure systems,

cryptographic devices, flight software, and a variety of real-time simulation and controlsystems, and he won HoneywellÕs highest award for technical achievement for his part indeveloping a very large scale radar landmass simulator.  He also developed and presented a

course on systems engineering and project management that was eventually given to morethan 3,000 students in 13 countries.  He served on the CSTB committees that produced 
Computersat Risk: Safe Computing in the Information Age, For the Record: Protecting Electronic Health Informa-
tion, and Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions and Future Possibilities.He also participated in two of CSTBÕs workshops, ÒCyber-AttackÓ and 
ÒInsider Threat.ÓMarc Donner is an executive director in the Institutional Securities Division of Morgan Stanley,where he focuses on system and data architecture around client relationships.  His recent
projects have included initiating Morgan StanleyÕs Internet presence and intranet activitiesand modernizing a number of legacy systems.  He received a bachelor
Õs degree in electricalengineering from the California Institute of Technology and a doctorate in computer sciencefrom Carnegie Mellon University.  He is a member of the IEEE Computer Society and Usenix.
Michael McGill has more than 30 years of hands-on experience in information technologyand more than 12 years in health care technology.  He has been responsible for systemwide

operations and for the development of information systems.  He has also been responsible for
the development of clinical data repositories, overseen the implementation of clinical andadministrative systems, and developed support architectures that allow secure and reliable
access.  Dr. McGill was the corporate vice president and chief information officer of the Henry
Ford Health System, an integrated health care delivery system.  Prior to that he was the chief
information officer of the University of Michigan Health System.  At the University of Michigan,
A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60A REVIEW OF THE FBIÕS TRILOGY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION PROGRAMMcGill also headed its telecommunication networks and phone service.  He led the evolution
of the electronic information resources at both the University of Michigan and Henry Ford.Dr. McGill served as a director of industry marketing with Ameritech Information Systems.He was vice president of Online Computer Library Center, Inc. At Syracuse University, he
held the positions of associate professor, assistant dean for research and the PhD program,School of Information Studies, and associate professor in the School of Computer and Infor-mation Science.  He was program director for information science for the National Science

Foundation and a senior computer and information science advisor, Office of Toxic Sub-stances, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.  He holds a bachelor
Õs degree from MichiganState University and masterÕs and doctoral degrees in computer science from Syracuse Uni-versity.  Dr. McGill is a member of the American Medical Informatics Association, the College
of Health Information Management Executives, and the Health Information ManagementSystems Society.  He has been elected a fellow of the American Association for the Advance-

ment of Science for his Òpioneering research and development in information systems.Ó  He is
also the author of numerous articles and co-author of Introduction to Modern InformationRetrieval, published by McGraw-Hill.
James Noga is the CIO for the Massachusetts General Hospital.  The 875-bed hospital with
over 1.4 million ambulatory visits annually is a world-renowned medical center offering
sophisticated diagnostic and therapeutic care, and it conducts the largest hospital-basedresearch program in the United States.  He came to the MGH in 1990 as director of clinical
applications and in 1997 became the CIO.  He has been instrumental in advancing clinical

systems at the MGH with the introduction of an online enterprise clinical reporting system,provider order entry, and an ambulatory electronic medical record.  In addition to clinical
systems his current focus is on improving patient revenue cycle systems.  He is also a contributor
to the recently published book Effective Healthcare Information Management: Leadership Roles,Challenges, and Solutions on the topics of software procurement and integration strategies.
Mr.Noga holds an MS degree in biomedical computing and information processing from the

Ohio State University and is an active member of the College of Healthcare InformationManagement Executives and Society of Information Management.Carl G. OÕBerry is vice president, Strategic Architecture, Integrated Defense Systems, TheBoeing Company.  He was previously deputy chief of staff for Command, Control, Communi-
cations & Computers, Headquarters, U.S. Air Force, a position from which he directed Air
Force-wide information systems planning and policy development.  Earlier in his Air Force
career, he served as commander of the Air Force Rome Air Development Center and as jointprogram manager, World-Wide Military Command and Control System Information System.
He also led the development and field testing of an airborne radar sensing/tracking systemthat was the forerunner of the Joint Surveillance and Target Attack Radar System.  He has a
masterÕs degree in systems management from the Air Force Institute of Technology and abachelorÕs degree in electrical engineering from New Mexico State University.  He served on
the CSTB committee that produced Realizing the Potential of C4I: Fundamental Challenges.  He
retired from the U.S. Air Force as a lieutenant general in August 1995.  From then until

December 1998, he was vice president and director of planning and information technologyfor Motorola, the Space and Systems Technology Group, in Scottsdale, Arizona.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX: SHORT BIOGRAPHIES61Ken Orr is an internationally recognized expert on data warehousing, knowledge manage-ment, software engineering, business process reengineering, and technology transfer.  He is
the founder and principal researcher of the Ken Orr Institute, a business technology researchorganization.  Previously, Mr. Orr was an affiliate professor and director of the Center for the
Innovative Application of Technology with the School of Technology and Information Manage-ment at Washington University in St. Louis.  Mr. Orr has more than 39 years of experience in
research, analysis, design, project management, technology planning, and management con-
sulting.  His clients have included such organizations as the states of California, Illinois,
Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Oregon, and Washington, the city of Chicago, the U.S.Army, Navy, and Marine Corps, the FAA, IBM, DEC, Detroit Edison, Xerox, Olivetti (Italy),
Philip Morris, Pacific Bell (SBC), Bellcore (Telcordia), Burlington-Santa Fe Railroad, KellwoodCorporation, Phoenix International (Canada), and many others.  Mr. Orr has written three
books (Structured Systems Development, Structured Requirements Definition, and The One MinuteMethodology) and is the author of dozens of articles on advanced software development, tech-nology management, and human communication.  Mr. Orr was also one of the principal
developers of the DSSD (Warnier-Orr) methodology, as well as a leading researcher in the
development of automated tools for automatic program generation, database design, businessrequirements, and advanced client/server prototyping.James Patton is a technical director with the MITRE Corporation, currently helping lead anorganization of over 200 persons devoted to numerous information systems challenges of theextended intelligence and law enforcement communities.  He has nearly 30 years of informa-

tion systems experience, with over 20 of those years focused on the peculiar needs and chal-lenges of distributed systems for intelligence support.  Mr. Patton has done performance
engineering, including synthetic workload modeling and benchmarking, as well as providing
and managing the provision of systems engineering expertise for the acquisition of large-scaledistributed systems through all phases of the systems engineering process.  He has managed
work programs seeking to apply current and near-term information technologies in innova-
tive ways to address challenging intelligence problems.  Mr. Patton received a bachelor
Õsdegree in mathematics from Loyola College and did graduate study in applied mathematicsand computer science at Rice University.Mark Seiden is a senior consultant with CutterÕs Business-IT Strategies Practice and a memberof the Leadership Group of Cutter ConsortiumÕs Risk Management Intelligence Network.  Hehas consulted since 1983 in the areas of security, network, and software engineering to companiesworldwide, with clients including start-ups, major computer and communication companies,financial institutions, law firms, UN agencies, online content providers, Internet service pro-
viders, research organizations, and nonprofits.  As an independent consultant, and in varying
roles at Securify (also known as Kroll OÕGara Information Security Group), his most recentprojects have included design, architecture, and implementation for e-business systems; secu-
rity for online financial transaction processing and distributed document processing systems;custom firewalls based on open-source components; finding computer criminals; and penetrationtesting of the network and physical security of deployed systems, enterprises, and colocation
facilities.  Mr. Seiden has 35 years of programming experience.  He has been a Unix and
mainframe system programmer; written Macintosh applications; spent time at IBM Research,Xerox Parc, Bell Labs, and Bellcore; and has taught at the university level.  Mr. Seiden has been
A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62A REVIEW OF THE FBIÕS TRILOGY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION PROGRAMon the board of directors of two user groups and is on the Technical Advisory Board ofCounterpane Security Systems.George Spix is chief architect in the Consumer Platforms Division of Microsoft Corporation.He is responsible for MicrosoftÕs end-to-end solutions for consumer appliances and publicnetworks.  He also serves on the board of the Digital Audio Video Council, the Information
Infrastructure Standards Panel, the Commerce DepartmentÕs Computer SystemsÕ Security and
Privacy Advisory Board, and a National Research Council study focused on trusted comput-ing systems.  Mr. Spix joined Microsoft in 1993 as the director of multimedia document archi-tecture.  He was responsible for the Advanced Consumer Technology Division
Õs multimediatools efforts and early third-party tools acquisitions.  Later, as director of infrastructure and
services, he led a team that created the services and networks required for early interactivetelevision trials.  Before coming to Microsoft, Mr. Spix spent 5 years as director of systems and

software development at Supercomputer Systems, Inc., in Eau Claire, Wisconsin.  He was
responsible for the delivery of systems and software products for a next-generation super-computer.  Prior to that, he worked for Cray Research, Inc., in Chippewa Falls, Wisconsin, as

a chief engineer and was responsible for systems and software development for the XMP andYMP line of supercomputers.  A Purdue University electrical engineer, Mr. Spix was drawn to
supercomputers, their systems, and applications while at the Los Alamos National Laboratories.Charles E.  Stuart 
is president and CEO of Competitive Enterprise Solutions, LLC (CESLLC),a networking and information technology consulting firm he founded in 1999.  At CESLLC he

has contributed to projects addressing computer security, machine learning, and enterprisecollaboration.  In the past year he has been supporting the development of a next-generation
intrusion detection system with sponsorship from DARPA and Rome Laboratories and is
currently working with a client to commercialize that technology.  Prior to founding CESLLC,
Mr. Stuart spent 20 years in government service.  As a senior executive in the Department of
EnergyÕs Nuclear Weapons Program, Mr. Stuart was responsible for implementing enterprisecollaboration tools for streamlining and improving design and manufacturing processes at theplants and national laboratories.  These included Web-based tools for resource planning as
well as for design modeling and simulation.  In addition, for 2 years he was a manager in the

Advanced Simulation and Computing Initiative, which produced the first teraop computingplatform, and in 1998 he led a study of networking security requirements for the weaponscomplex.  During the Cold War, prior to his DOE service, Mr. Stuart spent 25 years as both a

contractor and civil servant in the field of undersea warfare.  He founded and headed the
Maritime Systems Technology Office at DARPA, where he served as both a program managerand office director.  In 1985 he received the Bushnell Award from the American Defense

Preparedness Association for his career contributions to undersea warfare.  Mr. Stuart holds a
BSEE degree from Duke University and completed a 2-year program in business and manage-ment.  His biography is included in 
WhoÕs Who in America and 
WhoÕs Who in Science andEngineering.  He is a member of the IEEE and the National Defense Industrial Association.
Gio Wiederhold is a professor (emeritus) of computer science, medicine, and electrical engi-neering at Stanford University.  He started working with computers for numerical applica-
tions in 1957.  In the late 1960s he led the development of real-time data acquisition and
database systems to support clinical research.  Derivative products from that work are still
A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX: SHORT BIOGRAPHIES63being used at Stanford and around the world.  After gaining 16 years of industrial experience,
he returned to school and joined the Stanford faculty in 1976.  At Stanford he initiated research
into knowledge-based techniques for information and database management.  This research
direction, starting with the KBMS project at Stanford in 1977, has now become an active
research field in its own right.  Results derived from this work help in the management of
complex information systems, as found in medicine, especially long-term-care records, manu-facturing systems, and planning applications.  His current focus has shifted to the problems

encountered in the integration and composition of large-scale networked and software sys-tems.  He holds a PhD in medical information science from the University of California, San
Francisco, and a degree in aeronautical engineering from TMS Technicum in Rotterdam,
Holland.  Dr. Wiederhold has been a fellow of the Association for Computing Machinery andthe Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.  He has participated with the Air Force
Scientific Advisory Board and has served on numerous National Research Council commit-
tees.  He has also been a DARPA program manager.
Staff MembersHerbert S.  Lin 
is senior scientist and senior staff officer at the Computer Science and Tele-communications Board, National Research Council of the National Academies, where he hasbeen the study director of major projects on public policy and information technology.  Thesestudies include a 1996 study on national cryptography policy (CryptographyÕs Role in Securingthe Information Society), a 1991 study on the future of computer science (Computing the Future),a 1999 study of Defense Department systems for command, control, communications, comput-ing, and intelligence (Realizing the Potential of C4I: Fundamental Challenges), and a 2000 study onworkforce issues in high-technology (Building a Workforce for the Information Economy).  Prior to
his NRC service, he was a professional staff member and staff scientist for the House ArmedServices Committee (1986-1990), where his portfolio included defense policy and arms control
issues.  He also has significant expertise in math and science education.  He received his PhD
in physics from MIT in 1979.  Avocationally, he is a longtime folk and swing dancer, and a
poor magician.  Apart from his CSTB work, a list of publications in cognitive science, science

education, biophysics, and arms control and defense policy is available on request.Kristen Batch is a research associate with the Computer Science and TelecommunicationsBoard of the National Research Council.  She will be involved with upcoming projects focus-
ing on wireless communication technologies and telecommunications research and develop-ment.  While pursuing an MA in international communications from American University,

she interned at the National Telecommunications and Information Administration, in theOffice of International Affairs, and at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, in theTechnology and Public Policy Program.  She also earned a BA from Carnegie Mellon Univer-

sity in literary and cultural studies and Spanish, and received two travel grants to conductindependent research in Spain.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.65As a part of the National Research Council, the Computer Science and Telecommunica-tions Board (CSTB) was established in 1986 to provide independent advice to the federal
government on technical and public policy issues relating to computing and communications.Composed of leaders from industry and academia, CSTB conducts studies of critical nationalissues and makes recommendations to government, industry, and academic researchers.  CSTB

also provides a neutral meeting ground for consideration of complex issues where resolutionand action may be premature.  It convenes invitational discussions that bring together
principals from the public and private sectors, ensuring consideration of all perspectives.  The

majority of CSTBÕs work is requested by federal agencies and Congress, consistent with itsNational Academies context.A pioneer in framing and analyzing Internet policy issues, CSTB is unique in its compre-hensive scope and effective, interdisciplinary appraisal of technical, economic, social, andpolicy issues.  Beginning with early work in computer and communications security, cyber-
assurance and information systems trustworthiness have been a cross-cutting theme in CSTBÕswork.  CSTB has produced several reports regarded as classics in the field, and it continues toaddress these topics as they grow in importance.To do its work, CSTB draws on some of the best minds in the country, inviting experts toparticipate in its projects as a public service.  Studies are conducted by balanced committees
without direct financial interests in the topics they are addressing.  Those committees meet,
confer electronically, and build analyses through their deliberations.  Additional expertise

from around the country is tapped in a rigorous process of review and critique, furtherenhancing the quality of CSTB reports.  By engaging groups of principals, CSTB obtains the
facts and insights critical to assessing key issues.What Is CSTB?A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technology Modernization ProgramCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66A REVIEW OF THE FBIÕS TRILOGY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION PROGRAMThe mission of CSTB is to:¥Respond to requests from the government, nonprofit organizations, and private industryfor advice on computer and telecommunications issues and from the government for advice
on computer and telecommunications systems planning, utilization, and modernization;¥Monitor and promote the health of the fields of computer science and telecommunica-
tions, with attention to issues of human resources, information infrastructure, and societal
impacts;¥Initiate and conduct studies involving computer science, computer technology, andtelecommunications as critical resources; and¥Foster interaction among the disciplines underlying computing and telecommunica-
tions technologies and other fields, at large and within the National Academies.More information about CSTB can be obtained online at http://www.cstb.org.