DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/11007Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy Reform57 pages | 8.5 x 11 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-09243-2 | DOI 10.17226/11007Committee on Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options; Computer Scienceand Telecommunications Board; National Research CouncilSummary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Summary of a Forum on
Spectrum Management
Policy Reform
Committee on Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
Washington, D.C.
wwwwwwwwwwwwwww.nap.edu.nap.edu.nap.edu.nap.edu.nap.eduSummary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS   500 Fift
h Street, N.W.   Wa
shington, DC 20001 
 NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the 
National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy of 

Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, an
d the Institute of Medicine. The members of the 
committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for 

appropriate balance. 

 Support for this project was provided by the Department of Commerce, National Telecommunications and 
Information Administration, under Contract No. DG133504CN0054.  Any opinions, findings, conclusions, 

or recommendations expressed in this publication are th
ose of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the 
views of the organization that provided support for the project. 

 International Standard Book Number 0-309-09243-4 (Book) 
International Standard Book Number 0-309-53290-6 (PDF) 

 Cover designed by Jennifer M. Bishop. 
 
Copies of this report are available from the Nati
onal Academies Press, 500 Fifth Street, N.W., Lockbox 
285, Washington, D.C. 20055; (800) 624-6242 or (
202) 334-3313 in the Washington metropolitan area.  
Internet, <http://www.nap.edu>. 

 Copyright 2004 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
 
Printed in the United States of America 
Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   The National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of 
distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance 
of science and technology and to their use for th
e general welfare.  Upon the authority of the 
charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, 
the Academy has a mandate that requires it to 
advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts is 
president of the National Academy of Sciences. 
The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the 
National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel orga
nization of outstanding engineers.  It is 
autonomous in its administration and in the selec
tion of its members, sharing with the National 
Academy of Sciences the responsibility for a
dvising the federal government.  The National 
Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineer
ing programs aimed at meeting national needs, 
encourages education and research, and recognizes th
e superior achievements of engineers.  Dr. 
Wm. A. Wulf is president of the National Academy of Engineering. 
The Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences to 
secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy 
matters pertaining to the health of the public.  
The Institute acts under the responsibility given to 
the National Academy of Sciences by its congressiona
l charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to id
entify issues of medical care, research, and 
education.  Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is 
president of the Institute of Medicine. 
The National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 to 
associate the broad community of science and technology with the Academy™s purposes of 

furthering knowledge and advising the federal 
government.  Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, 
the Council has become the principal operating 
agency of both the National Academy of Scien
ces and the National Academy of Engineering in 
providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities.  
The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Bruce 

M. Alberts and Dr. Wm. A. Wulf are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the National Research 
Council.  www.national-academies.org
Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  ivCOMMITTEE ON WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS 
 DAVID E. LIDDLE, U.S. Venture Partners, 
Chair YOCHAI BENKLER, Yale Law School DAVID BORTH, Motorola Labs 

ROBERT W. BRODERSEN, University of California at Berkeley 

DAVID D. CLARK, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
THOMAS E. DARCIE, University of Victoria, British Columbia 
ANDREA GOLDSMITH, Stanford University 

DALE N. HATFIELD, University of Colorado at Boulder 

MICHAEL KATZ, University of California at Berkeley 

PAUL J. KOLODZY, Stevens Institute of Technology 
LARRY LARSON, University of California at San Diego 
DAVID P. REED, Massachusetts Institute of
 Technology and Hewlett-Packard Labs 
GREGORY L. ROSSTON, Stanford University 

DAVID SKELLERN, Cisco Systems 

 Staff  
JON EISENBERG, Study Director and Senior Program Officer 
JULIE ESANU, Program Officer 

KRISTEN BATCH, Research Associate 

MARGARET MARSH HUYNH, Senior Program Assistant 
Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  vCOMPUTER SCIENCE AND 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARD  DAVID D. CLARK, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Chair ERIC BENHAMOU, 3Com Corporation 
ELAINE COHEN, University of Utah 

THOMAS E. DARCIE, University of Victoria, British Columbia 

MARK E. DEAN, IBM Research 

JOSEPH FARRELL, University of California at Berkeley 
JOAN FEIGENBAUM, Yale University 
HECTOR GARCIA-MOLINA, Stanford University 

RANDY H. KATZ, University of California at Berkeley 

WENDY A. KELLOGG, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center 

SARA KIESLER, Carnegie Mellon University 
BUTLER W. LAMPSON, Microsoft Corporation, CSTB member emeritus 
DAVID LIDDLE, U.S. Venture Partners 

TERESA H. MENG, Stanford University 

TOM M. MITCHELL, Carnegie Mellon University 

DANIEL PIKE, GCI Cable and Entertainment 

ERIC SCHMIDT, Google Inc. FRED B. SCHNEIDER, Cornell University 
BURTON SMITH, Cray Inc. 

WILLIAM STEAD, Vanderbilt University 

ANDREW J. VITERBI, Viterbi Group, LLC 

JEANNETTE M. WING, Carnegie Mellon University 
  
CHARLES BROWNSTEIN, Director 
KRISTEN BATCH, Research Associate 

JENNIFER M. BISHOP, Program Associate 
JANET BRISCOE, Administrative Officer 
JON EISENBERG, Senior Program Officer 

RENEE HAWKINS, Financial Associate 

PHIL HILLIARD, Research Associate 

MARGARET MARSH HUYNH, Senior Program Assistant 
ALAN S. INOUYE, Senior Program Officer 
HERBERT S. LIN, Senior Scientist 

LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Program Officer 

DAVID PADGHAM, Research Associate 

CYNTHIA A. PATTERSON, Program Officer 
JANICE SABUDA, Senior Program Assistant 
BRANDYE WILLIAMS, Staff Assistant 

STEVEN WOO, Dissemination Officer 

 
For more information on CSTB, see its Web site
 at <http://www.cstb.org>, write to CSTB,  The National Academies, 500 Fifth Street, N.W., Washington, DC 20001, call at 202-334-2605, 
or e-mail CSTB at cstb@nas.edu.
 Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  vii  Preface   
   
 
 
   
 
 Pursuant to a May 29, 2003, executive 
memorandum, which established a Federal 
Government Spectrum Task Force and an asso
ciated public outreach program, the National 
Telecommunications and Information Administratio
n convened a series of public forums to bring 
together a variety of stakeholders to present 
their views on spectrum management policy.  The 
Computer Science and Telecommunications Boar
d (CSTB) of the National Research Council was 
asked to convene one of these forums.  
CSTB organized a public forum on February 12-13, 2004, at which a variety of 
government and private sector stakeholders were
 asked to present their views on spectrum policy 
(the agenda appears in Appendix A).  The foru
m was organized and this summary report was 
prepared under the auspices of CSTB™s Comm
ittee on Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy 
Options, which is currently also carrying out a 
comprehensive assessment of wireless technology 
and application trends and their implicati
ons for spectrum management and policy.  
Speakers at the forum were given roughly 
10 minutes to provide their views on issues 
identified in the executive memorandum (Box P-1). 
  A brief period was provided at the end of 
each session for discussion among panelists and for 
questions from the organizing committee and 
attendees.  Many speakers prepared slides for 
use in their presentations; copies of most are 
available from CSTB™s Web site, <www.cstb.org>. 
This report  provides the committee™s summary of a number of the remarks made by 
panelists.  Although the summary was prep
ared by the National Academies based on 
presentations and discussion at the forum, the comm
ents do not necessarily reflect the view of the 
committee, nor are they findings or recommendations of the National Academies.   The 

committee™s broader consideration of spectrum 
policy and its findings and recommendations will 
appear in its final report, to be released in early 2005. 
The committee would like to thank all the par
ticipants in the forum for their thoughtful 
presentations.  It would also like to thank th
e National Telecommunications and Information 
Administration (NTIA) for sponsoring the event,
 and it extends special thanks to Norbert 
Schroeder at NTIA for all his help in making the forum possible. 

 David E. Liddle, 
Chair Committee on Wireless Technology 

Prospects and Policy Options 
Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  viii  BOX P-1  Mission and Goals of the Department of Commerce™s Spectrum Policy 
Initiative Sec. 2. Mission and Goals. The Initiative shall undertake a comprehensive review of 
spectrum management policies (including any re
levant recommendations and findings of the 
study conducted pursuant to section 214 of the E-Government Act of 2002) with the objective 
of identifying recommendations for revising policies and procedures to promote more 
efficient and beneficial use of spectrum wit
hout harmful interference to critical incumbent 
users. The Department of Commerce shall prepare legislative and other recommendations to: 
 (a) facilitate a modernized and im
proved spectrum management system; 
 (b) facilitate policy changes to create incentiv
es for more efficient and beneficial use of spectrum and to provide a higher degree of pr
edictability and certainty in the spectrum 
management process as it applies to incumbent users; 
 (c) develop policy tools to streamline the 
deployment of new and expanded services and 
technologies, while preserving national security
, homeland security, and public safety and 
encouraging scientific research; and 
 (d) develop means to address the critical spectrum needs of national security, homeland 
security, public safety, the federal transportation infrastructure, and science. 
 ___________________________ 
SOURCE:  Executive Office of 
the President (EOP), 2003, 
Executive Memorandum: Spectrum Policy 
for the 21st Century
, Washington, D.C., May 29, available online at 
<http://spectrumreform.ntia.doc.gov/execmemo.htm>. 
 Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  ix  Acknowledgment of Reviewers   
   
 
 
   
 
 This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their diverse 
perspectives and technical expertise, in accord
ance with procedures approved by the National 
Research Council™s Report Review Committee.  Th
e purpose of this independent review is to 
provide candid and critical comments that will assist
 the institution in making its published report 
as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity, 

evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript 
remain confidential to protect the integrity of 
the deliberative process. We wish to thank the 
following individuals for their review of this report: 

 
 Gerald R. Faulhaber, University of Pennsylvania, 

 Kevin C. Kahn, Intel Corporation, 

 Dipankar Raychaudhuri, Rutgers University, and 
 Steven S. Wildman, Michigan State University. 
 Although the reviewers listed above prov
ided many constructive comments and 
suggestions, they were not asked to endorse th
e conclusions or recommendations, nor did they see 
the final draft of the report before its release.  
The review of this report was overseen by James J. 
Mikulski, Motorola (retired).  Appointed by th
e National Research Council, he was responsible 
for making certain that an independent examina
tion of this report was carried out in accordance 
with institutional procedures and that all re
view comments were carefully considered.  
Responsibility for the final content of this repor
t rests entirely with the authoring committee and 
the institution.  Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  xi  Contents   
   
 
 
   
 
 
1 SUMMARY OF REMARKS MADE BY FORUM PANELISTS 1 

Federal Spectrum Users: Defense, Justice, Transportation, and Aviation, 1 
Federal Spectrum Users: Scientific Uses, 2 
State and Local Government Users, 4 

Federal Spectrum Management Authorities, 5 

Frequency Managers a
nd Amateur Radio, 6 
Consumer Advocacy Organizations, 8 
Cellular Carriers, 8 
Broadcasting Services, 9 
Commercial and Government Se
rvices and Applications, 10 
Technology, Standards, and Commercial R&D, 11 

Wi-Fi and Broadband Wireless Access Technologies, 12 
Government and Academic Re
search and Development, 13 
   
APPENDIXES 
 A   Forum Agenda 17 
B List of Slide Presentations 22 

C   Biographies of Speakers 24 

D Biographies of Committee and Staff Members 39 
 Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1 1  Summary of Remarks Made by Forum Panelists     
     
   FEDERAL SPECTRUM USERS: DEFENSE, JUSTICE, TRANSPORTATION, AND 
AVIATION 
In Session 1A, panelists from several federal agencies
1 discussed spectrum management 
from the perspective of the defense, homeland 
security, justice, transportation, and aviation missions.  Speakers made a number of points emphasizing the special nature of federal spectrum 
use, noting that 
 Ł   Many federal spectrum applicationsŠsuch 
as defense, safety-of-life operations for 
commercial aviation, and law enforcement and 
other public safety usesŠrequire very high 
reliability and interoperability. 
Ł   Some federal uses of spectrum are tied to nongovernmental users, which complicates 
efforts to modernize wireless systems.   For ex
ample, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
cannot easily change some of its services becau
se the costs of new equipment would fall on 
airlines and pilots. Ł   Technology changes must often be carefully
 coordinated to address interdependencies 
among systems and to align spectrum use with bot
h U.S. and international spectrum allocations. 
Ł   New demands for spectrum continue to em
erge in the federal government.  For 
example, the Intelligent Vehicle Initiative, whic
h is headed by the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration and the Federal Highway 
Administration and carried out in partnership 
with the automobile industry, aims to create a wire
less alert system to warn drivers of changing 
road conditions.  Implementation of this and 
other new transportation systems will depend, in 
part, on the availability of spectrum. 
 
Regarding the efficiency of federal spectr
um use, the panelists noted the following: 
 Ł   Federal spectrum allocation and assignment 
processes provide greater flexibility than does the process of allocating and assigning nonfederal spectrum, which tends to be more service-  

and use-specific.  This gives fe
deral users greater freedom, for ex
ample, to exploit technological 
innovation and thus the potential for more efficient use. 
                                                          
 1 Badri Younes, Department of Defense; David G. Boyd, Department of Homeland Security; 
Merri Jo Gamble, Department of Justice; Tyler Duva
ll, Department of Transportation; and Donald Willis, 
Federal Aviation Administration.  Biographies for panelists are provided in Appendix C. 
Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A FORUM ON SPECTRUM MANAGEMENT POLICY REFORM 
 2 Ł   Sharing of spectrum among federal users occu
rs today.  For example, the FAA and 
Department of Defense (DOD) share spectrum, as the FAA coordinates and authorizes DOD 
electronic attack exercises and global positioning jamming activities. 
Ł   The Integrated Wireless Network Initiative under development by the Departments of Justice, Treasury, and Homeland Security is a goo
d example of a program that seeks to provide 
interoperability and improve spectral efficien
cy by building a national land-based, mobile, 
encrypted radio network to serve the diverse needs of multiple agencies. 
Ł   Spectrum sharing is central to the next generation of global positioning systems, for 
which frequency allocations will support 
both public- and private-sector use.  
 Comments by panelists regarding possible 
changes in spectrum management policy 
included these: 

 Ł   Changes to spectrum management policy sh
ould balance potential economic benefits 
against current and future needs of federal u
sers.  Potential commercial benefits should be 
weighed against the operational requirements for pr
otecting health and safety.  A panelist also 
argued that imposing spectrum fees on federal 
spectrum use would probably not be a useful 
mechanism for increasing efficiency.  It would, for 
example, be difficult to determine the value of 
spectrum required for safety-of-life missions. 
Ł   A national strategic plan should be created 
to collectively identify how the federal 
government could make use of spectrum as efficiently as possible given its operational needs.  

Based on input from individual agencies, the pl
an should identify the mission requirements 
driving spectrum needs and identify new technology 
under consideration by the agencies. The list 
of priorities based on federal uses, along with other public and commercial needs, should serve as 
a basis for spectrum allocation decisions. 
Ł  Automation of federal spectrum administrative processes, which would permit 
spectrum use to be monitored and analyzed in
 real time, would make spectrum management 
easier and permit spectrum to be used more effectively and efficiently. 
Ł   An integrated testbed should be developed to run trials 
of new technologies.  This 
would make it easier for government agenci
es to explore and adopt new technologies and 
determine future possibilities for spectrum sharing.  
 FEDERAL SPECTRUM USERS: SCIENTIFIC USES 
In Session 1B, panelists from the Nationa
l Aeronautics and Space Administration 
(NASA), the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), and the 
University of California at Berkeley
2 discussed the characteristics of
 several scientific uses of 
federal spectrum and implications for spectrum 
policy. Outlining the characteristics of several 
scientific uses, the panelists observed that  Ł   Services supporting basic research, scien
ce missions to outer space, and weather 
forecasting require high reliability.  Both p
assive measurements and communications with 
spacecraft depend on the detection of very 
weak signals and are highly susceptible to 
interference.                                                           
 2 Scott Pace, National Aeronautics and Space Admi
nistration; Richard Barth, National Oceanic 
and Atmospheric Administration; Karen St. Germain, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration; 
and Don Backer, University 
of California at Berkeley. 
 Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF REMARKS MADE BY FORUM PANELISTS 
3Ł   Radio astronomy and the Earth Exploration 
Satellite Service (EESS) are both passive 
spectrum users.  Because they are passive observe
rs, they depend on the reception of very weak 
signals.  Each also has to operate in particular spectral bands dictated by physicsŠemission and 
absorption in the atmosphere in the case of EESS 
and emissions of elements, molecules, and 
stellar objects in the case of radio astronomy.  
 Ł   EESS data are important for weather forecasting, the development of meteorological 
and climate models, and other scientific research
.  EESS measures changes in the natural thermal 
background and is thus very sensitive to interfe
rence.  Observations are made globally by a 
constellation of satellites, which means that spectru
m has to be protected worldwide.  Because the signals of interest are very weak, the entire allo
cated bandwidth is used to squeeze out the best 
possible signal-to-noise ratio.   Ł   Radio astronomy data have been critical 
to improving our understanding of the 
universe.  The level of tolerable interferen
ce for radio astronomy, which measures naturally 
occurring radiation from outer space, is roughly 10 
orders of magnitude below that of remote-
sensing systems.  Operation depends on dedicated
 spectrum allocations and geographic protection 
in the form of radio quiet zones and coordinated 
operation zones in the vicinity of observatories.  
Ł   Satellite-based sensors look down at Earth a
nd thus look at potential interferers, as opposed to radio telescopes, which can look away from interferers. 
Ł   Passive uses raise particular concerns about proposals made in the Federal 
Communications Commission™s (FCC™s) 
Spectrum Policy Task Force report.
3   First, remote-
sensing systems depend on detecting signals signi
ficantly weaker than the existing noise floor 
level tolerated by commercial systems, ra
ising questions about how one would establish 
permissible interference levels in remote-sen
sing bands.  Second, passive users cannot be 
detected for the purpose of dynamica
lly controlling access to unused spectrum. 
 Speakers noted several efforts to make
 more efficient use of spectrum: 
 Ł   New generations of satellite systems la
unched by NOAA and NASA have increased 
their bandwidth efficiency. These improve
ments have been necessary because ongoing 
improvements to space sensing equipment have increased the volume of data that must be 
transferred from the satellites to ground stations. 
Ł   The consolidation of separate polar weathe
r satellite programs operated by NOAA and 
DOD into a single system called the National Pola
r-orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite 
System (NPOESS) will improve the spectral effici
ency of communications with the satellites in 
the system. 
 Panelists offered a number of comments a
bout future spectrum policy, including 
 Ł   Making frequency assignments based on good-neighbor policies that aim to place 
compatible technologies in adjacent bands of
 spectrum would be a useful approach. 
Ł   The impact on current and future scientific spectrum uses of the cumulative noise floor 
level increases that may result from po
licy changes should be considered.  
Ł   Different burdens of proof with respect to safety are, appropriately, applied to safety-
critical services like communication with spacecraf
t and to normal commercial services.  These 
differing standards represent an obstacle to shared operation between these services. 
                                                           
 3 Federal Communications Commission (FCC).  2002. 
Spectrum Policy Task Force Report, 
ET 
Docket No. 02- 135.  FCC, Washington, D.C., November.  Available online at 
<http://www.fcc.gov/sp
tf/reports.html>. 
Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A FORUM ON SPECTRUM MANAGEMENT POLICY REFORM 
 4 STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT USERS 
In Session 2, public safety professionals and state and local officials
4 discussed public safety communication needs as they relate to current and emerging technologies and spectrum 
availability.  Comments made by panelists include the following: 
 Ł   The operational needs of public safety (i.e., 
protection of life and property) cannot be 
fully served by today™s commercial systems. 
 One reason is coverage.  Public safety 
communications requires ubiquitous coverage in
 rural and wilderness areas that are not well-
covered by commercial services.  In urban areas,
 commercial systems do not always reach into 
subway systems or interiors of buildings despite 
the density of base stations.  Another reason is 
that public safety communications must be able 
to handle high-volume surges when and where an 
emergency occurs, which implies system overprovisioning.  Finally, public safety systems must 

robustly support one-to-many as well as one-to-one communications.     
Ł   Emerging technologies, such as microsensor arrays, mobile robots, radio frequency 
identification systems, and augmented reality tech
nology to overlay visual and audio data onto 
real-world views for first responders, represent significant opportunities for public safety.  
Realizing this potential would require the building of new communications networks, would lead 
to significantly greater demand for public safety 
spectrum, and would heighten tensions between 
public safety and commercial uses.    
Ł   Interoperability is a major technical and orga
nizational issue.  At a technical level it requires coordination and sharing of informa
tion about frequency allocations and technology 
standards.  At an organizational level, it re
quires coordination between local first responders, local elected officials, and state and federal l
eaders.  Current interoperability guidelines produced 
by the Department of Homeland Security™s SAFECOM program and the National 
Telecommunications and Information Administra
tion (NTIA) have been important steps.  
Ł   Local government budgets, which provide most of the funding for public safety 
communications, are coming under increased pressure
. Eighty-three percent of cities are less able 
to fund operations today than one year ago, acco
rding to a survey by the National League of 
Cities.  Ł   Understanding the nature and limitation of cu
rrent public safety systems is the biggest 
challenge facing local elected officials seeking 
to develop a plan and strategy to mitigate 
problems.  
Ł   Local elected officials have limited time and technical resources to engage in or stay 
abreast of the numerous activities at the federal le
vel examining public safety issues. However, it 
is important for local elected officials as well 
as public safety officials to be involved in these 
activities. Ł   Public safety radios are expensive compar
ed with commercial handsetsŠthey cost 
about $3,000Šreflecting their specialized nature 
and the comparatively sm
all market. If the costs 
of these radios are to be significantly reduced, greater economies of scale will be necessary.   
Ł   Current attempts to provide enhanced ser
vices include establishment of a statewide 
network in New York and a partnership in W
ashington, D.C., with Motorola and Flarion 
Technologies that aims to build a broadband data network.   
Ł   Using dedicated infrastructure rather than commercial services for public safety 
services is costly and is one reason that public saf
ety technology lags the state of the art.  Yet 
                                                          
 4 Glen Nash, State of California Department of General Services; Capt. Thomas Cowper, New 
York State Wireless Project; Marilyn Praisner, Montgomery County (Md.) Council; Nancy Jesuale,  
NetCity Engineering; Robert LeGrande, Office of the 
Chief Technology Officer, District of Columbia; and 
Thera Bradshaw, City of Los Angeles. 
Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF REMARKS MADE BY FORUM PANELISTS 
5today™s commercial systems have not been designed to meet public safety requirements.  One 
possible remedy is to move to nondedicated spectrumŠand possibly nondedicated 

infrastructureŠwhile providing public safety user
s with priority access.  Implementation would 
require the incorporation of public safety requirements into the design of new systems and the 

development of technologies supporting robust authen
tication of public safety users and priority 
access to shared networks.  Generally, more research
 is needed on future directions for public safety communications. 
Ł   Wide-area mobile data app
lications will require more spectrum than planned new 
allocationsŠ4.9 GHz for broadband hotspot a
nd fixed communication and 24 MHz in the 700 
MHz band, which may or may not become availa
ble in 2006.  Use of the 4.9 GHz band is 
complicated by FCC rules that currently prohibit use of the 802.11j technology currently being 

developed for use in the Japanese market.  The 
Spectrum Coalition for Public Safety advocates 
the allocation of an additional 10 MHz in the upper 700 MHz band. 

 FEDERAL SPECTRUM MANAGEMENT AUTHORITIES 
In Session 3, panelists discussed current developments in spectrum policy.
5   Panelists noted that several spectrum reform initiatives were under way: 

 Ł   Considerable progress has been made recently in several areas.  For example, new 
allocations have been made for ultrawideband, 5 GHz unlicensed, and 70 GHz, 80 GHz, and 90 
GHz services, and new allocations are under consideration for third-generation (3G) wireless 
services.  Since the implementation of spectrum 
auctions, more than 25,000 licenses have been 
made available and more than $14 billion in reve
nue has been received by the U.S. Treasury.  
More flexible services rules and rules encourag
ing private spectrum transactions have provided 
additional opportunities and incentives for efficient use. Ł   The administration™s spectrum policy 
initiative, as outlined in the executive 
memorandum, will recommend improvements to spectr
um management policies and procedures.  
One particularly useful outcome anticipated fro
m the  presidential initiative would be a concise 
summary of what spectrum users, regulators, a
nd Congress should be doing to improve spectrum 
policy over the next 5 to 10 years.  
Ł   Areas under current FCC consideration include cognitive radios,
6 receiver standards,
7 interference temperature,
8 standards for broadband over power lines,
9 and the identification of 
                                                          
 5 Michael Gallagher, National Telecommunications and Information Administration, Department 
of Commerce; John Muleta, Wireless Telecommunications Branch, Federal Communications Commission;  
Julius Knapp, Office of Engineering and Technology, Federal Communications Commission; Andrea 

Petro, Office of Management and Budget; and David Siddall, Paul, Hastings, Janofsky & Walker LLP. 
6 Federal Communications Commission. 2003. Notice of Proposed Rule-Making and Order. 
Facilitating Opportunities for Flexible, Efficient, and Reliable Spectrum Use Employing Cognitive Radio 
Technologies; Authorization and Use of Software De
fined Radios. ET Docket No. 03-108, ET Docket No. 
00-47 (terminated), FCC 03-322 (rel
. December 30). Av
ailable online at 
<http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public
/attachmatch/FCC-03-322A1.pdf>. 
7 Federal Communications Commission. 2003. Notice of Inquiry. Interference Immunity 
Performance Specifications for Radio Receivers, Review
 of the Commission™s Rules and Policies Affecting 
the Conversion to Digital Television. ET Docket No. 03-65, MM Docket No. 00-39, FCC 03-54 (rel. 

March 24).  Available online at <http://hraunfoss.f
cc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-03-54A6.pdf >. 
8 Federal Communications Commission. 2003. Notice of Inquiry and Notice of Proposed 
Rulemaking. Establishment of an Interference Temper
ature Metric to Quantify and Manage Interference 
and to Expand Available Unlicensed Operation in Ce
rtain Fixed, Mobile and Satellite Frequency Bands. 
Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A FORUM ON SPECTRUM MANAGEMENT POLICY REFORM 
 6 additional spectrum for advanced wireless service
s.  More spectrum for unlicensed use is being 
explored in the TV broadcast bands, in bands 
below 900 MHz, and for the 50-MHz reallocation 
from federal government use to a mixed-use basis at
 3.65 to 3.7 GHz.  NTIA is also developing 
recommendations for the mixed-use band. 
Ł   Current legislative proposals include th
e following:  (1) establishing a spectrum 
reallocation fund that would reimburse federal user
s that give up spectrum as a way of increasing 
overall spectral efficiency and encouraging more
 effective allocation among public and private 
sector users; (2) authorizing the FCC to char
ge fees on unauctioned spectrum licenses; and  
(3) extending the FCC™s auction authority, due to expire in 2007.  
Panelists also raised a number of questio
ns to be explored further in spectrum 
management reform initiatives, including these: 
 Ł   How many of the 90,000 frequency assignme
nts require thorough review, and which 
areas deserve the highest focus?  
Ł   What resources are the agencies that have e
quity in the spectrum applying to achieve 
the goals of their mission for a sound spectrum policy? 
Ł   Are federal agencies applying sufficient leadership and resources (including 
information technology) to address oft-cited spect
rum challenges?  Are the resources comparable 
to those in the private sector and commensurat
e with the increasing attention being given to 
spectrum issues? 
Ł   Alternatives to the current public safety bus
iness model, which is based on exclusive 
use of spectrum and self-provisioning, should be considered.  Issues to explore include (1) how to 

separate network access from the provisioning and management of the network, (2) how to 

increase choice among equipment vendors, and (3) 
how priority access can be used to provide 
public safety communications with commercial systems and infrastructure.  
Ł   What enables the FCC and NTIA to work we
ll together? What is the value of meeting 
together on a monthly basis? 
Ł   How is interference testing done today?  
What are its motives, methods, and costs? 
Would a centralized testing process and facility be useful? 
Ł   How does one tell if engineering principlesŠ
e.g., interference, harmful interference, 
signal-to-noise-ratio, noise floorŠare be
ing invoked legitimatelyŠor not?   
Ł   To what extent can economic incentives re
place traditional spectrum planning?   To 
what extent will competition and consumer pres
sure provide incentives for industry to address 
interference problems?  How much of an 
incentive does purchasing spectrum rights provide 
companies to invest in more efficient tec
hnologies rather than seeking new allocations?   FREQUENCY MANAGERS AND AMATEUR RADIO 
 In Session 4, panelists from the Association of Public-Safety Officials, Comsearch, the 
United Telecom Council, and the 
American Radio Relay League
10 discussed issues relating to 
                                                                                                                               
                                             
 ET Docket No. 03-237, FCC 03-289 (rel.
 November 28). Available online at 
<http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public
/attachmatch/FCC-03-289A1.pdf>. 
9 Federal Communications Commission. 2004. Notice of Proposed Rule Making. Carrier Current 
Systems, Including Broadband Over Power Line Systems, Amendment of Part 15 Regarding New 

Requirements and Measurement Guid
elines for Access Broadband. ET Do
cket No. 03-104, ET Docket No. 
04-37, FCC 04-29 (rel. February 23). Available online at 

<http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public
/attachmatch/FCC-04-29A1.pdf>. 
10 Robert Gurss, Association of Public-Safet
y Officials; Kenneth Ryan, Comsearch; William 
Moroney, UTC; and Paul Rinaldo, American Radio Relay League. 
Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF REMARKS MADE BY FORUM PANELISTS 
7frequency management and c
oordination for public safety, utilities and other critical 
infrastructure, commercial applications, and amateur radio.   
Panelists made several obser
vations about requirements for public safety and critical 
infrastructure uses of spectrum: 
 Ł   Voice and data services for the control, operation, and maintenance of utility and other 
critical infrastructure companies require a very 
high level of reliability, which has been provided 
by dedicated networks and radio systems. 
Ł   In life-safety applications, efficiency shoul
d not be based simply on a measure of users 
per channel, but rather on how spectrum can 
best be used to support these missions.  
 With regard to providing broadband services over power lines, panelists offered contrasting views: 

 Ł   The utility industry is encouraged about th
e potential of the technology to offer 
broadband over power lines and 
provide an additional true facilities-based competitor in 
broadband services.  The industry is actively exam
ining the interference issues that may result 
from the service offering, and it is working with 
groups that could be affected by interference 
problems. 
Ł   Amateur radio operators are concerned a
bout emissions from broadband over power 
lines.  The interference concern is heightened
 because overhead power 
lines, many in close 
proximity to amateur receivers, would act as transm
itters.  These segments would be  resonant at 
different frequencies depending on their length (e.g
., reflecting pole spacing) and thus cannot be 
planned for or filtered out properly.  Because of 
the high potential for interference, discussions at 
the FCC have focused on establishing a power limit that would accommodate both uses. 

 Panelists also offered several suggestions 
for improving spectrum management policies: 
 Ł   Amateur radio operators have long made
 successful use of dynamic frequency 
assignment by applying a listen-before-transmit rule
 and asking if a given channel is occupied 
before transmitting.  Ł   Software tools used by commercial fr
equency coordination and management 
organizations, such as geographical information sy
stems and databases, and the best practices of 
those organizations could be useful in improvi
ng the efficiency and effectiveness of federal 
spectrum management.  
Ł   Spectrum policy should provide flexibility 
to enable interoperability and spectrum 
sharing between public safety and critical infrastructure users.  There is also interest in exploring 
the deployment of joint radio systems. 
Ł   Access to government databases contai
ning nonrestricted data for frequency 
assignments could improve the identification of 
relevant licensees and users and the coordination 
of licenses for commercial services, especially tho
se that are deployed in bands shared with the 
government.   
Ł   Shared databases and common tools could 
also eventually allow for real-time 
registration and coordination of commercial ser
vices, permitting same-day frequency clearance, 
deployment, and operation. 

 Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A FORUM ON SPECTRUM MANAGEMENT POLICY REFORM 
 8 CONSUMER ADVOCACY ORGANIZATIONS  
In Session 5, panelists from the Consumer 
Federation of America and the Media Access 
Project11 discussed several issues of concern to consumer advocacy organizations with regard to 
spectrum policy and associated issues of media ac
cess.  The comments provided by the speakers 
included these: 
 Ł   Radio spectrum is a public resource that shoul
d be used to promote the widest possible 
dissemination of information from diverse and even
 antagonistic sources.  Broadcast licensees are 
supposed to serve the public interest.  
Ł   As illustrated by the successful campaign to block low-power FM broadcasting, 
incumbents tend to act to exclude competing or
 potentially disruptive technologies and services. 
Ł   A balance should be sought between un
licensed spectrum; exclusive licenses by 
service, such as the family radio service that can
 only be used for voice services; and other 
exclusive licensing to ensure that each broadcaster serves the public interest in its own broadcast 
area.. Ł   The view of spectrum licenses as property 
rights goes beyond the original premise 
behind licensing.  The granting of exclusive licen
ses to provide a service to the public reflected 
the view at the time that this was the only 
way to make broadcasting economically viable. 
Ł   The adoption of secondary markets in spectrum is not likely to increase the number of 
media voices, as large media firms will be able 
to outspend new competitors and prevent them 
from developing competitive services. 
 CELLULAR CARRIERS 
In session 6A, panelists from two national cellular carriers, Cingular Wireless and 
Verizon Wireless, and an industry association,
 the Cellular Telecommunications & Internet Association (CTIA),12 discussed the impact of spectrum policy on cellular voice and data 
services.  Observations made by panelists included these: 

 Ł   Innovation and investment by cellular carriers 
have resulted in substantial growth and 
increased spectral efficiency.  Substantial inv
estments in upgraded infrastructure and increased 
capacity have been necessary to meet subscriber
 demand within existing spectrum allocations.  
For example, the number of subscribers has grow
n by a factor of 12 over the past decade (from 
12 million subscribers to over 150 million subscribers), the number of minutes used per 

subscriber has grown fourfold, and the speed of commercially available data services has 
increased roughly 100-fold (from 4.8 kbps to over 
500 kbps).  Only a fourfold increase in 
spectrum, from 50 MHz to roughly 190 MHz, has 
been required to achieve these increases (this 
does not include spectrum to be assigned for 3G services). 
Ł   Adding other users to cellular bands would 
be costly, create potential risks, and not yield customer benefits in the form of new applica
tions or services.  It is appropriate to consider 
ways of exploiting so-called white space, but th
is is not appropriate fo
r bands where long-term 
stability is required for investment and innovation 
to continue.  New concepts introduced by the 
                                                          
 11 Harold Feld, Media Access Project, and Mark
 Cooper, Consumer Fe
deration of America. 
12 Jim Bugel, Cingular Wireless; Jim Smoak, Verizon Wireless; and Diane Cornell, Cellular 
Telecommunications & Internet Association. 
Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF REMARKS MADE BY FORUM PANELISTS 
9FCC™s Spectrum Policy Task Force,
 such as spectrum sharing, will require careful economic and 
technological analysis to understand the short-
 and long-term effects of such changes. 
Ł   A mix of licensed and unlicensed spectrum uses is appropriate, and cellular carriers 
are making use of both today.  Exclusive use 
over a spectrum band for licensed services provides 
carriers with incentives to invest 
in infrastructure and to innovate, and it provides carriers with 
needed protection from interference.  
Ł   Both government and commercial spectrum use should be subject to a cost-benefit 
analysis that includes technical and ec
onomic aspects and opportunity costs. 
Ł   A useful approach to spectrum management 
reform would be the establishment of an 
independent commission of spectrum experts to review spectrum allocations, analogous to the 
reviews of military facilities conducted under 
the Base Realignment and Closure Act. 
Ł   A longer term for the U.S. ambassador to
 the World Radiocommunication Conference 
would allow more attention to be devoted to in
ternational harmonization of spectrum allocations. 
Although technological advances have made it po
ssible to build handsets that can use multiple 
bands, spectrum allocation differences from country
 to country add costs and ultimately increase 
consumer prices.  Ł   Panelists saw opportunities with respect to public safety spectrum use, both to improve 
the spectral efficiency of these services and to 
establish new mechanisms for sharing or trading 
public safety spectrum in exchange for 
priority access to commercial services.  
 BROADCASTING SERVICES 
In Session 6B, panelists from a broadcast industry association, a broadcaster , and a 
satellite service provider13 discussed spectrum policy on  terrestrial broadcasting and associated 
satellite services.  The panelists made the following observations: 
 Ł   There are long-standing broadcast spectrum sharing arrangements between television 
broadcasters and other users such as public safety and radio astronomy.  
Ł   Investments in digital transmitters by broadcasters are improving spectral efficiency 
by doubling the number of digital television (DTV
) stations in the same amount of spectrum.  
Ł   Progress is being made on the transmission si
de, with digital broadcasting operational at 1,155 digital television stations in 203 tele
vision markets, containing 99.4 percent of U.S. 
television households.  In the receiver side, howev
er, digital television penetration is well below 10 percent of households.  
Ł   Digital transmission for the broadcasters is 
expected to generate additional revenue from such services as high-definition television, 
multicasting, and data transmission and other 
value-added services. Ł   Digital repacking efforts aim to move all DT
V stations to channels 2 to 51, returning 
108 MHz of spectrum to the government.  However,
 repacking has proved challenging in urban 
areas and is complicated by the existence of lo
w-power television stations and the congressional desire for 175 additional DTV licenses. 
Ł   Changing the licensing structure by geographic area and increasing co-location, which 
would permit greater use of adjacent channels, would promote further efficiency in the broadcast 

spectrum and would create economic incentives 
for completing the transition to DTV. 
Ł   Although an estimated 85 percent of U.S. households receive a television signal from 
cable or satellite antennas, roughly 80 million television sets, or one-third of all television sets in 
                                                          
 13 David Donovan, MSTV; Greg Schmidt, LinTV; and Kalpak S. Gude, PanAmSat. 
Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A FORUM ON SPECTRUM MANAGEMENT POLICY REFORM 
 10the United States (e.g., second sets in a kitchen or
 bedroom) receive only over-the-air terrestrial 
television. The cable and satellite industries also 
rely on over-the-air television programming that 
is rebroadcast over those systems.  
Ł  Underlay or unlicensed operation in broa
dcast spectrum should be delayed or 
prohibited because (1) use of broadcast spectrum will undergo numerous changes as DTV 
stations are repositioned during digital transiti
on; (2) it will take time to characterize the 
propagation of new DTV transmissions; (3) recei
vers, which are provided by the consumer 
electronic industry and thus have performan
ce characteristics not under the control of 
broadcasters, are subject to interference from
 unlicensed devices; (4) no feedback mechanism 
exists to advise of digital signal degradation; and (5) adding other users to broadcast bands would 
undesirably constrain the future evolution of television transmission systems. 
Ł   Capacity increases being realized by the tr
ansition to digital technology for satellite 
transmissions, permitting six regular
 digital channels or two HDTV channels as compared with 
one analog channel per 36 MHz trans
ponder, should not be used to justify the return of spectrum.  
Instead, such increases should be viewed as providing
 an opportunity to offer more channels and 
services, which in turn provides an economic incen
tive for the investment in the analog-to-digital 
migration. Ł   Spectrum policies based on definitions of sp
ectral efficiency that emphasize increasing 
the number of spectrum users will harm the internal 
efficiency efforts of existing spectrum users.  
Ł   The higher-order modulation schemes that have been employed in satellite 
communications increase both data rates and spectral efficiency but are more susceptible to 

interference.  Additionally, the smaller earth sta
tion antennas currently used by residential users also render satellite links more susceptible to interference than were earlier generations of 
antennas.  COMMERCIAL AND GOVERNMENT SERVICES AND APPLICATIONS 
In Session 6C, panelists from General Dynamics Decision Systems, Boeing, Lockheed 
Martin, and Iridium
14 discussed commercial and government ser
vices and applications.  Panelists offered a number of observations about 
the evolution of wireless technology: 
 Ł   Even as new technologies and spectrum manageme
nt policies come into being, legacy 
devices and associated management policies will s
till have to be accommodated for some time. 
Ł  New adaptive, smart radio technologiesŠsoft
ware-defined radios, smart antennas, and 
intelligent signal processingŠcan significantly incr
ease the processing gain in the spatial domain 
but the extent to which they do this will depend 
on a number of factors, including the band in 
which they operate, the spectrum environmen
t (propagation environmental condition), cost, 
application, and platform.  
Ł   Many licensed spectrum applications, such
 as public safety, defense, and some 
internal corporate business networks, are not mark
et-based, and procuring them from the market 
would be difficult, as commercial operators would 
not want to be liable for safety of life and 
internal business uses that require accuracy
 24 hours per day, 7 days per week. 
 
Panelists also offered several observations
 about current and future policy-making 
processes: 

                                                           
 14 Bruce Fette, General Dynamics Decision Systems; Thomas Walsh, Boeing; Jennifer Warren, 
Lockheed Martin; and Pat Mahoney, Iridium. 
Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF REMARKS MADE BY FORUM PANELISTS 
11Ł   The current relationship between NTIA and th
e FCC, which is based in large part on personality and individual working relationships
, may not be adequate, especially as increased 
sharing between federal and nonfederal spectru
m users raises jurisdictional questions and 
otherwise complicates decision making.  These complications exist today:  For instance, who 
resolves disputes involving commercial services th
at have out-of-band impact on government-
exclusive bands? Ł   Increased information on coordination betw
een the Interdepartment Radio Advisory 
Committee (IRAC) and FCC would be helpful. 
 A public tracking system to monitor the 
application request processŠfor example, when 
the IRAC sends questions to the FCC about an 
applicationŠwould increase confidence that all necessary information has been received, 
decrease errors, and reduce the time staff spend responding to questions.   
Ł   The international dimensions of spectrum decisions, which are not emphasized in the 
executive memorandum, deserve more attention. 
For example, domestic decisions can have a 
significant impact on U.S. licensees that also ope
rate in other countries and have to obtain 
spectrum assignments or other regulatory approval there as well.    
Ł   There is a need to increase U.S. represen
tation in bilateral and international negotiations, which have broad im
plications for how U.S. alloca
tions and operations are carried 
out.  
 TECHNOLOGY, STANDARDS, AND COMMERCIAL R&D 
Panelists in Session 7 discussed various ways
 in which standards setting and technology 
development relate to spectrum policy.
15  Several speakers addressed the issue of standards, 
noting that 
 Ł   Standards-based systems have experienced 
significant growth in both market size and 
applications over the past few years, despite
 the recent downturn in the telecommunications 
industry.  The most notable example is wi
reless local area networking based on IEEE 802.11 
standards. Ł   Standards do not freeze technology developmen
t in time.  Standards are constantly 
evolving as a result of competition among vendors to introduce new and improved technologies 

and features.  Such evolution drives the standards development organizations to continually 
improve standards to meet the market demand wh
ile also maintaining some degree of backward 
compatibility for current users.  
Ł   Although the standards process works well for establishing interoperability between 
devices built to a common standard, it does not address interoperability or coexistence with 
other systems very well.  There is a potential role 
for regulators hereŠnamely, the establishment of 
rules covering the coexistence of different standards.  These rules should be flexible enough to 
permit continued technology evolution. 
 On the subject of licensed and unlicensed spectrum, speakers made several points, 
including the following: 
 Ł   Licensed and unlicensed approaches to ma
naging spectrum play useful roles for 
different technologies and applications, and bot
h support increasing spectral efficiency.   
                                                          
 15 Carl R. Stevenson, Agere Systems; Charle
s Wheatley, Qualcomm; Gee Rittenhouse, Lucent 
Laboratories; Kevin Kahn, Intel Corporation; and Carl M. Panasik, Texas Instruments Inc. 
Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A FORUM ON SPECTRUM MANAGEMENT POLICY REFORM 
 12Ł  For public safety or homeland security applications, which have demanding 
requirements, licensed spectrum would offer 
advantages over unlicensed spectrum because access 
charges for services have driven efficiency, its
 reliability is proven, and it leverages world 
competition to reduce costs. These applications
 could make use of commercial services if 
provisions are made for priority access a
nd if liability concerns are addressed. Ł   Unconstrained interference among different users is possible in unlicensed spectrum, 
rendering some applications too unreliable.  On
 the other hand, unlicensed spectrum allows new 
technologies to enter the market quickly and offe
rs new opportunities to provide services, such as 
wide area networks (WANs). Ł   Protection for incumbent licensees will remain important. 
Ł   Carrier flexibility with respect to the technologies used in their assigned bands is an 
important enabler of innovation. 
Ł   Additional spectrum for unlicensed devices would enable further innovation and use.  
Ł   Innovative technology approaches to identify unused spectrum, such as the 
interference temperature, might not be applicab
le across all spectrum bands but could serve to 
identify available spectrum in particular bands with well-defined incumbents.   
 Views were mixed about the need to increase interference protection for certain 
unlicensed devices.  Some panelists felt the 
increasing maturity and economic importance of 
some unlicensed uses may be reason enough to create additional protection for certain devices 

within unlicensed bands.  Others were skep
tical about imposing ruled-based enforcement 
mechanisms on unlicensed devices 
because new rules could impede innovation and because there 
are a variety of technical options that could 
be used to resolve interference problems.   Several international policy issu
es were addressed by the panelists: 
  Ł   Encouraging technology neutrality in interna
tional allocations would permit operators 
providing a service, rather than regulators, to
 determine the best technology architecture to 
deliver the services and would permit competition on such dimensions as serving more users per 

megahertz, better quality of service, higher data 
rates, and the introduction of new services. 
Ł   Establishing common worldwide bands for 
cellular mobile communications would 
have substantial benefits.   Handset designers have found ways of accommodating diverse 
spectrum allocations, but this has made handsets mo
re complicated than they need to be and has 
added to their cost.  Harmonization would create greater economies of scale for manufacturers, 

make it more convenient for consumers to use 
the same device while traveling (especially 
laptops), and reduce conflicts w
ith regional regulations when portable devices are taken to other 
countries.   WI-FI AND BROADBAND WIRELESS ACCESS TECHNOLOGIES 
 In Session 8, panelists from several firms involved in wireless LAN and broadband 
technologies16 discussed the implications of these tec
hnologies for spectrum management policy.  
Comments made by panelists included these: 
                                                           
 16 Michael Green, Atheros Communications; Leigh Chinitz, Chief Technical Advisor, Proxim; 
Siavash Alamouti, Vivato; Duane Buddrius, Alvarion
; Bradley Holmes, Arraycomm, Inc.; and Dewayne 
Hendricks, the Dandin Group. 
 Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF REMARKS MADE BY FORUM PANELISTS 
13Ł   Assumptions about spectrum capacity that underlie spectrum management decisions 
should be carefully examined.  Is spectrum rea
lly a finite, limited resource (as common wisdom 
would have it), or is capacity actually infinite, with access constrained by time, geographic 
location, and frequency?  
Ł   The benefits of unlicensed spectrum include the accelerated pace of innovation in 
wireless communications and the ripple effect
s of these technologies on other segments of the 
computing and communications market.   
Ł   Measures that would advance unlicensed 
applications include the allocation of 
additional spectrum; reuse or shared use of 
currently underutilized bands; globally harmonized 
allocations and harmonized technical rules for 
operation and compliance testing; the use of 
advanced radio technologies; and a simplified product certification process.  
Ł  Wireless broadband could serve as an alterna
tive means of delivering broadband to the 
40 percent of households and other underserved gr
oups that are not served by either cable or 
digital subscriber line (DSL).   Roughly 90 per
cent of these underserved customers are located in 
rural areas.  The following measures would he
lp expand broadband coverage:  (1) permit 
increased transmitter power in unlicensed ba
nds for wireless broadband and (2) identify 
additional unlicensed spectrum or opportunities fo
r spectrum underlay for wireless broadband. 
Ł   Policies should reward more efficient, flex
ible, and intelligent technologies that permit 
incremental moves toward a more open, shared ap
proach to spectrum management and allocation.  
It would, however, be counterproductive to force spectrum users to become more spectrally 
efficient only to reassign to others the spectrum that was opened up.    
Ł   Techniques for spectrum sharing with pr
iority access provide an opportunity to support and enhance national security and public 
safety applications without requiring separate 
allocations. Ł   Smart antenna technologies offer a number 
of advantages over conventional antennas, 
including less interference, an increase in bandwid
th efficiency and wireless system coverage, 
and a reduction in the number of standard radios 
and thus the total energy transmitted.   Full 
exploitation of the technology would be advanced 
if policy would (1) take account of the antenna 
gains achieved by smart antennas rather than 
applying power limits designed for standard 
antennas systems and (2) emphasize the efficiency 
of wireless systems rather than individual 
radios.     GOVERNMENT AND ACADEMIC RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
In Session 9, researchers and research managers from Rutgers, the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, and the Defense A
dvanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
17 discussed several active areas of wireless research and some policy implications. 

 Ł   Inflexible spectrum policies, which can lead
 to spot shortages, are the driver for research on dynamic spectrum allocation techniques.  
Ł   DARPA™s XG program is developing tec
hnology to support radios that can 
dynamically adapt to the spectral and policy e
nvironment.  One core program component is 
dynamic spectrum selection based on propagation characteristics, measured spectrum use, and 

inferred potential interference.  The other core component is a policy language to describe rules 
for spectrum use that allow the regulations in
 any particular operating environment to be 
                                                          
 17 Preston Marshall, Advanced Technology Office, DARPA; Dipankar Raychaudhuri, Rutgers 
University; and Moe Win, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
 Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A FORUM ON SPECTRUM MANAGEMENT POLICY REFORM 
 14systematically described and followed by a radi
o.   Results from the XG program will be placed 
in the public domain with the expectation that
 the commercial sector will further develop and 
commercialize the technologies and thus 
make radios more cost-effective.  
Ł   Two areas of research into dynamic freque
ncy allocation are agile radios and cross-
layer coordination among radios. 
Ł   Agile or cognitive radios are able to select frequencies dynamically across a wide 
bandwidth and to generate a variety of waveforms. 
Ł   Higher layer spectrum coordination protocol
s, which provide mechanisms for radio 
devices to observe each other, are a possible 
enabler for spectrum sh
aring scenarios such as 
spectrum underlay or dense unlicensed band depl
oyment.  Because interference is a receiver 
property, spectrum protocols may be needed to 
overcome the inherent ﬁhidden nodeﬂ problem, in 
which two transmitters (no matte
r how agile) cannot hear each other but still interfere at a 
receiver that is located between them.  Two 
approaches are being developed to solve this 
problem.  One is a spectrum policy service that u
ses an Internet connection to provide a network 
layer service that identifies what is operating w
ithin a given locality.  Another approach, a 
spectrum etiquette protocol, would use a comm
on wireless signaling channel rather than an 
Internet connection.  An 802.11-based protocol has already been developed to provide this 
service.  Experiments to reduce interference betw
een Bluetooth and 802.11 transmissions suggest 
that significant improvements can be made in throughput and quality of service.  Either approach 
would depend on the development of standardi
zed protocols and could leverage the DARPA XG 
program™s work on codifying policy. 
 Ł   Large-scale trials of alternative cognitive radio and spectrum coordination protocol 
approaches would help establish the viability of
 these approaches and provide estimates of the spectral efficiency they could achieve. 
Ł   Ultrawideband (UWB) has had a long history 
with different meanings and definitions.  
UWB™s first use was in the spark gap radios pi
oneered by Marconi.  UWB has come back into 
play with a recent FCC ruling permitting its use.  Today™s UWB technology uses very narrow, 

short pulses for uses such as short-range, high-speed data for broadband access networks.  Based 
on the FCC definition, numerous opportunities exist for the deployment of UWB systems, 
especially with the wide range of unlicensed spect
rum allocation, from 3.1 to 10 GHz.  There are 
no backward compatibility issues because its u
se has not been permitted until recently.  
Ł   FCC rules permit UWB to be used for many applications but interestingly prohibit its 
use for toys.  One current area of interest fo
r UWB is short-range communications within the 
home.   
Ł   Today, UWB is permitted in only one country, the United States, so UWB 
applications under development will eventually be
 constrained by allocation decisions and rules 
established by regulators around the world. 
Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   Appendixes Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.17 A  Forum Agenda   
   
 
 
   
 
 February 12-13, 2004 
Washington, D.C. 
  THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 12 
 8:00 a.m. Registration and Continental Breakfast 

 
8:30  Welcome 

 Charles Brownstein, Director, Computer Scie
nce and Telecommunications Board, National 
Research Council David Liddle, Chair, Committee on Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
 8:45  Opening Remarks 
 Samuel Bodman, Deputy Secretary, Department of Commerce 
Session 1: Federal Spectrum Users 
 9:00  1A: Defense, Justice, Transportation, and Aviation 
 Moderator:  Dale Hatfield, University of Colorado 
David G. Boyd, Deputy Director and Research/Development Director for SAFECOM, 
Department of Homeland Security  
Tyler Duvall, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Transportation 

Merri Jo Gamble, Spectrum Manager, Department of Justice  

Donald Willis, Office of Spectrum Policy and 
Management, Federal Aviation Administration 
Badri Younes, Director, Spectrum Ma
nagement, Department of Defense 
 10:15  Break 
Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A FORUM ON SPECTRUM MANAGEMENT POLICY REFORM 
18  10:30  1B: Scientific Uses 

 Moderator:  David Skellern, Cisco 

Don Backer, Professor of Astronomy, University of California at Berkeley, and Chair, NRC 
Committee on Radio Frequencies 
Richard Barth, Office of Radio Frequency, Na
tional Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
Scott Pace, Chief Technologist, National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Karen St. Germain, NPOESS Integrated Program
 Office, National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration  
 11:45    Lunch 
 Session 2:  State and Local Government Users 
 12:45 p.m. State and Local Government Users 

 
Moderator:  David Liddle, U.S. Venture Partners Thera Bradshaw, Assistant General Manager of In
formation Technology, City of Los Angeles  
Capt. Thomas Cowper, Associate Director, New York State Wireless Project
 Nancy Jesuale, President, NetCity Engineering
 Robert LeGrande, Agency Liaison, Office of th
e Chief Technology Officer, District of Columbia
 Glen Nash, Senior Telecommunications Engineer, State of California Department of General 
Services  Marilyn Praisner, Member, Montgomery County (Md.) Council
  
2:20  Break 

 Session 3:  Federal Spectrum Management Authorities 
 2:30  Federal Spectrum Management Authorities 
 
Moderator:  Yochai Benkler, Yale Law School
 Michael Gallagher, Acting Assistant Secretary 
for Information and Communications, Department 
of Commerce 
Julius Knapp, Deputy Chief, Office of Engin
eering and Technology, Federal Communications 
Commission 
John Muleta, Chief, Wireless Telecommuni
cations Branch, Federal Communications Commission 
Andrea Petro, Program Examiner, Offi
ce of Management and Budget  
David Siddall, Attorney, Paul, Hastings, Janofsky & Walker LLP 
 3:50  Break 
 Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FORUM AGENDA 
19Session 4: Frequency Managers and Amateur Radio 
 4:00  Frequency Management and Amateur Radio 
 Moderator:  David Reed, MIT Media Lab and HP Labs
 Robert Gurss, Director, Legal and Government A
ffairs, Association of Public-Safety Officials 
 William Moroney, President, United Telecom Council 

Paul Rinaldo, Chief Technical Offi
cer, American Radio Relay League
 Kenneth Ryan, Director, Spectrum Management Solutions, Comsearch   
 Session 5: Consumers 
 5:15  Consumer Organizations  

 Moderator:  Yochai Benkler, Yale Law School
 Mark Cooper, Director of Research, Consumer Federation of America 
Harold Feld, Associate Director, Media Access Project 
 5:30  Reception 
FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 13 
 8:00 a.m. Registration and Continental Breakfast 

 Session 6: Carriers and Service Suppliers 
 8:30  6A: Cellular Carriers  
 
Moderator:  Paul Kolodzy, Stevens Institute of Technology Jim Bugel, Executive Director for Federal Government Affairs, Cingular Wireless 
Diane Cornell, Vice President for Regulatory Po
licy, Cellular Telecommunications & Internet 
Association Jim Smoak, Director, Business Development, Verizon Wireless 

 9:30  6B: Broadcasting Services 
 
Moderator:  Paul Kolodzy, Stevens Institute of Technology David Donovan, President, MSTV 
Kalpak S. Gude, Vice President for Government
 and Regulatory Affairs and Associate General 
Counsel, PanAmSat 
Greg Schmidt, Vice President for New Development and General Counsel, LinTV 
 10:30  Break 
 Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A FORUM ON SPECTRUM MANAGEMENT POLICY REFORM 
20 10:45  6C: Commercial and Government Services and Applications 
 
Moderator:  Dale Hatfield, University of Colorado 
Bruce Fette, Chief Scientist, General Dynamics Decision Systems  
Pat Mahoney, Vice President Regulatory and Spectrum Affairs, Iridium 

Thomas Walsh, Boeing Space and Communication Spectrum Management 

Jennifer Warren, Senior Director, Trade a
nd Regulatory Affairs, Lockheed Martin 
 11:45  Lunch 
  Session 7: Technology, Standards, and Commercial R&D 
 12:45 p.m. Technology, Standards, and Commercial R&D 
 Moderator:  Larry Larson, University of California at San Diego 
Kevin Kahn, Intel Fellow and Director, Communicat
ions and Interconnect Technology Lab, Intel 
Carl M. Panasik, Director, Advanced Architecture, Texas Instruments, Inc. 
Gee Rittenhouse, Vice President, The Wireless 
Research Laboratory, Lucent Laboratories 
Carl R. Stevenson, Senior Manager, Standa
rds and Regulatory Affairs, Agere Systems  
Charles Wheatley, Senior Vice President for Technology, Qualcomm
   Session 8: Wi-Fi and Broadband Wireless Access Technologies 
 2:00  Wi-Fi and Broadband Wireless Access 
 Moderator:  David Skellern, Cisco
 Siavash Alamouti, Chief Technical Officer, Vivato  
Duane Buddrius, Director of Product Engineering and Product Management, Alvarion 

Leigh Chinitz, Chief Technical Advisor, Proxim 
Michael Green, Manager, Global Product Compliance, Atheros Communications 
Dewayne Hendricks, Founder, The Dandin Group 

Bradley Holmes, Arraycomm, Inc. 

 3:15  Break 
 Session 9:  Government and Academic R&D 
 3:30  Government and Academic R&D  

 
Moderator: Andrea Goldsmith, Stanford
 Preston Marshall, Program Manager, Advanced Technology Office, DARPA 
Dipankar Raychaudhuri, Professor, Electrical and Computer Engineering, and Director, Wireless 
Information Network Laboratory, Rutgers University 
Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FORUM AGENDA 
21Moe Win, Charles Stark Draper Assistant Professor of Aeronautics and Astronautics, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
 4:15  Closing Remarks 
 David Liddle, Chair, Committee on Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options  
 4:20  Adjourn
  Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 22 B  List of Slide Presentations   
   
 
 
   
 
 The following presenters used slides in their presentation and made them available to 
CSTB for public distribution.  Copies of these slides can be viewed at CSTB™s Web site, 
<www.cstb.org>.  The slides have not been edited, 
and opinions and statements in them are solely 
those of the individual persons or participants at the forum and have not necessarily been adopted 
or endorsed or verified as accurate by the National Academies.    
 Siavash Alamouti, Chief Technical Officer, Vivato  
Don Backer, Professor of Astronomy, University of California at Berkeley, and Chair, NRC 
Committee on Radio Frequency 
Richard Barth, Office of Radio Frequency, Na
tional Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
David G. Boyd, Deputy Director and Research/Development Director for SAFECOM, 
Department of Homeland Security  
Thera Bradshaw, Assistant General Manager of 
Information Technology, City of Los Angeles 
Duane Buddrius, Director of Product Engineering and Product Management, Alvarion 

Jim Bugel, Cingular Wireless 

Leigh Chinitz, Chief Technical Advisor, Proxim 

Capt. Thomas Cowper, Associate Director, New York State Wireless Project 

David Donovan, President, MSTV 
Tyler Duvall, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Transportation 
Bruce Fette, Chief Scientist, General Dynamics Decision Systems  

Brian Fontes, Vice President for Federal Regulatory Affairs, Cingular Wireless  

Merri Jo Gamble, Spectrum Manager, Department of Justice  

Michael Green, Manager, Global Product Compliance, Atheros Communications 
Kalpak S. Gude, Vice President for Government
 and Regulatory Affairs, Associate General 
Counsel, PanAmSat 
Dewayne Hendricks, Founder, The Dandin Group 

Nancy Jesuale, President, NetCity Engineering 

Kevin Kahn, Intel Fellow and Director, Communicat
ions and Interconnect Technology Lab, Intel 
Julius Knapp, Deputy Chief, Office of Engin
eering and Technology, Federal Communications 
Commission 
Robert LeGrande, Agency Liaison, Office of the 
Chief Technology Officer, District of Columbia 
Pat Mahoney, Vice President Regulatory and Spectrum Affairs, Iridium 

Preston Marshall, Program Manager, Advanced Technology Office, DARPA 
William Moroney, President, United Telecom Council 
Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LIST OF SLIDE PRESENTATIONS 
23 John Muleta, Chief, Wireless Telecommuni
cations Branch, Federal Communications Commission 
Scott Pace, Chief Technologist, National Aeronautics and Space Administration Carl M. Panasik, Director, Advanced Architecture, Texas Instruments, Inc. 
Dipankar Raychaudhuri, Professor, Electrical and Computer Engineering, and Director of the 
Wireless Information Network Laboratory, Rutgers University 
Paul Rinaldo, Chief Technical Offi
cer, American Radio Relay League 
Gee Rittenhouse, Vice President, The Wireless 
Research Laboratory, Lucent Laboratories 
Karen St. Germain, NPOESS Integrated Program
 Office, National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration  
Greg Schmidt, Vice President for New Development and General Counsel, LinTV 

David Siddall,  Paul, Has
tings, Janofsky & Walker LLP Jim Smoak, Director, Business Development, Verizon Wireless 
Carl R. Stevenson, Senior Manager, Standa
rds and Regulatory Affairs, Agere Systems  
Thomas Walsh, Boeing Space and Communication Spectrum Management 

Jennifer Warren, Senior Director, Trade a
nd Regulatory Affairs, Lockheed Martin 
Charles Wheatley, Senior Vice President for Technology, Qualcomm  

Donald Willis, Office of Spectrum Policy and 
Management, Federal Aviation Administration 
Badri Younes, Director, Spectrum Ma
nagement, Department of Defense 
 Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 24 C  Biographies of Speakers   
   
 
 
   
 
 WELCOME AND OPENING REMARKS 
 Samuel W. Bodman is the Deputy Secretary of the Department
 of Commerce.  A financier and executive 
by trade, he is well suited to his role of managing th
e day-to-day operations of the department, which has 
40,000 employees and a $5 billion budget.  Dr. Bodman is
 an engineer by training; he is well qualified for 
his specific oversight focus on the NOAA, the Patent and Trademark Office, and the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology.  With 31 years of experience in the private sector, Dr. Bodman is a firm 
believer in the American free enterprise system.  His 
work in the finance industry began when he was a 
professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and started consulting with the venture capital 
sector.  He and his partners and associates provided 
financial and managerial support to scores of new 
business enterprises throughout the United States. 
 Virtually all of these companies had a strong 
dependence on technology and innovation.  Many achie
ved great financial success and established public 
markets for their securities.  Dr. Bodman holds a B.S.
 in chemical engineering from Cornell University 
and an Sc.D. from MIT.  He served as an associate professor of chemical engineering at MIT and as 

technical director of the American Research and 
Development Corporation, a pioneer venture capital 
firm.  From there, Dr. Bodman went to Fidelity Ventur
e Associates, a division of Fidelity Investments.  In 
1983 he was named president and chief operating officer
 of Fidelity Investments and a director of the 
Fidelity Group of Mutual Funds.  In 1987, he jo
ined Cabot Corporation, a Boston-based Fortune 300 
company with global business activities in specialty
 chemicals and materials, where he served as 
chairman, CEO, and a director.  Over the years, he has been a director of many other publicly owned 

corporations.  Dr. Bodman has also been active in public
 service.  He is a former director of MIT's School 
of Engineering Practice and a former member of 
the MIT Commission on Education.  He was also a 
member of the Executive and Investment Committees 
at MIT and the American Academy of Arts and 
Sciences and was a trustee of the Isabella Stew
art Gardner Museum and the New England Aquarium. 
 
Charles N. Brownstein
 is the director of the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB) 
of the National Academies. He joined the Academies in 2004 from the Corporation for National Research 
Initiatives (CNRI), where since 1994 he directed the 
Cross Industry Working Te
am and did independent 
research with support from NSF and DARPA. His interest
s are in innovation, applications and impacts of 
information technology, Internet performance, and 
the technology-policy interface.  Dr. Brownstein 
joined CNRI in 1994 after a 20 year career at the 
National Science Foundation (NSF). There he served in 
positions including program director for Telecomm
unications Policy and IT Applications, division 
Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOGRAPHIES OF SPEAKERS 
25director for Information Science and Technology, de
puty assistant director and assistant director of NSF 
for Computer and Information Science and Engineeri
ng (CISE), and director of the Office of Planning 
and Assessment. His federal achievements are recogni
zed by Presidential Meritorious and Distinguished 
Senior Executive Service awards and by NSF's Distingui
shed Service Award.  At NSF, he led in the 
creation of CISE, nurtured the development of NSFnet, 
and set strategic directions for federal information infrastructure. He was a principal in organizing the inter-agency High Performance Computing and 

Communications (HPCC) initiative and was executive di
rector of the National Science Board™s Special Committee on the Future of NSF. He presided over in
formation technology and policy working groups at 
the OECD, was founding chair of the Federal Netw
orking Council, and participated on the Board of 
Regents of the National Library of Medicine. He 
organized and co-chaired the White House National 
Performance Review Working Group for Reinventing 
Government through Information Technology. He 
was a founding trustee of the Internet Society 
(ISOC), chaired the Association for Computing 
Machinery™s public policy activity, USACM, and is pr
esently a director of Fortec, which provides the 
IETF Secretariat.  From 1971 to 1975, Dr. Brownstein
 taught at Lehigh University and was a founder of 
the Institute of Social and Behavioral Research. Ther
e he was principal investigator on NSF and industry-
supported research awards on telecommunications polic
y, information industry innovation, two-way cable 
field experimentation, and interactive learning t
echnologies. He also taught research design at the University of Michigan™s Inter-university Consortiu
m for Social and Political Research. His Ph.D. is in 
political science, from Florida State University, 1971. 
 SESSION 1A: FEDERAL SPECTRUM USERS: DEFENSE, JUSTICE, TRANSPORTATION, AND 
AVIATION 
 David G. Boyd is deputy director and r
esearch and development director for the SAFECOM Program 
Office at the Department of Homeland Security, wh
ere he has been since it was established in March 
2003.  He is responsible for office operations and for th
e management or oversight of the operations of all 
the Homeland Security laboratories. In addition, he
 is responsible for the national effort to achieve 
interoperability among communications systems of the na
tion™s first responders at local, state, and federal 
levels.  Dr. Boyd came to Homeland Security from the U.
S. Department of Justice, where he was director 
of science and technology for the National Institute of Ju
stice, the criminal justi
ce research and evaluation agency.  His office managed research and developmen
t programs in every facet of technology affecting 
law enforcement and corrections, including the fo
rensic sciences, less-than-lethal technologies, 
information and communications technologies, con
cealed weapons and contraband detection, and 
simulation.  His office directed the DNA and fore
nsic laboratory improvement programs, which are 
designed to strengthen DNA identification and general forensic analysis capabilities in state and local 
crime laboratories. His office also managed the 
only voluntary standards development and testing 
organization for law enforcement and corrections in 
the United States, and was charged by Congress with 
the development of proficiency tests for DNA laboratori
es.  Dr. Boyd also served, at the direction of the 
Attorney General, on the White House National 
Science and Technology Council, on the National 
Security Council Committee on Safety and Security of
 Public Facilities, and as the executive chair of the Justice Department™s Technology Policy Council. He
 has an M.A. in operations research and public 
policy analysis and a Ph.D. in decision sciences.  
 Tyler Duvall is the deputy assistant secretary for transportation policy in the Department of 
Transportation.  His portfolio includes economic and 
strategic analysis; transportation, energy, and the 
environment; and federal civilian uses of the el
ectromagnetic spectrum, including global positioning 
systems.  Mr. Duvall currently works closely with th
e assistant secretary for transportation policy and the 
administrators of the Federal Highway and Federa
l Transit Administrations in the development of 
comprehensive surface transportation legislation.  
In addition, he coordi
nates the department™s 
Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A FORUM ON SPECTRUM MANAGEMENT POLICY REFORM 
26 implementation of President Bush™s Executive Or
der to streamline environmental reviews of 
transportation projects.  Before assuming his current 
role, Duvall was the special assistant to the assistant 
secretary for transportation policy. In this role, he 
advised on a broad range of policy and legal issues 
related to surface transportation, including innova
tive financing of transportation infrastructure, streamlining environmental review processes, highw
ay safety, freight and goods movement, Amtrak, 
security, overall program funding, and the oversight of federal funds.  Prior to joining USDOT, Mr. 

Duvall was an associate in the business and finance group of Hogan & Hartson, LLP, of Washington, 

D.C. There, he represented various
 public and private companies in mergers, acquisitions, and securities 
filings. He has a B.A. in economics from Washingt
on and Lee University and a law degree from the 
University of Virginia. 
 Merri Jo Gamble is the spectrum manager for the Department of Justice.  She has over 30 years 
experience in the spectrum management field and has ser
ved in a variety of positions within the Federal 
Bureau of Investigation, NTIA, and the Department
 of Justice.  In the area of domestic spectrum 
management, she is currently the Department of Justice representative on the Interdepartmental Radio 
Advisory Committee.  She has also served as the De
partment of Justice representative on the Spectrum 
Planning Subcommittee and on various spectrum ma
nagement ad hoc and working groups.  Her 
international experience includes participation in 
bilateral spectrum negotiations with the Mexican 
government as a subject matter expert
 on land mobile law enforcement border issues.  She participates in 
activities of the International Telecommunication 
Union and was recently a delegate and U.S. 
spokesperson at the World Radiocommunication Conference 2003. 
 Donald Willis 
is a manager in the Spectrum Planning and International Division
 Office at the Federal 
Aviation Administration.  His strategic vision is to 
protect the aeronautical radio spectrum for the current 
and future needs of international aviation.  After 
serving in the U.S. Navy from 1966 to 1968, Mr. Willis 
graduated from Western Washington University in 
Bellingham, Washington.  In 1974, he began his 
career with the U.S. Air Force as a communications 
officer.  His assignments included command of a 
communications squadron in Italy and liaison to 
the Federal Aviation Administration.  Mr. Willis™s 
assignments as a spectrum engineer began in 1978
 and include having been director for frequency 
management for the U.S. Air Force in Europe and 
frequency manager for the Rapid Deployment Joint 
Task Force, which later became the U.S. Central 
Command.  After retiring from the U.S. Air Force in 
1992, he began his career as an electronics engineer at the FAA.   
 Badri Younes is DOD director for spectrum management and the director of the Defense Spectrum 
Office, with responsibility for spectrum policy, stra
tegic planning, and implementation at DOD.  Under 
his leadership, the Department has successfully negot
iated all the recent win-win agreements with the 
FCC, NTIA, and the U.S. private sector that have 
enabled technological innovations to proceed while 
safeguarding critical military equities.  He h
as successfully led the DOD spectrum management 
organization to become more proactive in addressi
ng the radio frequency (RF) and spectrum issues facing 
the department in transforming the military into
 a network-centric fighting force.  Mr. Younes™s 
experience spans over 20 years of microwave and RF systems engineering and technology. Prior to 

joining the DOD, he managed the RF systems e
ngineering and spectrum management for NASA™s 
Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) Space and Gr
ound Networks.  While at GSFC, he successfully 
managed the development and im
plementation of the hardware 
systems for NASA™s second TDRSS 
ground terminal.  Mr. Younes™s career includes 5 years of
 hands-on work in state-of-the-art technology at 
the Naval Surface Warfare Center.  His primary focu
s included coding and modulation theory, analog and 
digital communications, quantum electronics, signal processing, nonlinear mathematics, and neural 

networks. He has an M.S. in electronic engin
eering from Catholic University of America. 
 Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOGRAPHIES OF SPEAKERS 
27SESSION 1B: FEDERAL SPECTRUM USERS: SCIENTIFIC USES 
 Richard Barth
 is chief of the Radio Frequency Manageme
nt Division at the U.S. Department of 
Commerce and director of the department™s
 Office of Radio Frequency Management. 
 Scott Pace is the chief technologist for space communications in NASA's Office of Space Flight.  He is 
responsible for advising senior NASA management 
on technical, programmatic, policy, and regulatory 
issues related to space-based information systems 
providing communications, navigation, and remote 
sensing.  He is particularly focused on issues related 
to the global positioning system, active and passive 
sensor bands, aeronautical safety bands, and dual-use space communications. He represents agency 

interests in interagency as well as international forums.  
 Karen St. Germain
 is with the NPOESS Integrated Program O
ffice at NOAA.  Her work has focused on passive polarimetric radiometry of the ocean surface 
and polar regions, which she continued after several 
years with the Naval Research Laboratory™s Remote Se
nsing Division.  Prior to this Dr. St. Germain was 
an assistant professor in the Department of Electrical E
ngineering at the University of Nebraska, Lincoln.  
She is a member of the American Geophysical Union,
 the American Association for the Advancement of 
Science, and the Institute of Electrical and Elect
ronics Engineers. She has a Ph.D. in electrical engineering from the University of Massachusetts, Amherst.   
 SESSION 2: STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT USERS 
 Thera Bradshaw is the chief executive officer for the City of Los Angeles Information Technology 
Agency.  Her responsibilities are both internal and exte
rnal services, including the administration of cable 
franchises, the education and government
 television stations, and the 3-1-1 
number, ﬁone call to city hall.ﬂ  
Before joining the Los Angeles agency, Ms. Bradshaw 
was executive director of the city and county of 
San Francisco's Emergency Communica
tions Department.  Under her leadership, a new department was 
created and built from what was traditionally a support 
service function within the police, public health, 
and fire departments.  From 1990 to 2000, she was 
responsible for implementi
ng the $200 million dollar 
capital project improving 9-1-1 emergency communications
 in San Francisco.  Ms. Bradshaw also served 
as executive director of the Regional Communications Agency of Clark County, Washington, with 42 

participating local governments.  She pioneered Oregon'
s first automated, enhanced 9-1-1 system with 14 
participating local governments in the Portland metr
opolitan area in 1986.  Ms. Bradshaw's professional 
leadership extends to state, national, and internationa
l roles in appointed and elected positions on a variety 
of boards and committees.  She has authored numerous
 publications, is an in-demand public speaker, and 
testified before the U.S. Congress and the FCC.  Ms. Bradshaw served from 1999 to 2003 on the Board of 
Officers and was the 69th President of the Association of Public-Safety Communications Officials 

International (APCO).  APCO is the world™s old
est and largest not-for-profit professional organization dedicated to the enhancement of public safety co
mmunications, with more than 16,000 members in 34 
countries.  She also served 7 years on the board of officers for 
the National 9-1-1 Association (NENA) and 
was the national president in 1995.  Major na
tional policy improving 9-1-1 and public safety 
communications was accomplished during her tenure.
  Ms. Bradshaw has received numerous honors, 
including being named one of the top women of leader
ship in public safety.  Her undergraduate education 
is from Oregon State University.  She is also a gra
duate of the University of Washington's Graduate 
School of Public Affairs and the FBI Executive Command College. 

 Thomas Cowper
, associate director in charge of engineering and technology for the Statewide Wireless 
Network project within New York State™s Office for Technology, is a 20-year veteran of the New York 
State Police.  He spent 9 years in field assignments, 
including 4 years with the State Police tactical unit, 
Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A FORUM ON SPECTRUM MANAGEMENT POLICY REFORM 
28before becoming directly involved with the deve
lopment, procurement, and deployment of law 
enforcement technology. He served as director of comm
unications for the State Police prior to his current 
assignment.  When completed, the Statewide Wireless 
Network is intended to serve the land mobile radio 
requirements of 65,000 federal, state, and local public
 safety users on a single shared network and will be 
the largest technology procurement in the history of Ne
w York State.  Capt. Cowper is a member of the 
Society of Police Futurists International and the 
FBI™s Futures Working Group, two organizations 
devoted to examining the emerging 
trends and developments that ar
e changing our world and the manner 
in which law enforcement and public safety services ar
e delivered.  He holds a B.S. in mechanical 
engineering technology and an M.A. in public administration.  
 Nancy Jesuale is the president of NetCity Engineering, In
c., a consulting practice dedicated to strategic 
planning and solution sets for government in public safety and fiber optic telecommunications systems.  

Current clients of NCE include the City of Los Ange
les, the District of Columbia, Portland Community 
College, and the Center for Wireless Network Secur
ity.  Ms. Jesuale has worked in local and state government as a telecommunications strategic pla
nner and director of public safety networks, 
telecommunications networking, and network operations
.  As program manager for public safety, she is 
responsible for establishing relationships, research 
programs, and public policy support for the Wireless 
Network Security Center (WiNSeC).  Most recently Ms. Jesuale was the director of ComNet, a bureau of 

the city of Portland, Oregon, responsible for all voice,
 data, and video communications systems in the city 
and provider of regional communications service
s for government entities throughout the region. 
 Robert LeGrande is the deputy chief technology officer in the Office of the Chief Technology Officer 
(OCTO), District of Columbia government (DC).  
Mr. LeGrande provides executive leadership for the 
Wireless Networks Program, the Human Services Modernization Program, the Agency Liaison Group, 
and the OCTO Chief Information Officer staff.  The Wireless Networks Program provides upgrades to the 
push-to-talk radio networks of the DC Fire Depart
ment, the DC Emergency Management System, and the 
DC Metropolitan Police Department (MPD).  He 
also manages, in conjunction with Washington 
Metropolitan Area Transit Authority (WMATA), the 
WMATA Public Radio System Program.  This 
program will expand the upgraded DC Fire, EMS, 
and MPD push-to-talk radio system to the WMATA 
tunnel system radio network.  Mr. LeGrande ove
rsees the Public Safety Wireless High Speed Data 
Network Program as well.  The progr
am™s objective is to construct a 
broadband wireless
 network using licensed dedicated spectrum to provide citywide access to
 mission-critical applications.  In this effort, he 
spearheaded the creation of the Spect
rum Coalition for Public Safety to secure 10 MHz of spectrum in the 
700 MHz band.  He and his team are actively working with
 legislators to achieve this goal.  Additionally, 
his team is creating the first broa
dband wireless network for public saf
ety.  The network will serve as a 
testbed for public safety applications and provide 
all public safety agencies with the insight to key 
requirements and operational issues regarding broadba
nd applications.  He leads the Human Services 
Modernization Program team, which will upgrade some 
DC human services IT applications and integrate 
all of them.  He also heads the Agency Liaison Gr
oup, which provides IT program direction and support 
to all district agencies and reviews and approves a
ll DC IT project purchases. Finally, Mr. LeGrande is 
the deputy responsible for OCTO chief information offi
cer (CIO) staff.  This program is responsible for 
providing CIO leadership and direction to multiple di
strict agencies.  Prior to Mr. LeGrande™s position with the DC government, he was responsible for 
overseeing all development of products within the 
NuVizion portfolio.  At Proxicom he served as the managing director for the National Microsoft Practice, 

with executive oversight responsibilities for a di
verse set of program engagements such as 
www.exxonmobil.com, www.MBCC.com, www.AEAn
et.org and www.MERANT.com.  Prior to 
Proxicom, Mr. LeGrande worked as a consultant pr
ogram manager for MCI™s Internet and Intranet 
Development Group.  Here he managed over 18 We
b-based projects, including www.MCICENTER.com 
and MCI™s award-winning investor relations Web site. 
 He began his career with Lockheed Martin, where 
he held positions in configuration management soft
ware test and integration engineering and project 
management on the AN/BSY Submarine Combat System and Vertical Launching System programs.  Mr. 
Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOGRAPHIES OF SPEAKERS 
29LeGrande received his education at Clark Atlanta Univ
ersity, where he graduated with a B.S. in physics 
and a minor in mathematics.  
 Glen Nash is senior telecommunications engineer in the State of California Department of General 
Services.  Marilyn Praisner is the longest serving woman ever on the Montgomery County Council.  She is 
currently in her fourth term representing District 4.
  Ms. Praisner served as council president in 1993 and 
1997 and as vice president in 1992 and 1996.  Prior to being elected to the County Council, she worked 

for the Central Intelligence Agency for 
16 years, serving as an analyst, a branch chief, and on the staff of 
the Deputy Director of Intelligence.  A county offi
cial known for her national leadership on technology 
and telecommunications issues, Ms. Praisner has re
presented local government across this country at 
numerous technology conferences on public safety comm
unications, cable television, the siting of cellular towers, and rights-of-way management.  She h
as represented local government on public safety 
communications committees, including the National Task
 Force on Interoperability (as vice chair of the 
Governance Subcommittee) and the Department of 
Homeland Security™s Executive Committee for the 
Public Safety Wireless Network (PSWN) program. She currently serves as a member of the Department™s 

SAFECOM Executive Committee. She al
so serves on the Homeland Security Task Force of the National 
Association of Counties (NACo).  Ms. Praisner is a Maryland vice chair for Capital Wireless Integrated 
Network (CapWIN), a public safety communication syst
em for the Washington, D.C., metropolitan area.  
A member of the board of directors of the NACo, she is in her second term as chair of its 

Telecommunications and Technology Steering Committ
ee.  The immediate past president of the 
Maryland Association of Counties, she also serves 
on the Maryland Interoperability Governance Working 
Group.  SESSION 3: FEDERAL SPECTRUM MANAGEMENT AUTHORITIES 
 Michael Gallagher is the Acting Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Communications and Information 
and Acting Administrator of NTIA.  He most recentl
y served as the deputy chief of staff for policy and as 
counselor to the Secretary of Commerce.  He was 
the lead policy advisor to the Secretary and was 
responsible for the effective coordination of polic
y initiatives within the Commerce Department and 
across the administration.  As a leading member of
 the Bush administration's technology team, he has 
focused on bringing the benefits of new telecomm
unications technologies to American consumers.  
Working closely with the FCC and other government ag
encies, Gallagher directed NTIA's technical study 
that led to the FCC's approval of ultrawideband, a 
new technology that could spur the development of 
devices to underlay the radio frequency spectrum, 
improving the ability of public safety entities to 
respond to emergencies.  He led NTIA's developmen
t of a spectrum allocation plan, paving the way for 
deployment of advanced mobile telecommunicati
ons services known as third-generation (3G).  The 3G plan, which identified 90 MHz of radio spectrum for futu
re wireless services, is a significant part of the 
administration's overall initiative to promote efficien
t use of the radio spectrumŠkey to improving the 
quality of voice and data services and 
enhancing the delivery of health services.  Mr. Gallagher has a B.A. 
from the University of California at Berkeley and a J.D.
 from the University of California at Los Angeles.  
 Julius Knapp is deputy chief of the FCC™s Office of Engi
neering and Technology (OET).  Previously he 
was chief of the policy and rules division for OET 
and oversaw spectrum allocations and technical rules 
for radio frequency devices as well as coordination of 
radio frequency issues with the federal government. 
Knapp has also served as the chief of the FCC labor
atory, where he was responsible for the FCC™s 
equipment authorization program.  He held a variety 
of other positions during his 26 years with the FCC, 
including heading the Frequency Allocations Bran
ch, where he directed FCC frequency allocation 
Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A FORUM ON SPECTRUM MANAGEMENT POLICY REFORM 
30proceedings for cellular service, private land mobile 
services, and mobile satellite services.  He is a 
member of the Institute of Electronics and Electri
cal Engineers and the Electromagnetic Compatibility 
Society and is a fellow of the Radio Club of Ameri
ca.  Mr. Knapp has a B.S. in electrical engineering 
from the City College of New York. 
 John Muleta is chief of the Wireless Telecommuni
cations Bureau (WTB) of the Federal Communications Commission, appointed in January 
2003.  Prior to this appointment, he was the 
president and CEO of Source 1 Technologies LLC, a privately held systems integration firm in 
Washington, D.C.  Mr. Muleta was also a cof
ounder of OI Systems, Inc., a Washington-based 
management consulting firm.  He previously serve
d at the FCC, where he held various positions, 
including deputy bureau chief and chief of the En
forcement Division of the Common Carrier Bureau.  
After leaving the FCC, Mr. Muleta held the position 
of president for PSINet Ventures, Inc., and before 
that, was president of PSINet's Global Facilities Division and the India, Middle East, and Africa Division.  
He began his career at GTE Corporation and later wo
rked at Coopers & Lybrand Consulting, LLC, before 
joining the FCC.  Mr. Muleta has a B.S. in systems e
ngineering from the University of Virginia School of 
Engineering and Applied Sciences, and M.B.A. and J.
D degrees from the University of Virginia joint 
degree program. 
 Andrea Petro is a program examiner at the Office of Management and Budget. 
 David Siddall
 is an attorney with the law firm Paul, H
astings, Janofsky, and Walker LLP in Washington, 
D.C.  Mr. Siddall advises and represents a wide ra
nge of clients on wireless
 spectrum and equipment 
issues before the FCC, Congress, and 
executive branch agencies.  He brings to the table many years of 
communications policy experience on Capitol Hill and 
at the FCC before entering private practice, including service as chief of the FCC™s spectrum manage
ment branch and later as wireless advisor to an 
FCC commissioner.  He was at the heart of the po
licy debates in the 1990s, when the FCC allocated 
spectrum and adopted rules to govern a variety of ne
w services such as PCS, digital TV, satellite digital 
audio radio, and low Earth orbit satellites.  Mr. Sidda
ll is admitted to practice before the bars of the 
District of Columbia and the U.S. Supreme Court.
  He also is an active member of the Federal 
Communications Bar Association and the American Ba
r Association.  He is coauthor of the book 
FCC LobbyingŠA Handbook of Insider Tips and Practical Advice
.   SESSION 4: FREQUENCY MANAGERS AND AMATEUR RADIO 
 Robert Gurss
 serves as director of legal and government affairs for the Association of Public-Safety 
Communications Officials International (APCO).  His 
experience covers all aspects of communications 
law, including issues related to wireless telecommunications, common carrier, cable, and broadcasting 

matters.  His practice currently focu
ses on the representation of governmental entities and corporations on 
wireless telecommunications issues.  His exper
tise includes domestic and international spectrum 
allocations, transactions involving communications
 facilities, frequency reallocation negotiations, 
resolution of interference disputes, complex FCC li
censing matters, regulatory compliance issues, rule 
waivers, equipment standards, tower siting and related environmental assessment issues.  Mr. Gurss has 
been an active participant in the Public Safety Wi
reless Advisory Committee, the Public Safety National 
Coordination Committee, the National Public Safety 
Telecommunications Council, and the National Task 
Force on Interoperability.  He is a frequent speak
er on communications law issues and has written the 
monthly ﬁWashington Viewﬂ column in 
Public Safety Communications
 magazine for the past 14 years.  
Mr. Gurss is a director and past president of the Land Mobile Communications Council, a coalition of 
major associations representing the interests of wirele
ss telecommunications licensees before the FCC. He 
has a B.A. and a J.D. from th
e University of Michigan. 
Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOGRAPHIES OF SPEAKERS 
31 William Moroney is the president, chief executive officer, and member of the board of directors of the 
United Telecom Council (UTC) and the United Power Li
ne Council (UPLC).  UTC is the international 
trade association representing the telecommunications and 
IT interests of electric, gas, and water utilities 
and other critical infrastructure entities.  UPLC 
is a trade association of utilities and technology 
companies involved in the deployment of broadband
 over power line (BPL) services.  Mr. Moroney has 
spent the last 20 years as the leader of industry organizations driving technological change and 

convergence in networking and electronic commerce.
  Before joining UTC, he served as the chief 
executive of the MultiMedia Telecommunications As
sociation (MMTA), the Business Quality Messaging 
Forum (BQM Forum), the Electronic Messaging Asso
ciation (EMA), the Electronic Funds Transfer 
Association (EFTA), the National Automated Clearing House Association (NACHA), and his own 
consulting and financial newsletter 
publishing company.  He also has 
held public affairs and marketing 
positions at other trade associations and worked 
on two presidential campaigns and as a broadcast 
journalist.  Mr. Moroney is a member of the board of directors of the research foundation of the 
Consumer Energy Council. 
 Paul Rinaldo
 is the chief technology officer for the 
American Radio Relay League, the national 
association for amateur radio.  His current duties 
include U.S. government relations on domestic and 
international matters, including the In
ternational Telecommunication Union (ITU).  He has participated in 
ITU plenipotentiary conferences, world radio conferences, study groups, working parties, and task groups 

and in related U.S. preparatory meetings.  He curre
ntly chairs the ITU-R group charged with technical 
studies related to the amateur and amateur-satellite se
rvices.  He chaired ITU groups on wind profiler 
radar and out-of-band emissions.  He is a senior memb
er of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers (IEEE) and a member of the Board of the United States ITU Association. Mr. Rinaldo studied 
radio engineering at Valparaiso Technical Institute. 
 
Kenneth Ryan
 is director of Spectrum Management Solutio
ns for Comsearch.  He is responsible for 
fixed, satellite, and emerging wireless technologies in
 engineering, business development, and spectrum 
management.  He is currently working on projects 
involving federal government wireless initiatives, 
domestic and international specialized spectrum management services, and emerging wireless services 
such as Dedicated Short-Range Communications, Enha
nced Safety of Vehicles, and satellite Ka-band 
systems.  He is active in the Telecommunications 
Industry Association and National Spectrum Managers 
Association.  He is a member of the NSMA board
 of directors and is chairperson for the Satellite 
Technologies Working Group.  He has been working 
with intersystem interfe
rence assessment, satellite Earth station system design, and 
regulatory consulting 
for two decades. Mr. Ryan is a professional 
engineer registered in the state of Virginia. He has a B.S. in electrical engineering from George Mason 
University and an M.S. in electrical engin
eering from Virginia Polytechnic Institute.  
SESSION 5: CONSUMER ORGANIZATIONS 
 Mark Cooper is director of research at the Consumer Federation of America, where he has responsibility 
for energy, telecommunications, and economic policy analysis.  He is also director of the Digital Society 

Project, a Ford Foundation-funded effort to analyze and explain the impact of ongoing technological 

changes in American society to consumer, low income
, and civil rights activists and organizations.  He 
has published in trade and scholarly journals numerou
s articles on telecommunications and digital society 
issues, as well as antitrust and energy policy.  Dr. Co
oper was also a fellow at the Stanford Law School 
Center for Internet and Society and an associate fello
w at the Columbia University Institute on Tele-
Information.  He is the author of four books, including 
Media Ownership and Democracy in the Digital 
Information Age: Promoting Diversity with First 
Amendment Principles and Market Structure Analysis (Center for Internet and Society, 2003).  Dr. Cooper has a Ph.D. from Yale University. 
Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A FORUM ON SPECTRUM MANAGEMENT POLICY REFORM 
32 Harold Feld, associate director of the Media Access Project, joined MAP after practicing 
communications, Internet, and energy law at Covington & 
Burling.  He served as co-chair of the Federal 
Communications Bar Association's Online Committee 
and has written numerous articles on Internet law 
and communications policy for trade publications and lega
l journals.  In addition, Mr. Feld clerked for the 
Hon. John M. Ferren of the District of Columbia
 Court of Appeals. He has a B.S. from Princeton 
University and a J.D. from Boston University Law School.  

 SESSION 6A: CARRIERS 
 Jim Bugel
, executive director for Federal Government Affairs/National Security for Cingular Wireless 
LLC, is responsible for federal regulatory policy an
d strategic planning for Cingular Wireless.  Mr. 
Bugel brings to the federal regulatory environment ye
ars of experience in the wireless industry.  He has held management and leadership positions in the 
operations, marketing, and finance sectors of the 
company.  In Washington, D.C., Mr. Bugel is activel
y involved in federal spectrum management issues at 
both the Federal Communications Commission and 
National Telecommunications and Information 
Administration.  His added responsibilities include th
e newly created Department of Homeland Security, 
where he is Cingular's representative on matters relating to homeland security.  Prior to the formation of 
Cingular Wireless, Mr. Bugel was with BellSouth. Mr. Bugel received his Bachelors in Business Science 
from Miami University in Oxford, Ohio.   
 Diane Cornell
 is vice president for regulatory policy at the Cellular Telecommunications & Internet 
Association (CTIA).  She is responsible for coordinating regulatory issues affecting the mobile wireless 
industry.  Since joining CTIA Ms. Cornell has worked on a wide range of issues involving spectrum, 
universal service, and regulatory mandates.  She previously worked at the FCC in a number of positions.  

Her last position at the FCC was as associate chie
f in the Wireless Telecommunications Bureau, where 
she served as chief of staff.  There she was involved 
in a wide range of wireless communications issues, 
including various spectrum-related rulemakings and 
issues involving third-generation mobile systems.  
As chief of the Telecommunications Division of the In
ternational Bureau and chief of the International 
Policy Division of the Common Carrier Bureau, she w
as responsible for international policy rulemakings, 
facilities and service authorizations, and multilateral and 
bilateral conferences.  Before joining the FCC, Ms. Cornell was a senior associate specializing in telecommunications with the law firm of Squire, 

Sanders and Dempsey in Washington, D.C.  She is 
currently an officer of the Federal Communications 
Bar Association.  Ms. Cornell has a B.A. from Wesley
an University and a J.D. from the University of 
Pennsylvania. 
 Jim Smoak,
 director of business development, Verizon Wireless, has been in the wireless industry for over 10 years.  He has held several positions in sales, 
training, customer service, engineering, and product 
development.  Mr. Smoak currently works in the 
wireless data and multimedia department and is a 
director within the business development function.
  Some of his larger responsibilities include the 
company's efforts around location-based services and smart devices, and he is responsible for the 

company's marketing relationship with Microsoft Corporation. 
 SESSION 6B: BROADCASTING SERVICES 
 David Donovan
 is president of the Association for Maximum Service Television, Inc. (MSTV).  MSTV 
is a 48-year old national association of over 430 local
 television stations dedicated to promoting the 
Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOGRAPHIES OF SPEAKERS 
33technical quality of free, local, over-the-air television service and has taken a leading role in the transition 
to digital television service.  Mr. Donovan has n
early 20 years of broadcast regulatory and policy 
experience, and prior to accepting the position of MSTV president, he served as the vice president for 
legal and legislative affairs for the Association of Lo
cal Television Stations, Inc. (ALTV).  He has also 
served as the mass media legal advisor to two FCC commissioners, as well as legal advisor to the chief of 

the Mass Media Bureau.  Mr. Donovan came to the FCC from Boston, where he was in the private 
practice of law.  He also served as law clerk to th
e Judicial Council of Massachusetts. He has a B.A. and 
an M.A. in communications from the University of
 Massachusetts, Amherst, and a J.D. from Suffolk 
University Law School. 
 Kalpak Gude is vice president for government regulator
y affairs and associate general counsel of 
PanAmSat.  PanAmSat is a leading commercial provi
der of global satellite communications services in 
both video (including cable television program distribu
tion, direct-to-home television, and special events 
coverage) and data (including VSAT networks and Internet backbone connectivity).  His responsibilities 
include leading the corporate effort on global and do
mestic regulatory affairs,
 which entail management of PanAmSat™s international market entry, global 
licensing, and international policy efforts, along with 
legislative, regulatory policy, and licensing issues befo
re the U.S. government.  His work also focuses on 
corporate compliance with U.S. export control regulati
ons and international spectrum management issues.  
These responsibilities include management of PanAmSat™s regulatory efforts at the ITU and global 
compliance with ITU regulations.  Mr. Gude wo
rked as counsel on the U.S. Senate Committee on 
Commerce, Science, and Transportation, as well as 
the Subcommittee on Communications before joining 
PanAmSat.  There, he focused on areas of telecommuni
cations, the Internet, and satellites.  Prior to his work with the U.S. Senate, he was an attorney/a
dvisor in the Policy and Program Planning Division, 
Common Carrier Bureau of the FCC, where he focu
sed on local telecommunications competition and was 
one of the primary authors of the FCC™s local competition rules implementing the 1996 
Telecommunications Act.  Mr. Gude has a B.S. in el
ectrical engineering from the Rochester Institute of 
Technology and a J.D. from the Indiana University School of Law, Bloomington.  
 Greg Schmidt
 is vice president for new development and ge
neral counsel of LIN Television Corporation, 
where he oversees legal and regulatory operations.  Mr
. Schmidt came to LINTV from his partnership in 
the Washington law firm of Covington & Burling, where he practiced communications law for 15 years.  

At C&B, he represented a wide variety of mid-sized broadcast companies, including LINTV, as well as 

television trade associations, including the CBS Te
levision Network Affiliates Association and the 
Association for Maximum Service Television (MSTV
). While representing MSTV, Mr. Schmidt helped 
craft the industry™s initial regulatory strategy for the 
transition to digital television.  As interim co-
president of MSTV, he assisted in the completion of 
the industry™s reevaluation of its digital transmission 
standard.  He is currently on the boards of the Me
dia Institute and the Washington International School 
and has served on the executive committee and as chai
rman of various committees of the Federal 
Communications Bar Association.  Prior to his work with C&B, he served as a clerk and as deputy 
supervising staff attorney for the United States Court of
 Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. He has a B.A. from 
Swarthmore College and a J.D. from Stanford University. 
 SESSION 6C: COMMERCIAL AND GOVERNM
ENT SERVICES AND APPLICATIONS 
 Bruce Fette
 is chief scientist of the ISSPD division of 
General Dynamics Decision Systems, working in 
advanced signal processing for telephony and RF communi
cations.  Dr. Fette has acquired 35 patents, is a member of the Motorola Science Advisory Board, a 
Motorola Dan Nobel fellow, and has been given the 
Distinguished Innovator Award.  He has worked with
 the SDR Forum from its inception, currently as 
technical chair, and is a panelist for the IEEE 
Conference on Acoustics Speech and Signal Processing Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A FORUM ON SPECTRUM MANAGEMENT POLICY REFORM 
34Industrial Technology Track.  Dr. Fette also is curre
ntly heading the General Dynamics Signal Processing 
Center of Excellence. He has a B.S.E.E. from the 
 University of Cincinnati and M.S.E.E. and Ph.D. 
degrees from Arizona State University.  
 Pat Mahoney
 is the vice president for regula
tory and spectrum affairs for Iridium Satellite LLC, the owner and 
operator of the Iridium Mobile Satellite System.  In this position, she is responsible for the coordination of spectrum 
and regulatory issues impacting the Iridium satellite syst
em, as well as the management of spectrum and service 
authorizations necessary for operation in various countries in which Iridium provides service.  Mahoney has over 24 

years experience as an attorney in 
the communications field, specializing in regulatory matters, licensing, and 
spectrum, including 5 years at Iridium
 LLC, the predecessor of Iridium Satellite
, LLC.  Immediately prior to joining 
Iridium Satellite LLC, she was vice president at Final Analysis, one of the licensed ﬁLittle LEOﬂ MSS systems, 

establishing and directing the domestic and international re
gulatory policies and government affairs activities of that 
company.  Ms. Mahoney began her communications regulato
ry career at the communicati
ons law firm of Fletcher 
Heald and Hildreth, where she pr
acticed for 16 years and was a partner.  Sh
e has also served the satellite industry in 
a number of leadership positions.  She is a former chai
r of the Satellite Industry Association, an industry trade 
association in the United States.  She served on th
e FCC Advisory Committee for the ITU™s 2003 World Radio 
Conference and was vice chair of the its Informal Working 
Group on MSS, including GPS.  She was also one of 
three U.S. satellite industry representativ
es on an international task force of 
leaders of government, industry, and the 
science community established by the OECD to address the 
impact of low Earth orbit satellites on the future of radio 
astronomy. 

 Thomas Walsh 
is with Boeing Space and Communication Spectrum Management. 
 Jennifer Warren is senior director of Trade and Regulator
y Affairs in Lockheed Martin™s Washington, 
D.C., operations, responsible for developing and im
plementing corporate domestic and international 
policy and regulatory strategies, with a particular emphasis on spectrum management, IT 

policy/regulation, and satellite policies.  In additio
n, she handles day-to-day government and regulatory 
responsibilities associated with these issues.  Prior 
to joining Lockheed Martin™s Space and Strategic 
Missiles Sector, Ms. Warren was at the FCC in numer
ous positions, including senior legal advisor to the chief of the International Bureau and, finally, assist
ant chief of the Wireless Telecommunications Bureau.  
Before joining the FCC, she interned at the Commission of the Eur
opean Communities in Brussels, at both legal services and the Directorate General for Co
mpetition, focusing on a range of EU activities with 
Japan and the United States, including the U.S.-E
U cooperation agreement on antitrust matters.  Since 
entering the field of international telecommunicati
ons, Ms. Warren has served both as a government and 
private representative on U.S. delegations to numer
ous international conferences, including the ITU 
Plenipotentiary Conferences and World Radio Conferen
ces.  She also served as vice chair of the FCC™s 
Federal Advisory Committee for WRC-03 (WAC-03) a
nd currently is vice chair of the TIA™s Spectrum 
Policy Working Group, co-chair of the Satellite I
ndustry Association™s Regulatory Working Group, and 
chair of Industry Working Group-1 of the FCC™s WAC-07.  Ms. Warren has a B.S. in languages and a 

J.D., both from Georgetown University. 
 SESSION 7: TECHNOLOGY, STANDARDS, AND COMMERCIAL R&D 
 Kevin Kahn is an Intel senior fellow and currently the di
rector of the Communications Technology Lab, 
an advanced development and research lab in Intel™
s Corporate Technology Group responsible for radio, 
optical, and copper physical layer technologies.  He
 helps drive communications strategies and policy for 
the corporation.  Some of his current primary 
focuses are broadband access to the home, wireless LANs 
and PANs, spectrum policy, and related Internet issues. 
 He also coordinates Intel RF technical directions 
across divisions and chairs the Intel Communicati
ons Research Council, which oversees research 
activities between Intel and academic programs.  Dr. Kahn serves on the FCC Technological Advisory 
Council, the National Science Foundation™s Engin
eering Advisory Council, and on various academic 
Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOGRAPHIES OF SPEAKERS 
35advisory committees.  Throughout his work with Intel,
 he has worked in system software development, 
operating systems, processor architecture, and various
 strategic planning roles.  He has held both 
management and senior individual contributor roles.
  Dr. Kahn holds a B.Sc. in mathematics from  
Manhattan College and M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in computer science from Purdue University. 
 Carl Panasik is director of the advanced architectures 
team for Texas Instruments (TI) and is also 
currently a distinguished member of technical staff. 
 He is responsible for U.S.-based research initiatives 
in the Wireless Terminals Business Unit and is ch
air of the Wireless Intellectual Property Rights 
Committee.  The team develops wireless communications systems utilizing smart handsets.  Dr. Panasik 
is TI™s early adopter for ultrawideband communicati
ons.  He has worked on software-defined radio 
architectures and digital signal processor-enhanced cellu
lar power amplifiers that are designed for next-
generation handsets.  Prior to his current position, 
Dr. Panasik was program manager for the TI Odyssey 
Program, where he directed technology development 
for 2.5 and 3G Internet-ready handsets that will 
allow consumers to view streaming 
audio and video.  This research 
effort covered adaptive antennas, multiband RF, baseband architecture, process technolog
y, applications software, and other areas.  
Previously, Dr. Panasik was the manager for the Wire
less Data Research program, where he supported the 
TI Notebook division in the development of wireless 
meeting rooms and classrooms.  He also was the 
program manager for the TI programmable transversal f
ilter research contract for the U.S. Department of 
Defense.  Dr. Panasik is a senior member of the I
EEE and a certified professional engineer in the state of 
Texas.  He holds 13 patents with ove
r 30 patents pending.  Dr. Pansik has a B.S. in electrical engineering 
from Cleveland State University and M.S. and 
Ph.D. degrees from the University of Illinois. 
 George (Gee) Rittenhouse
 is vice president of the Wireless Research Laboratories at Lucent 
Technologies, where he has headed several projects, including MIMO system development, network 
optimization, wireless IP networks, and fourth-gen
eration wireless.  He joined Bell Laboratories as a member of technical staff, where he developed a high-speed 0.1 µm NMOS process for optical 

networking.  He later joined the Wireless Research 
Laboratory at Bell Laboratories, where his research 
focused on RF front-end radio architectures and cellular system engineering.  He has written for 

numerous publications and holds patents in wireless sy
stems and circuits.  He has also received the Bell 
Labs fellow award. Dr. Rittenhouse holds a B.S. in ph
ysics from the  University of California at Los 
Angeles and a Ph.D. in electrical engineering and computer science from the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology.  
 Carl Stevenson 
is senior manager for standards and regulatory 
affairs at Agere Systems, with experience 
in the design and development of RF communications sy
stems and equipment.  He is a senior member of 
the IEEE, a member of the IEEE Standards Association,
 a fellow of the Radio Club of America, chair of 
the IEEE 802.18 Radio Regulatory Technical Advisory Group, and chair of the Wi-Fi Alliance 

Regulatory Committee.   Charles Wheatley 
is senior vice president for technology at Qualcomm, concentrating equally on RF 
hardware design, system design, field testing, an
d standards development.  He has been working on 
various aspects of CDMA as applied to cellula
r/personal communications since its inception.
  He has been involved with spread spectrum systems for over 40 years, including both frequency hopping and 

direct sequence systems.  At Rockwell Internationa
l, he contributed to the GPS on various terminal 
designs and was also responsible for technical aspects
 of GPS™s spaceborne rubidium frequency standard.  
After he moved to Linkabit, he contributed to RF
 and system aspects of the Milstar program.  Dr. 
Wheatley is an IEEE fellow and holds
 over 50 patents on various techni
ques and devices, mostly related 
to communications and navigation. He holds a B.
S. in physics from the California Institute of 
Technology, an M.S. in electrical engineering from the University of Southern California, and a Ph.D. in 

electrical engineering from the University of California at Los Angeles.
  Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A FORUM ON SPECTRUM MANAGEMENT POLICY REFORM 
36SESSION 8: WI-FI AND BROADBAND WIRELESS ACCESS TECHNOLOGIES 
 Siavash Alamouti 
is vice president for advanced development at 
Vivato, where he has been a pioneer in wireless technologies.  Best known as the inventor of the Alamouti Code, the first multiple-input-
multiple-output (MIMO) code adopted for a wireless st
andard, his research and development efforts have 
been recognized by the IEEE Communications Society as among the most influential in the organization's 

history.  Since joining Vivato, Mr. Alamouti has help
ed revolutionize the use of smart antenna technology 
in Wi-Fi infrastructure systems and was instrumental in
 building the first Wi-Fi switch.  Prior to joining 
Vivato, he made contributions in specifying me
thodologies and developing design libraries for third-
generation wireless communications systems, wireless local area network (WLAN) systems and smart 
antennae at Cadence Design Systems.  Mr. Alamou
ti began his career developing and designing physical 
and media access control (MAC) layer technologies at MPR Teltech and AT&T Wireless.  In addition to 

his professional duties, Mr. Alamouti serves as a te
chnical advisor to both the Harvard Broadband 
Communications Laboratory (HBBCL) and Morpho Tec
hnologies.  He has published more than 100 
papers and technical reports and has received more 
than 10 patents for his innovations in the field of 
wireless communications.  Mr. Alamouti holds B.A.Sc. and M.A.Sc. degrees in electrical engineering 

from the University of British Columbia. 

 
Duane Buddrius, director of product engineering and product management for Alvarion Inc., has been 
instrumental in Alvarion™s extraordinary growth, co
ntributing heavily to the development of new products 
for the 2.4-GHz, 5-GHz, and 900-MHz markets as well as managing the product life cycles for the North 

American Division.  He pioneered the unlicensed 
band direct sequence and frequency hopping spread 
spectrum markets, working in systems engineering, research and development, and marketing.  Mr. 

Buddrius has participated in IEEE 802.11 wireless st
andards development, FCC rule-making procedures, 
and in the WLANA, Wi-Fi, and WiMAX industry associa
tions.  Prior to Alvarion, Mr. Buddrius held 
positions as director of engineering and director of 
product development at Solectek Corporation and at 
other players in the wireless industry. 
 Leigh Chinitz 
is the chief technical officer for the Wirel
ess LAN Division of Proxim Corporation.  His 
responsibilities include setting and leading technolog
y directions across the Proxim LAN Division and 
driving the overall software and hardware architecture and technology roadmaps.  In addition, his position 
entails participation in many technical, regulatory, 
and standards organizations.  Previously he was the 
chair of the technical committee within the HomeRF
 Working Group, and currently he is an active 
participant in the 802.11 standards committees. Prior to
 joining Proxim he worked in systems technology 
research for Motorola and later was responsible for coordinating Motoro
la™s participation in FCC rule-
making proceedings as part of Motorola™s government re
lations organization.  Mr. Chintz holds a B.S. in 
physics from Yale University and an M.S. 
in physics from the University of Virginia. 
 Michael Green, manager of Global Product Compliance at Atheros Communications, is responsible for 
regulatory approvals of 802.11a, b, 
and g products.  Over the past 2 years he has lobbied spectrum 
regulators in the United States, Asia, and Europe to
 remove barriers to use of the 5-GHz bands and 
participated in the U.S. and European prepara
tion for the World Radio Conference 2003, which has 
resulted in a global allocation of 455 MHz of spectru
m for use by wireless LAN devices.  He formerly 
worked at 3Com Corporation as manager of the re
gulatory affairs and approvals group responsible for 
global approvals of all product categor
ies and as a wireless product manager.  Dewayne Hendricks is currently CEO of the Dandin Group, Inc., based in Fremont, California. The 
Dandin Group offers a comprehensive range of pr
oducts and services, including research and product 
development, for wireless communications via the Inte
rnet.  The Dandin Group will begin to deploy the 
first exclusively wireless Internet
-based communications system, includi
ng voice, data, and video, in 
Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOGRAPHIES OF SPEAKERS 
37Tonga later this year.  He is also an active member 
of the FCC Technological Advisory Council.  Prior to 
forming the Dandin Group, he was the general manage
r of the Wireless Business Unit for Com21, Inc.  
He joined Com21 following an opportunity to particip
ate as the co-principal investigator in the NSF™s 
Wireless Field Tests for Education project.  The pr
oject successfully connected remote educational 
institutions to the Internet.  The test sites ranged fro
m rural primary schools in Colorado to a university in 
Ulaan Baatar, Mongolia.  Mr. Hendricks was the CEO and cofounder of Tetherless Access Ltd., one of 

the first companies to develop and deploy Part 
15 unlicensed wireless metropolitan area data networks 
using the TCP/IP protocols.  He has participated in the installation of 
these networks in other parts of the 
world, including Kenya, Tonga, Mexico, Canada, and 
Mongolia.  In 1986, he ported the popular KA9Q 
Internet Protocol package to the Macintosh, allowing the Macintosh platform to be used in packet radio 
networks.  Today, thousands of amateur radio 
operators worldwide use the NET/Mac system he 
developed to participate in the global packet radio In
ternet.  This system continues to be developed and 
deployed by the amateur radio service.  He has been
 involved with radio since receiving his amateur radio 
operator's license as a teen.  Mr. Hendricks currently 
holds official positions in several national nonprofit 
amateur radio organizations and is a director of th
e Wireless Communications Alliance, an industry group 
representing manufacturers in the unlicensed radio industry.   
 Bradley Holmes
 is with Arraycomm, Inc. 
 SESSION 9: GOVERNMENT AND ACADEMIC R&D 
 Preston F. Marshall has an almost 30-year background in 
communications, software and hardware 
development, and system developm
ent.  Currently he is with DARPA™s Advanced Technology Office, 
and serves as program manager for the neXt Ge
neration (XG) Communications, WolfPack, and 
Connectionless networking programs, as well as several smaller efforts.  The XG program is developing 

technology to provide adaptive spectrum algorithms, wa
veforms, and media access in an integrated, open 
product.  The WolfPack program is developing an 
electronic and signal intelligence/communications and 
radar denial system that uses a distributed networ
k of forward-positioned, Coke-can-sized devices and 
networks the multiple assets to achieve order-of-
magnitude increases in capability over conventional 
standoff technology.  Mr. Marshall previously w
as employed by a number of defense electronics 
companies and participated in the Trident submarin
e, missile defense, B-1B electronic countermeasures 
and acoustic processing programs, and he has supported several Office of the Secretary of Defense offices 
in the area of spectrum-related policy and technology
.  Mr. Marshall holds B.S.E.E and M.S. degrees in 
information science from Lehigh University. 
 Dipankar Raychaudhuri is a professor of electrical and computer engineering and director of the 
Wireless Information Network Lab (WINLAB) at Rutgers University.  As WINLAB's director, he is 

responsible for a cooperative industry-university rese
arch center with focus on next-generation wireless technologies.  WINLAB's current research scope incl
udes topics such as RF/sensor devices, UWB, future 
3G and WLAN systems, spectrum management, ad hoc 
networks, and pervasive computing.  Prior to 
WINLAB, he held progressively responsible cor
porate R&D positions in telecom and networking, 
including chief scientist for Iospan 
Wireless, assistant general manager and department head of systems 
architecture for NEC USA C&C Research Laboratories,
 and head of broadband communications research 
for the Sarnoff Corporation.  Research and develo
pment highlights include the multimodal sensor-on-
silicon center of excellence (MUSE), hierarchical self-organizing ad hoc wireless network for sensors and 
4G, and AirBurst, a MIMO/OFDM system for broadba
nd fixed wireless access.  Dr. Raychaudhuri holds 
10 patents on various topics, incl
uding broadband wireless networks, MAC protocols, digital video, and 
VSAT networks.  A past vice-chair of the Wireless 
ATM Working Group of the ATM Forum, he is also 
an IEEE fellow and editor of IEEE Multimedia and ACM M2CR.  He holds a B.Tech. in electronics and 
Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A FORUM ON SPECTRUM MANAGEMENT POLICY REFORM 
38electrical communications from the Indian Institute 
of Technology at Kharagpur and M.S. and Ph.D. 
degrees in electrical engineering from SUNY at Stony Brook. 
 Moe Z. Win
 has been since 2002 with the Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics
 and the Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems at th
e Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where he holds the Charles Stark Draper Chair.  His main resear
ch interests are the application of mathematical and 
statistical theories to communication, detection, and 
estimation problems.  Specific current research topics 
include measurement and modeling of time-varying ch
annels, design and analysis of multiple antenna 
systems, ultrawide bandwidth communications syst
ems, optical communications systems, and space 
communications systems.  From 1998 to 2002, he was with the Wireless Systems Research Department at 

AT&T LaboratoriesŒResearch.  From 1994 to 1997, he
 was a research assistan
t with the Communication Sciences Institute at the University of Southern Ca
lifornia (USC), where he played a key role in the 
successful creation of the Ultra-Wideband Radio Labora
tory.  In 1987, Dr. Win was at the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory of the California Institute of Technol
ogy, where he performed research on digital 
communications and optical systems for NASA space 
exploration missions.  He currently serves as the 
technical program chair for the IEEE Communication Theory Symposium of ICC-2004.  He served as the 

technical program chair for the IEEE Communication Theory Symposium of Globecom-2000 and the 

IEEE Conference on Ultra Wideband Systems and Technologies in 2002, technical program vice-chair for 

the IEEE International Conference on Communications in 2002, and the tutorial chair for the IEEE 
Semiannual International Vehicular 
Technology Conference in fall 2001.  He is the secretary for the 
Radio Communications Technical Committee of the I
EEE Communications Society.  Dr. Win currently 
serves as area editor for 
Modulation and Signal Design 
and as editor for Wideband Wireless and 
Diversity
, both for IEEE Transactions on Communications
.  He served as the editor for Equalization and 
Diversity 
from July 1998 to June 2003 for the 
IEEE Transactions on Communications
 and as a guest 
editor for the 2002 
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications
 special issue on Ultra-Wideband Radio in Multiaccess Wireless Communications.  Dr. Win was awarded a B.S. from Texas A&M 

University in 1987 and an M.S. degree from the University of Southern California at Los Angeles in 

1989, both in electrical engineering.  As a Presidentia
l Fellow at USC, he received both an M.S. degree in 
applied mathematics and a Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering in 1998.   
 Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 39 D  Biographies of Committee and Staff Members   
   
 
 
   
 
 
David E. Liddle, Chair, is a general partner in the firm U.S. 
Venture Partners, a leading Silicon Valley 
venture capital firm that specializes in building comp
anies from an early stage in digital communications, 
networking, wireless communications
, semiconductors, technical software
, and e-health.  He retired in December 1999 after 8 years as CEO of Interval Resear
ch Corporation.  During and after his education 
(B.S. and E.E., University of Michigan; Ph.D., com
puter science, University of Toledo), Dr. Liddle has 
spent his professional career developing technologies 
for interaction and communication in activities 
spanning research, development, management, and entr
epreneurship.  First, he spent 10 years at the 
Xerox Palo Alto Research Center and the Xerox In
formation Products Group, where he was responsible 
for the first commercial implementation of the graphi
cal user interface and local area networking.  He 
then founded Metaphor Computer Systems, whose 
technology was adopted by IBM and the company 
ultimately acquired by IBM in 1991.   In 1992, Dr. 
Liddle co-founded Interval Research Corporation with 
Paul Allen.  During his tenure, the company formed
 six new companies and several joint ventures based 
on the research conducted at Interval.  Dr. Liddle 
is a consulting professor of computer science at 
Stanford University.  He has served as a director 
at Sybase, Broderbund Software, Metricom, Starwave, 
and Ticketmaster; he is currently a director with the New York Times Company, in addition to numerous 
early-stage companies.  He was honored as a distingui
shed alumnus from the University of Michigan and 
is a member of the national advisory committee at the 
College of Engineering of that university.  He is 
also a member of the advisory committee of the School
 of Engineering at Stanford University and of the 
College of Engineering at the University of Californi
a, Berkeley.  He has been elected a senior fellow of 
the Royal College of Art for his contributions to human-computer interaction.  His current technology and 

investment interests are particularly focused
 on signal processing, with emphasis on wireless 
communications. 
 Yochai Benkler is a professor of law at Yale Law School.  
His research focuses on the effects of laws that regulate information production and exchange on th
e distribution of control over information flows, 
knowledge, and culture in the digital environment.  Hi
s particular focus has been the neglected role of commons-based approaches toward management of res
ources in the digitally netw
orked environment.  He 
has written about the economics and political th
eory of rules governing telecommunications 
infrastructure, with a special emphasis on wirel
ess communications, rules governing private control over 
information, in particular intellectual property, a
nd of relevant aspects of U.S. constitutional law.  
Previously, Mr. Benkler had been a professor at New 
York University School of Law, where he was 
director of the Engelberg Center for Innovation Law a
nd Policy and of the Information Law Institute.  Mr. 
Benkler received his J.D from Harvard Law School and his LL.B. from Tel Aviv University.   

 Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A FORUM ON SPECTRUM MANAGEMENT POLICY REFORM 
40David Borth is an expert on wireless communications, with insight into national security as well as 
commercial needs.  He is corporate vice president and director of the Communications Research 

Laboratories of Motorola, a part of the company's 
research arm, Motorola Labs.  Dr. Borth joined 
Motorola in 1980 as a member of the Systems 
Research Laboratory in corporate research and 
development.  As a member of that organizati
on, he has conducted research on digital modulation 
techniques, adaptive digital signal processing methods
 applied to communication systems, and personal 
communication systems, including both cellular and PC
S systems.  He has contributed to Motorola's 
implementations of the GSM, TDMA (IS-54/IS-136), a
nd CDMA (IS-95) digital cellular systems.  In his 
current role, he manages a multinational (United 
States, Australia, France, Japan, United Kingdom) 
organization focusing on all aspects of communication 
systems, ranging from theoretical systems studies 
to system and subsystem analysis and implementation 
to integrated circuit designs.  Dr. Borth received his B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign.  Previously, he was a member of the 
technical staff of the systems division of Watkins-
Johnson Company and an assistant professor in the School
 of Electrical Engineering, Georgia Institute of 
Technology.  Dr. Borth is a member of Motorola's
 Science Advisory Board Associates and has been 
elected a Dan Noble Fellow, Motorola's highest honorary
 technical award.  He has been issued 31 patents 
and has authored or co-authored chapters of five books in addition to 25 publications.  He received the 
Distinguished Alumnus Award from the University of
 Illinois Electrical and Computer Engineering 
Alumni Association and was elected a fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers for 
his contributions to the design and development of
 wireless telecommunication systems.  He is a 
registered professional engineer in the state of Illinois.  Dr. Borth was a member of the Computer Science 
and Telecommunications Board from 2000 to 2003.  He also served on the CSTB committee that 

produced the report 
Information Technology for Counter-Te
rrorism: Immediate Action and Future 
Possibilities (2003).  Robert W. Brodersen
 is the John R. Whinnery Distinguished Professor in the Department of Electrical 
Engineering and Computer Science at the University of 
California at Berkeley. He is also the co-scientific 
director of the Berkeley Wireless Research Center
, where his research focus is the application of 
integrated circuits to personal communication syst
ems, with emphasis on wireless communications and 
low-power design.  Dr. Brodersen's research is fo
cused in the areas of low power design and wireless communications and the CAD tools necessary to support 
these activities.  He has won best paper awards for a number of journal and conference papers in 
the areas of integrated circuit design, CAD, and communications, including the W.G. Baker Award in 
1979. In 1982 he became a fellow of the IEEE. He was corecipient of the IEEE Morris K. Liebmann Awa
rd in 1983. He received technical achievement 
awards in the IEEE Circuits and Systems Society 
in 1986, from the Signal Processing Society in 1991, 
and in 1999 from the ACM Special Interest Group in
 Mobile Computing.  Dr. Brodersen was elected a 
member of the National Academy of Engineering in 
1988.  In 1996, he received the IEEE Solid State 
Circuits Award.  He was awarded an honorary doctorate
 from the University of Lund, Sweden, in 1999, 
and in 2000 he received the Millennium Award from 
the Circuits and Systems Society and the Golden 
Jubilee Award from the IEEE.  In 2001 he was awar
ded the Lewis Winner Award for outstanding paper at 
the IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Confer
ence. He has served on the editorial board or as 
reviewer for numerous scholarly jour
nals and publications, including the 
IEEE Journal of Solid-State 
Circuits, IEEE Transactions on VLSI Systems
, IEEE Personal Communications Magazine, and Wireless 
Personal Communications
 (Kluwer Press).  He is the author or co-author of over 60 journal publications; 
120 published conference papers; and 
author, co-author, editor, or contributor to 14 books, including 
An Anatomy of a Silicon Compiler
 (1992, Kluwer Academic Publishers) and 
Low Power Digital CMOS Design (1995, Kluwer Academic Publishers).  He rece
ived his Ph.D. degree in engineering from the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1972. 
 
David D. Clark graduated from Swarthmore College in
 1966 and received his Ph.D. from the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1973.  He
 has worked since then at the MIT Laboratory for 
Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOGRAPHIES OF COMMITTEE MEMBERS 
41Computer Science, where he is currently a senior r
esearch scientist in charge of the Advanced Network 
Architecture Group.  Dr. Clark's research interest
s include networks, network protocols, operating 
systems, distributed systems, and computer and communications security.  After receiving his Ph.D., he 
worked on the early stages of the ARPANET and on the development of token ring local area network 
technology.  Since the mid-1970s, Dr. Clark has been involved in the development of the Internet.  From 

1981 to 1989, he acted as chief protocol architect in
 this development and chaired the Internet Activities 
Board.  His current research area is protocols and architectures for very large and very high speed 

networks.  Specific activities include extensions to 
the Internet to support real-time traffic, explicit 
allocation of service, pricing, and new network technol
ogies.  In the security area, Dr. Clark participated 
in the early development of the multilevel secure Mul
tics operating system.  He developed an information 
security model that stresses integrity of data rather th
an disclosure control.  Dr. Clark is a fellow of the 
ACM and the IEEE and is a member of the National 
Academy of Engineering.  He received the ACM 
SIGCOMM award and the IEEE award in international communications, as well as the IEEE Hamming 

Award for his work on the Internet.  He is a consu
ltant to a number of companies and serves on a number 
of technical advisory boards.  Dr. Clark is currently
 chair of the CSTB (term ending June 30, 2004).  He 
chaired the committee that produced the CSTB report 
Computers at Risk:  Safe Computing in the Information Age and served on the committees that produced several other CSTB reports.  
Thomas (Ted) E. Darcie
 received his Ph.D. in aerospace physics 
from the University of Toronto in 
1982.  Currently, he is a professor at the University
 of Victoria, British Columbia, holding a Tier 1 
Canada Research Chair in Optical Systems for Comm
unications, Imaging, and Sensing.  Previously he 
worked at AT&T Bell Laboratories, where he joined th
e technical staff to study a wide variety of topics 
related to light-wave telecommunications, including fiber fabrication processes, semiconductor lasers, 
optical amplifiers, and numerous m
odulation and multiplexing techniques.  He has been a lead figure in 
the development of light-wave systems for analog appli
cations in cable television and wireless systems.  
As head of access communications research at 
AT&T Bell Laboratories (1989-1995), Dr. Darcie was 
responsible for technology innovation in wireless, lig
ht-wave, and hybrid fiber-coax systems.  He has 
authored over 100 technical publications and 25 patent
s spanning this broad set of technologies.  From 
1995 to 2002, he was vice president at AT&T Laboratories, in charge of communications infrastructure 

research.  His research laboratory provided technol
ogy support for AT&T™s diverse requirements in 
optical networking, broadband access, fixed wireless access, wireless LAN, and cellular systems.  His 
team worked closely with AT&T businesses to provide
 technical expertise and vision and has numerous 
programs devoted to the evolution of mobile and 
broadband services, applications, and technologies.  
From 2002 to 2003, he was vice president for AT
&T Labs™ Network Architecture and Strategic 
Operations Planning, with responsibility for 
connecting innovative ne
twork technologies with opportunities within AT&T™s network.  Dr. Darcie is
 an AT&T fellow, a fellow of the IEEE, and is 
currently a member of the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board. 
 Andrea Goldsmith
 received B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in el
ectrical engineering from the University 
of California at Berkeley in 1986,
 1991, and 1994, respectively.  Sh
e was an assistant professor in the 
department of electrical engineering at Caltech from 1994 to 1999.  In 1999, she joined the electrical 
engineering department at Stanford University, wh
ere she is currently an associate professor.  Her 
industry experience includes affiliation with Maxi
m Technologies (1986-1990), where she worked on 
packet radio and satellite communication systems, 
and with AT&T Bell Laboratories (1991-1992), where 
she worked on microcell modeling and channel estima
tion.  Dr. Goldsmith™s research includes work on 
the capacity of wireless channels and networks
; wireless information and communication theory; 
multiantenna wireless systems; energy-constraine
d communications; communications for distributed 
control; cross-layer design for cellular systems ad 
hoc wireless networks; and sensor networks.  Dr. 
Goldsmith holds the Bredt Faculty Development Scholar
 Chair at Stanford and is a recipient of the 
National Academy of Engineering Gilbreth Lectur
eship, Stanford's Terman Faculty Fellowship, a 
National Science Foundation CAREER Developmen
t Award, the Office of Naval Research Young 
Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A FORUM ON SPECTRUM MANAGEMENT POLICY REFORM 
42Investigator Award, a National Semiconductor F
aculty Development Award, an Okawa Foundation 
Award, and the David Griep Memorial Prize from the Un
iversity of California at Berkeley.  She was an 
editor for the IEEE Transactions on Communications from 1995 to 2001 and has been an editor for the
 IEEE Wireless Communications magazine since 1995.  She is also an elected member of Stanford's 
faculty senate and the IEEE Information Theory Soci
ety Board of Governors.  Dr. Goldsmith served on 
the CSTB committee that produced the report 
Evolution of Untethered Communications
 (1997). 
 
Dale N. Hatfield is currently an independent consultant 
and adjunct professor in the Department of 
Interdisciplinary Telecommunications at the Univer
sity of Colorado at Boulder (CU).  Between 
December 2000 and April 2002, Mr. Hatfield served as chai
r of the department.  Prior to joining CU, Mr. 
Hatfield was the chief of the Office of Engineeri
ng and Technology at the FCC and immediately before 
that was chief technologist at the commission.  Be
fore joining the FCC in December 1997, he was CEO 
of Mr. Hatfield Associates, Inc., a multidisciplinar
y telecommunications consulting firm in Boulder, 
Colorado, for 15 years.  Before that, Mr. Hatfie
ld was deputy Assistant Secretary of Commerce for 
Communications and Information and deputy administra
tor of the NTIA.  Before moving to NTIA, Mr. 
Hatfield was chief of the Office of Plans and Policy at the FCC.  In 1973 Mr. Hatfield received a 
Department of Commerce Silver Medal for contribu
tions to domestic communications satellite policy, 
and in 1999 he received the Attorney General's Dis
tinguished Service Award.  In 2000, he received the 
PCIA Foundation's Eugene C. Bowler award fo
r exceptional professionalism and dedication in 
government service and the FCC's Gold Medal Award
 for distinguished service.  More recently, he 
received the distinguished engineer award from the Univer
sity of Colorado at Boulder.  He currently is a 
fellow of the Radio Club of America.  In February
 2001, the FTC appointed Mr. Hatfield as monitor 
trustee in the AOL/Time Warner merger.  Currently, Mr
. Hatfield is serving on the board of directors of 
Crown Castle International and KBDI
 TV-12 public television in Denver.  He holds a B.S. in electrical 
engineering from Case Institute of Technology and 
an M.S. in industrial management from Purdue 
University. 
 Michael Katz is the Edward J. and Mollie Arnold Prof
essor of Business Administration of the Haas 
Economic Analysis and Policy Group and Director of
 the Center for Telecommunications and Digital 
Convergence at the University of California at Berk
eley.  From 2001 to 2002, he was Deputy Assistant 
Attorney General for economic analysis in the Antitrus
t Division of the Department of Justice.  From 
1994 to 1996, he was chief economist at the Federal 
Communications Commission.  Dr. Katz is co-editor of California Management Review
 and Journal of Economics and Management Strategy
.  He is a former 
member of the Computer Science and Telecommunica
tions Board of the National Research Council. He 
received his Ph.D. in economics from Oxford University.  

 Paul J. Kolodzy
 is director of the Wireless Network Security Center (WiNSeC), a new research facility 
at Stevens Institute of Technology that will draw
 on wide-ranging expertise to
 design, develop, and 
evaluate technology for the secure transmission of voice, 
video, and data.  He is also is a professor in the schools of Engineering and Technology Management at
 Stevens.  Previously, Dr. Kolodzy had been 
appointed as the senior spectrum policy advisor at the 
FCC, and he was also chair of the FCC™s newly 
created Spectrum Policy Task Force, which was ch
arged with examining spectrum allocation processes 
and other issues so that spectrum can be put to the 
highest and best use in a timely manner.  Before 
joining the FCC, Dr. Kolodzy served as a program manager within the Advanced Technology Office at 

DARPA in the Department of Defense.  At DARPA
, he oversaw the development of next-generation 
communications technology, which included the neXt 
Generation Communications (XG) initiative.  The 
XG project is developing technology that has the pot
ential to fundamentally change the manner which 
spectrum is allocated and assigned.  Dr. Kolodzy has al
so held positions at MIT's Lincoln Laboratory and 
Lockheed Martin Corporation in the development and management of advanced signal processing, RF, 
and EO systems.  He received a B.S. from Purdue Univ
ersity in chemical engineering and an M.S. and a 
Ph.D. in chemical engineering from Case Western 
Reserve University.  His doctoral work focused on 
Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOGRAPHIES OF COMMITTEE MEMBERS 
43laser measurement systems. 
 
Larry Larson is professor of electrical and computer engineering and director of the Center for Wireless 
Communications at the University of California, San Diego (UCSD).  Dr. Larson's research ranges from 
electronic circuits and systems to electronic devices and 
materials.  He develops high-speed circuits based 
on InP (indium phosphide) and GaAs (gallium arsen
ide) as well as silicon-germanium and CMOS 
technology.  He also explores applications for 
micromachining technology in the manufacture of high-
speed integrated circuits and studies new packaging technology for them.  Dr. Larson's current research is 
specifically also focused on low-power circu
it design and RF design techniques for wireless communications.  He recently completed 
CDMA Mobile Radio Design
, a book on how to design the 
hardware and software for wireless handsets based on code-division 
multiple access technology.  CDMA 
is the foundation of all third-genera
tion wireless technologies, including
 Europe's W-CDMA standard and 
CDMA2000.  As director of the industry-sponsored
 Center for Wireless Communications (CWC) at 
UCSD, Dr. Larson is in a unique position to co
mment on the development and deployment of 3G 
wireless, including new generations of circuits.  He
 oversees a wide range of ongoing research projects, 
with funding from CWC's 17 corporate members.  He is
 the first holder of the Communications Industry 
endowed chair at the Jacobs School.  He joined the UCSD faculty in 1996, after a 16-year career at 

Hughes Research Laboratories, where he pioneered th
e development of analog integrated circuits and 
low-noise HEMTs in III-V technology, as well as microwav
e integrated circuits in SiGe HBT technology and RF MEMs technology
.  Dr. Larson received his Ph.D. from the University of California at Los 
Angeles in 1986.  He is an IEEE fellow and co-w
inner of the 1996 Hughes Electronics Lawrence Hyland 
Patent Award and the 1999
 IBM Microelectronics Excellence Award.   
 David P. Reed is a fellow at HP Labs and an adjunct professo
r at the MIT Media Laboratory.  Dr. Reed's work focuses on using digital technology to transfor
m the design of technological, business, and social 
systems.  His current explorations center on explo
iting new information technologies that enable people 
to be more effective, including mobile compu
ting; highly scalable wire
less networking; group 
information sharing; pervasive networking; video 
media processing; and infrastructures for electronic 
commerce.  Dr. Reed spent 4 years at Interval Res
earch Corporation, explor
ing portable and consumer 
media technology. For 7 years prior to joining Interv
al, Dr. Reed was vice president and chief scientist for 
Lotus Development Corporation, where he led the d
esign and implementation of key products, including 
1-2-3, and technical business strategy.  Dr. Reed wa
s also a professor in MIT's Laboratory for Computer 
Science.  He is co-inventor of the end-to-end ar
gument, often called the fundamental architectural 
principle of the Internet.  Dr. Reed holds a B.S. 
in electrical engineering a
nd M.S and Ph.D. degrees in 
computer science and engineering from MIT.
  Gregory L. Rosston is the deputy director of the Stanford 
Institute for Economic Policy Research.  His 
research focuses on industrial organization, antitrust, 
and regulation.  He has written numerous articles on 
competition in local telecommunications, implemen
tation of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, 
auctions, and spectrum policy.  He has also co-edited two books, including 
Interconnection and the 
Internet: Selected Papers from the 1996 Telecommunications Policy Research Conference
.  Prior to joining Stanford University, Dr. Rosston served as deputy chief economist of the FCC.  At the FCC, he 

helped to implement the Telecommunications Act.  In 
this work, he helped to design and write the rules 
the commission adopted as a framework to encour
age efficient competition in telecommunications 
markets.  He also helped with the design and 
implementation of the FCC's spectrum auctions.  Dr. 
Rosston received his Ph.D. in economics from Stanford
 University and his A.B. in economics from the 
University of California at Berkeley. 
 
David Skellern is currently the technology director for Cisco's Wireless Networking Business Unit.  
He has been a consultant for leading compani
es in the United States, Europe, and Japan on the 
development of multiservice and broadband communica
tions networks. He held a senior staff faculty 
Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A FORUM ON SPECTRUM MANAGEMENT POLICY REFORM 
44position at HP Laboratories from 1993 to 1999.  In 1989, Dr. Skellern joined Macquarie University as 
professor of electronics.  While at Macquarie University, he worked to develop the core technologies that 
led to the formation of Radiata Communications Pty Lt
d. in 1997. He received B.Sc. (1972), B.E. (1974), 
and Ph.D. (1985) degrees from the University of Sydney.  
  STAFF  Jon Eisenberg, study director, is a senior program officer with the Computer Science and 
Telecommunications Board of the National Research Counc
il.  At CSTB, he has been study director for a 
diverse body of work, including a series of studies exploring networking technologies and Internet and 

broadband policy.  Current studies include an ex
amination of emerging wireless technologies and 
spectrum policy and a review of the National Archiv
es and Records Administration's digital materials 
preservation strategy.  From 1995 to 1997, Dr. Eisen
berg was an AAAS Science, Engineering, and 
Diplomacy Fellow at the U.S. Agency
 for International Development, wh
ere he worked on environmental 
management, technology transfer, and telecommunicati
ons policy issues.  He received his Ph.D. in 
physics from the University of Washington in 1996 a
nd B.S. in physics with honors from the University 
of Massachusetts at Amherst in 1988. 

 Julie Esanu is a program officer for the Office of Intern
ational Scientific and Technical Information Programs (ISTIP) at the National Academies.  Her emphasis is policy and management issues related to 

digital scientific and technical data and information,
 primarily through the support of the U.S. National 
Committee for the Committee on Data for Science 
and Technology (CODATA), an interdisciplinary 
committee of the International Council of Science.   
Ms. Esanu is the coeditor of two recent and related 
National Academies reports, including 
Open Access and the Public Domain 
in Digital Data for Science:  
Proceedings of a Symposium (National Academies Press, forthcoming) and 
The Role of Scientific and 
Technical Data and Information in the P
ublic Domain: Proceedings of a Symposium 
(NAP, 2003).  She 
worked with the Computer Science and Telecomm
unications Board to convene a workshop on the 
spectrum management policy reform and has provide
d program and research support to other National 
Academies™ projects examining the role of remote sensing research and applications; reviewing C4I 
planning for the Department of Defense; assessing r
esearch programs at the Army Research Laboratory; 
and examining the allocation of federal research 
and development funds.  Ms. Esanu received her 
bachelor™s degree in political science and internati
onal affairs from the George Washington University.  
 
Kristen Batch
 is a research associate with the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board of the 
National Research Council.  She is involved with
 the project focusing on wireless communication 
technologies and telecommunications research and 
development.  While pursuing an M.A. in 
international communications from American Univers
ity, she interned at the NTIA, in the Office of 
International Affairs, and at the Center for Strate
gic and International Studies, in the Technology and 
Public Policy Program.  She also earned a B.A. from 
Carnegie Mellon University in literary and cultural 
studies and Spanish and received two travel gran
ts to conduct independent research in Spain.  Margaret Marsh Huynh is a senior program assistant with the Computer Science and 
Telecommunications Board of the National Resear
ch Council since January 1999 supporting several 
projects.  She is currently supporting The Future of
 Supercomputing, Wireless 
Technology Prospects and 
Policy Options, and Internet Searching and the Domain
 Name System: Technical Alternatives and Policy 
Implications.  She previously worked on
 the projects that produced the reports 
Beyond Productivity: 
Information Technology, Innovation, and Creativity
; IT Roadmap to a Geospatial Future
; Building a 
Workforce for the Information Economy
; and The Digital Dilemma: Intellectual Property in the 
Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy ReformCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOGRAPHIES OF COMMITTEE MEMBERS 
45Information Age.  Ms. Huynh also assisted with the project Exploring Information Technology Issues for 
the Behavioral and Social Sciences (Digital Divide and Democracy).  She assists on other projects as 

needed.  Prior to coming to the NRC, Ms. Huynh 
worked as a meeting assistant at Management for 
Meetings and from September 1996 to April 1998 as a m
eeting assistant at the American Society for Civil 
Engineers.  Ms. Huynh has a B.A. (1990) in liberal studies with minors in sociology and psychology from 

Salisbury State University, Maryland. 
