DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/11177Assessment of Department of Defense Basic Research70 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-09443-6 | DOI 10.17226/11177Committee on Department of Defense Basic Research; Division on Engineering andPhysical Sciences; National Research CouncilAssessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee on Department of Defense Basic ResearchDivision on Engineering and Physical SciencesTHE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSWashington, D.C.www.nap.eduAssessment of Department of DefenseBasic ResearchAssessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS    500 Fifth Street, N.W.    Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the GoverningBoard of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of
the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Instituteof Medicine. The members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen fortheir special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.This is a report of work supported by Grant No. N00014-00-G-0230 between the U.S.Navy and the National Academy of Sciences. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or
recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do notnecessarily reflect the views of the organizations or agencies that provided support for thisproject.International Standard Book Number 0-309-09443-7 (Book)International Standard Book Number 0-309-54649-4 (PDF)Limited copies of this report are availableAdditional copies are available from:
from:Air Force Science and Technology BoardThe National Academies Press
National Research Council500 Fifth Street, N.W.
500 Fifth Street, N.W.Lockbox 285
Washington, DC 20001Washington, DC 20055

(202) 334-3118(800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313
(in the Washington metropolitan area)Internet, http://www.nap.eduCopyright 2005 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Printed in the United States of AmericaAssessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of
distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to thefurtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. Upon the
authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandatethat requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters.Dr.Bruce M. Alberts is president of the National Academy of Sciences.
The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the
National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. It isautonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the
National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. TheNational Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meetingnational needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achieve-
ments of engineers. Dr. Wm. A. Wulf is president of the National Academy of Engineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciencesto secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination
of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The Institute acts under the respon-sibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to be anadviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical
care, research, and education. Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute ofMedicine.The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in
1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the Academyspurposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. Functioning inaccordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the Council has become the
principal operating agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the NationalAcademy of Engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and thescientific and engineering communities. The Council is administered jointly by both Acad-
emies and the Institute of Medicine. Dr. Bruce M. Alberts and Dr. Wm. A. Wulf are chairand vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.www.national-academies.orgAssessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMMITTEE ON DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCHLARRY D. WELCH, 
Chair, U.S. Air Force (retired), Institute for DefenseAnalyses, Alexandria, VirginiaC.D. (DAN) MOTE, JR., Vice Chair, University of Maryland, College ParkALBERT J. BACIOCCO, JR., U.S. Navy (retired), Mt. Pleasant, South Carolina
JACK R. BORSTING, University of Southern California, Los Angeles

JOHN M. DEUTCH, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge

CHARLES B. DUKE, Xerox Innovation Group, Webster, New York

JOHN S. FOSTER, JR., Northrop Grumman Space Technology (retired),Redondo Beach, CaliforniaMARY L. GOOD, University of Arkansas, Little Rock
ROBERT J. HERMANN, Global Technology Partners, Hartford, Connecticut

JAMES C. McGRODDY, IBM Corporation (retired), Briarcliff Manor, New York
C. BRADLEY MOORE, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois
JAMES G. OCONNOR, Pratt & Whitney (retired), Coventry, ConnecticutRICHARD C. POWELL, University of Arizona, Tucson
FAWWAZ T. ULABY, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

BARBARA A. WILSON, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California
JOHNNIE E. WILSON, U.S. Army (retired); Dimensions International, Inc.,Alexandria, VirginiaStaffMICHAEL A. CLARKE, Lead Division Board DirectorJAMES C. GARCIA, Study Director
LANITA R. JONES, Program Assistant
DANIEL E.J. TALMAGE, JR., Research Associate
LINDSAY D. MILLARD, InternAssessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiPreface
The U.S. Congress mandated that this study be conducted. The mandate iscontained in the U.S. Senate report that accompanied the Senates version of theNational Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2004 and in the U.S. House
of Representatives report that accompanied the House-Senate authorization con-
ference committee version of the act. Specifically, the Senate and House reports,
respectively, state:While the Department [of Defense] is increasing its budget request for theScience and Technology Program, the committee remains concerned that the
investment in basic research has remained stagnant and is too focused on near-term demands. Therefore, the committee recommends an increase of $50.0 million
for basic research. In addition, the committee directs the Director of Defense
Research and Engineering to commission a study by the National Academy ofSciences to assess the basic research portfolio of the services and the DefenseAdvanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA). This assessment should review
the basic research portfolio in order to determine if the programs are consistentwith the definitions of basic research in DoD regulation. This report is notintended to rate the worthiness of the basic research portfolio, but rather to
determine whether the basic research portfolio needs to be realigned to be moreconsistent with the goals of traditional fundamental research activities.11Senate Armed Services Committee, FY04 National Defense Authorization Act, 108th Cong.,2003, S. Rep. 108-46, Title II, Subtitle A. Available online at http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname=108_cong_reports&docid=f:sr046.108.pdf. Last accessed on November 16, 2004.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiiPREFACEandThe conferees further note their concerns about funding levels and technicalcontent of the basic research activities of the defense science and technology
program. The Departments investment in basic research provides the founda-tion upon which our modern military is built. It is critical the basic researchinvestment remain strong, stable, and focused on the fundamental search for
new knowledge. Therefore, the conferees direct the National Academies of
Science to evaluate the DOD basic research portfolio. The evaluation shallutilize the official DOD definition of basic research to determine whether the
basic research portfolio is consistent with the definition provided in DOD regu-lation. The conferees expect to work closely with the National Academies ofScience and the Secretary to build the terms of reference for this evaluation.
The evaluation should be made available to the congressional defense com-mittees prior to the fiscal year 2006 budget request.2The Department of Defense (DOD) awarded National Research Council(NRC) the study grant with an effective starting date of March 2004.BACKGROUND AND SCOPE OF STUDYThe Department of Defense currently defines basic research as follows:3Basic research is systematic study directed toward greater knowledge or under-standing of the fundamental aspects of phenomena and of observable factswithout specific applications towards processes or products in mind. It includes
all scientific study and experimentation directed toward increasing fundamentalknowledge and understanding in those fields of the physical, engineering, envi-ronmental, and life sciences related to longterm national security needs. It is
farsighted high payoff research that provides the basis for technologicalprogress. Basic research may lead to: (a) subsequent applied research and advancedtechnology developments in Defense-related technologies, and (b) new and

improved military functional capabilities in areas such as communications,detection, tracking, surveillance, propulsion, mobility, guidance and control,navigation, energy conversion, materials and structures, and personnel support.
Program elements in this category involve pre-Milestone A efforts.2House Armed Services Committee, National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2004, 108thCong., 2003, H.R. Rep. 108-354, Title II, Subtitle D. Available online at http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname=108_cong_reports&docid=f:hr354.108.pdf. Last accessed on Novem-
ber16, 2004.
3Department of Defense, Financial Management Regulation, DOD 7000.14-R, Vol. 2B, Ch. 5,June 2004. Available online at http://www.dtic.mil/descriptivesum/budget_activities.pdf. Last
accessed on November 16, 2004.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACEixThe goal of DOD basic research support is to encourage advances in fieldsthat are likely to contribute to national defense, and in doing so, to foster a
competitive technology base for the U.S. military.In order to maintain this competitive technology base, the DOD continues tofund basic research. However, over the past 6 years, it has come to the attention
of the congressional committees on armed services that basic research funded by
the DOD may be changing. Several organizations, including university research
departments and defense laboratories, have described areas of concern. They
include the following:Some research conducted using funds designated specifically for basicresearch is not, under the DODs definition, considered basic research;Reporting requirements on DOD grants and contracts have become cum-bersome and constraining to basic researchers; andBasic research funds are handled differently among the Services, whichmakes the funds, in some cases, difficult to track and monitor.These concerns prompted the armed services committees to request that theNational Academies perform a study regarding the nature of basic research cur-
rently being funded by the Department of Defense. The task includes assessing
the DODs basic research portfolio, including that managed by the Office of theSecretary of Defense, the three military departments, and the Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency (DARPA), to determine if the programs in that port-
folio are consistent with the definitions of basic research contained in DOD
regulations and consistent with the characteristics associated with fundamental
research activities. Specifically, the National Academies statement of task is
shown in Box P-1.STUDY APPROACH AND CONSTRAINTSThe committee (see Appendix A for biographical sketches of members)approached the study in two basic steps, which corresponded to its first two
meetings. The committee devoted its first meeting, on May 5-6, 2004, to under-
standing the DOD definitions for basic and applied research and the characteristics
associated with fundamental research and to gathering data and information that
would provide insight into the study issue and background from representatives
of the research community. During this meeting, the committee received presen-
tations by personnel from the DOD, the Office of Management and Budget
(OMB), the National Science Foundation (NSF), and the Department of Energy
(DOE) and from a former member of the Senate Committee on Armed Services
staff. Representatives of the Association of American Universities (AAU) and
the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) spoke. The
associate provost from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and viceAssessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xPREFACEBOX P-1
Statement of TaskIn accordance with Senate Report 108-46, Title II, Subtitle A, and House Report108-354, Title II, Subtitle D, the National Academies will conduct a study to assess
the basic research portfolio of the Department of Defense (DoD), including thatmanaged by the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD), the three militarydepartments, and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), to
determine if the programs in that portfolio are consistent with the definitions ofbasic research contained in DoD regulations and consistent with the characteristicsassociated with fundamental research activities. To conduct the study, the National
Academies will accomplish the following tasks:1.Form a study committee that possesses knowledge and expertise in the
science and technology areas in which DoD basic research is involved; under-
standing of the differences and relationships between the DoD science andtechnology (S&T) program categories of basic research (6.1), applied research
(6.2), and advanced technology development (6.3); and understanding of DoDfinancial management and budget regulations and processes that define basicresearch and govern the categorization of science and technology programs
and related budgets as basic research and understand the historical character-istics associated with fundamental research activities.2.Review the unclassified and classified DoD basic research portfolio through
descriptions and documentation of recent, current, and planned programs; dis-cussions with DoD S&T and basic research policy makers, program managers,
and intramural and extramural researchers; on-site examination; testimoniesfrom persons with knowledge relevant to the study issues; and other referenceinformation as applicable.3.Audit the nature of the research to look at fundamental vs. applied orientation;
research program review criteria used by the OSD, military departments, and
DARPA; any restrictions being placed upon principal investigators; whetherbroad agency announcements permit truly innovative approaches to be pro-posed; and other such indicators.4.Determine if programs in the DoD basic research portfolio are consistent
with the definitions of basic research contained in DoD regulations and con-
sistent with the characteristics associated with fundamental research activities.Identify any instances where programs are not consistent with DoD regulationsor are not consistent with the characteristics associated with fundamental research
activities.5.Identify any problems that might arise from the definitions themselves or the
regulations, policies, or processes implementing the definitions that have a sig-nificant bearing on the study issues.6.Report findings, conclusions, and recommendations regarding the tasks above.
Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACExiprovosts for research from the University of Southern California (USC) andHoward University made presentations. Speakers from Harvard University and
George Mason University discussed how research fits into innovation. The list of
guest speakers and titles of their presentations at Meeting 1 is provided in
Appendix B.The committees second meeting, held on May 26-27, 2004, was devoted toreviewing the DODs basic research program. It included presentations (seeAppendix B) by representatives from the U.S. Army, U.S. Navy, U.S. Air Force,
DARPA, the Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA), and the Office of the
Secretary of Defense (OSD). Army speakers included representatives of the

Assistant Secretary of the Army for Acquisition, Logistics, and Technology
(ASAALT); the Army Research Laboratory (ARL) (including the Army Research

Office [ARO]); the Army Research Institute (ARI); the Medical Research and
Materiel Command (MRMC); the Engineer Research and Development Center
(ERDC); and the Research, Development, and Engineering Command (RDECOM).
The committee received presentations from Navy representatives of the Office of
Naval Research (ONR), the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL), and the Naval
warfare centers. Representatives of the Air Force Office of Scientific Research
(AFOSR) and the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) made presentations.
The director of DARPAs Defense Sciences Office represented DARPA. TheDOD chemical and biological defense program was discussed by a DTRA repre-
sentative. An OSD representative discussed the Department of Defense Experi-
mental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (DEPSCoR).The committee also conducted several site visits. Committee members visitedDARPA, the three main Service laboratories, and the Navy and Air Force offices
responsible for managing their respective Services basic research program.During each visit, committee members met with key organization leadership
personnel in addition to one or more groups of researchers and/or research
managers. Discussion topics included the DOD definition of basic research; the
perceptions of leadership, researchers, and managers about how well their research
fits this definition and about characteristics associated with basic research; trends;
concerns; and suggested improvements. Appendix C lists the DOD organizations
visited.Committee members also visited and/or interviewed individuals and groupsat the universities shown in Appendix C. Each visit included a meeting with the
key person responsible for research at the university (usually a vice president or
vice provost for research), as well as one or more groups of DOD-sponsored
researchers. In addition to the same topics discussed during the DOD site visits,
the discussions at the universities addressed the importance of DOD research
funding to the university research enterprise (e.g., faculty development and sup-
port, the ability to train graduate students, and the impact on the research agenda
of individual researchers and the institution). These same topics were discussed
during interviews of university research leaders who were not visited in person.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiPREFACEIn selecting the universities that it would invite to participate in its meetings,visits, and/or interviews, the committee attempted to include a representative
sample of universities receiving DOD research funding. The universities that
received DOD basic and applied research funding in fiscal year 2002 are shown
in Appendix E. Although it was impossible for the committee to conduct site
visits or interviews with research leaders and others at all of these universities or
even a major percentage of them, the committee sought to obtain meaningful
information regarding the study issue by selecting a sample that received a sig-
nificant portion of DOD research funding, included research sponsored by all
three military Services and DARPA, and was geographically balanced. In all, the
committees site visits and interviews included discussions with approximately140 people from 7 DOD research organizations and 14 universities.Constraints on this study were the normal ones experienced by most suchstudiesschedule and resources. The primary constraint was the requirementexpressed by congressional staff members that the study results be available by
the end of 2004.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSThe committee thanks the many organizations and guest speakers that pro-vided excellent support to the committee. The speakers presented information to
the committee that had a direct bearing on the study. From the high quality of the
presentations, it was obvious that the speakers and others had spent many hours
preparing. From the point of view of the committee, this was time well spent. We
hope that the speakers, their organizations, the committees Department of Defensesponsor, and ultimately the readers of this report will agree.Finally, the committee thanks the NRC staff members who supported thestudy. Primary among them were Mike Clarke, Jim Garcia, LaNita Jones, Daniel
Talmage, and intern Lindsay Millard.Larry D. Welch, ChairCommittee on Department of Defense Basic ResearchAssessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiiAcknowledgment of Reviewers
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for theirdiverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved
by the National Research Councils (NRCs) Report Review Committee. Thepurpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments
that will assist the institution in making its published report as sound as possible
and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evi-
dence, and responsiveness to the study charge. The review comments and draft
manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process.
We wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:Duane Adams, Carnegie Mellon University,Rita Colwell, University of Maryland,
Anthony J. DeMaria, Coherent-DEOS,
Gerald P. Dinneen, Honeywell, Inc. (retired),
Fernando L. Fernandez, Stevens Institute of Technology,
Ernest Henley, University of Washington,
Kathryn Logan, Georgia Institute of Technology (retired),
John W. Lyons, U.S. Army Research Laboratory (retired),
John B. Mooney, Jr., U.S. Navy (retired),
Theodore Poehler, Johns Hopkins University,
Charles V. Shank, E.O. Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,
James Siedow, Duke University,
Pace Vandevender, Sandia National Laboratories, and
Charles Zukoski, University of Illinois.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xivACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERSAlthough the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive com-ments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recom-
mendations, nor did they see the final draft of the report before its release. The
review of this report was overseen by William G. Agnew (NAE), General Motors
Corporation (retired). Appointed by the NRC, he was responsible for making
certain that an independent examination of this report was carried out in accor-
dance with institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully
considered. Responsibility for the final content of this report rests entirely with
the authoring committee and the institution.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xvContentsEXECUTIVE SUMMARY1
ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE (DOD)7
BASIC RESEARCHIntroduction, 7
Definitions and Their Role in Managing Basic Research, 8Findings, 11
Recommendations, 11Basic Research in the Wider Cycle of Discovery and TechnologyExploitation, 12Findings, 13
Recommendation, 13Multiple Missions, Motivations, and Management Approaches, 14Findings, 17
Recommendations, 18The Demand Versus the Supply, 18Findings, 23
Recommendations, 24APPENDIXES
ABiographical Sketches of Committee Members, 27
BGuest Speaker Presentations to the Committee, 37
Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xviCONTENTSCDOD Basic Research Organizations and Universities: Committee
Site Visits and/or Interviews, 41DDefinitions of Basic, Applied, and Fundamental Research, 44

EUniversities That Received Department of Defense 6.1 and 6.2
Funding in Fiscal Year 2002, 51Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Executive Summary
The Department of Defense (DOD) supports basic research to advance fun-damental knowledge in fields important to national defense. Over the past 6 years,however, several groups have raised concerns about whether the nature of DOD-
funded basic research is changing. The concerns include these: Funds are being
spent for research that does not fall under DODÕs definition of basic research;
reporting requirements have become cumbersome and onerous; and basic research
is handled differently by the three services. To explore these concerns, the Con-
gress directed DOD to request a study from the National Research Council (NRC)
about the nature of the basic research now being funded by the Department. Spe-
cifically, the NRC was to determine if the programs in the DOD basic research
portfolio are consistent with the DOD definition of basic research and with the
characteristics associated with fundamental research.SUMMARY OF FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONSNo significant quantities of 6.1 funds (basic research) have been directedtoward projects that are typical of research funded under categories 6.2 or 6.3.
DOD managers are generally successful in assuring that the basic research
funded by DOD fits within its definition. That definition, which precludes hav-
ing Òspecific applications . . . in mindÓ for basic research funded under category
6.1, is not, however, a useful criterion for discriminating between basic and
applied research. DOD should modify its definition by acknowledging that basic
research Òhas the potential for broad, rather than specific, applicationÓ and Òmay
lead to: . . . the discovery of new knowledge that may later lead to more focused
advances.ÓAssessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCHIt is also important to note that the need for discovery from basic researchdoes not end once a specific use is identified, but continues through applied re-search, development, and operations stages. Basic research is not part of a se-
quential, linear process from basic research, to applied research, to development,
and to application. DOD should view basic research, applied research, and devel-
opment as continuing activities occurring in parallel, with numerous supporting
connections throughout the process.At the same time, there has been a trend within DOD for reduced attention tounfettered exploration in its basic research program. Near-term DOD needs are
producing significant pressure to focus basic research in support of those needs.
DOD needs to realign the balance of its basic research effort more in favor of
unfettered exploration. Senior DOD management should support long-term ex-
ploration and discovery and communicate this understanding to its research man-
agers. Long-term, reliable DOD leadership support for basic research depends on
a clear understanding of the researchÕs expected value.The key to effective management of basic research lies in having experi-enced, empowered managers. DODÕs personnel policies should provide for con-
tinuity of research management with managers having an adequate level of au-
thority. DOD should also include within the attributes it assigns to the
management of its basic research the discovery of new fundamental knowledge,
flexibility to modify goals and approaches, freedom to pursue unexpected paths
and high-risk research questions, minimum requirements for detailed reporting,
open communications, freedom to publish, unrestricted involvement of students
and postdoctoral fellows, no restrictions on nationality of researchers, and stable
funding.The breadth and depth of science and technology (S&T) essential to the DODmission have expanded greatly in the past decade while simultaneously resources
provided for basic research have declined significantly. DOD should adjust its
basic research allocation to be more in line with its need to pursue research into
expanded areas of S&T and to support more unfettered research and new re-
searchers.Much greater involvement of university researchers is probably essential tomeet the demand for new discovery. Acquiring support from DOD, however, is
often difficult for many young university researchers. Furthermore, placing ex-
port controls on DOD-sponsored 6.1 research disqualifies it from being consid-
ered basic research as defined by NSDD-189 and poses a significant threat to the
open character of basic research performed in universities. DOD should recog-
nize NSDD-189, the fundamental research exclusion that provides for the unre-
stricted character of basic research, in its agreements with universities to perform
such research.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY3SPECIFIC FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONSThe committeeÕs findings and recommendations, which appear in the mainbody of the report with related discussion, are presented below.FindingsFinding 1. Department of Defense basic research funds under 6.1 have not beendirected in significant amounts to support projects typical of 6.2 or 6.3 funding.Finding 2. Research managers are well motivated and generally successful infocusing 6.1 funding on the discovery of fundamental knowledge in support ofthe range of Department of Defense needs.Finding 3. Having specific applications in mind is not a useful criterion for dis-criminating between basic and applied research.
Finding 4. The set of attributes and desirable characteristics of basic researchwidely shared among experienced basic research managers can be beneficial indistinguishing between basic and applied research.Finding 5. The basic research needs of the Department of Defense are complexand do not end when specific applications are identified.
Finding 6. The need for ongoing discovery from basic research can, and usuallydoes, continue through the applied research, system development, and systemoperation phases.Finding 7. Included in the range of values expected from basic research in theDepartment of Defense are (1) discovery arising from unfettered exploration,(2)focused research in response to identified DOD technology needs, and

(3) assessment of technical feasibility.Finding 8. A recent trend in basic research emphasis within the Department ofDefense has led to a reduced effort in unfettered exploration, which historicallyhas been a critical enabler of the most important breakthroughs in military
capabilities.Finding 9. Generated by important near-term Department of Defense needs andby limitations in available resources, there is significant pressure to focus DODbasic research more narrowly in support of more specific needs.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCHFinding 10. Universities, government laboratories, and industry have overlappingroles in basic research: universities primarily address the creation of broad newknowledge and human competencies, and Department of Defense laboratories
and industry are more sharply focused on discovery tied more directly to identi-
fied DOD needs.Finding 11. A clear understanding of the value expected from basic researchacross its full range provides the most reliable assurance of long-term Departmentof Defense leadership support for the basic research.Finding 12. A variety of management approaches in the Department of Defenseis appropriate to the widely diverse missions and motivations for basic research.
Finding 13. The key to effective management of basic research lies in havingexperienced and empowered program managers. Current assignment policies andpriorities (such as leaving substantial numbers of program manager positions
unfilled) are not always consistent with this need, which might result in negative
consequences for the effectiveness of basic research management in the long term.Finding 14. The breadth and depth of the sciences and technologies essential tothe Department of Defense mission have greatly expanded over the past decade.
Finding 15. In real terms the resources provided for Department of Defense basicresearch have declined substantially over the past decade.
Finding 16. The demand for new discovery argues for significantly increasedinvolvement of university researchers. Yet some younger university researchersin the expanded fields of interest to the Department of Defense are often discour-
aged by the difficulty in acquiring research support from the department.Finding 17. Recent pressures to apply restrictions on participation and publica-tion through export controls on Department of Defense-sponsored research fundedin 6.1 both disqualify it from being considered basic research as defined by National
Security Decision Directive 189 and threaten to change fundamentally the open
and public character of basic university research. This finding does not apply to
research funded in 6.2.RecommendationsRecommendation 1. The Department of Defense should change its definition ofbasic research to the following:Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY5Basic research is systematic study directed toward greater knowledgeor understanding of the fundamental aspects of phenomena and has the
potential for broad, rather than specific, application. It includes all
scientific study and experimentation directed toward increasing funda-
mental knowledge and understanding in those fields of the physical,
engineering, environmental, social, and life sciences related to long-
term national security needs. It is farsighted high-payoff research that
provides the bases for technological progress. Basic research may lead
to (a) subsequent applied research and advance technology develop-
ments in Defense-related technologies, (b) new and improved military
functional capabilities, or (c) the discovery of new knowledge that may
later lead to more focused advances in areas relevant to the Department
of Defense.Recommendation 2. The Department of Defense should include the followingattributes in its guidance to basic research managers and direct that these attributes
be used to characterize 6.1-funded research: a spirit that seeks first and foremost
to discover new fundamental understanding, flexibility to modify goals or
approaches in the near term based on discovery, freedom to pursue unexpected
paths opened by new insights, high-risk research questions with the potential for
high payoff in future developments, minimum requirements for detailed report-
ing, open communications with other researchers and external peers, freedom to
publish in journals and present at meetings without restriction and permission,
unrestricted involvement of students and postdoctoral candidates, no restrictions
on the nationality of researchers, and stable funding for an agreed timetable to
carry out the research.Recommendation 3. The Department of Defense should abandon its view ofbasic research as being part of a sequential or linear process of research anddevelopment (in this view, the results of basic research are handed off to applied
research, the results of applied research are handed off to advanced technology
development, and so forth). Instead, the DOD should view basic research, applied
research, and the other phases of research and development as continuing activi-
ties that occur in parallel, with numerous supporting connections among them.Recommendation 4. The Department of Defense should set the balance of sup-port within 6.1 basic research more in favor of unfettered exploration than ofresearch related to short-term needs.Recommendation 5. Senior Department of Defense leadership should clearlycommunicate to research managers its understanding of the need for long-termexploration and discovery.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCHRecommendation 6. Personnel policies should provide for the needed continuityof research management in order to ensure a cadre of experienced managerscapable of exercising the level of authority needed to effectively direct research
resources. Further, in light of the reductions in positions reported to the Com-
mittee on Department of Defense Basic Research, the Department of Defense
should carefully examine the adequacy of the number of basic research manage-
ment positions.Recommendation 7. The Department of Defense should redress the imbalancebetween its current basic research allocation, which has declined critically overthe past decade, and its need to better support the expanded areas of technology,
the need for increased unfettered basic research, and the support of new researchers.Recommendation 8. The Department of Defense should, through its funding andpolicies for university research, encourage increased participation by youngerresearchers as principal investigators.Recommendation 9. To avoid weakening the long and fruitful partnershipbetween universities and Department of Defense agencies, DOD agreements andsubagreements with universities for basic research should recognize National
Security Decision Directive 189, the fundamental research exclusion providing
for the open and unrestricted character of basic research. DOD program managers
should also explicitly retain the authority to negotiate export compliance clauses
out of basic research grants to universities, on the basis of both the programÕs
specific technologies and its objectives.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.7Assessment of Department of DefenseBasic ResearchINTRODUCTIONThe central issues addressed by the Committee on Department of DefenseBasic Research are these: (1) determining if the content of the basic research
portfolios managed by the Department of Defense (DOD) is consistent with the
DOD definition of basic research and with the characteristics of basic research,
(2) evaluating management challenges arising from the definition of basic
research, and (3) identifying constraints on basic research in universities and labo-
ratories arising from the definition and its implementation.To address these issues, the committee engaged in discussions with leadersand managers across the DOD research enterprise and with others who have
special interest in the subject. The discussions included two open plenary sessions.
A list of the presentations made at these meetings is provided in Appendix B. In
addition, to ensure a well-grounded understanding of DOD basic research man-
agement and its effect on researchers, the committee interviewed approximately
140 program managers and researchers located at 7 DOD organizations that
manage and/or conduct basic research and 14 universities that are among those
receiving the largest aggregate of DOD grants and contracts for research. These
DOD organizations and universities are listed in Appendix C. Although the
committee did not attempt a statistical analysis of the results of these contacts,
consistent themes in the responses of interviewees make the anecdotal evidence
credible and useful.The committee held discussions in plenary sessions and at the DOD researchorganizations and at universities engaged in DOD-sponsored research and
reviewed a large number of documents describing the basic research activities ofAssessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCHDOD organizations and DOD-sponsored research in industry and at universities.Even so, at best, this information covered only a sampling of the DOD 6.1 basic
research portfolio. Based on that sampling, the committee found reason to ques-
tion the appropriateness of the classification as 6.1 basic research for only a small
percentage of the work. Even in those cases, the issue usually centers on the
implication in the DOD definition of basic research (see the following section)
that having specific applications in mind is inconsistent with the purposes of
basic research. The committee concluded that discussion of that issue is not pro-
ductive, just as the distinction itself is not useful. Hence, the committeeÕs conclu-
sion is that, while some trends in basic research are undesirable, as discussed
elsewhere in this report, there is no evidence of significant misapplication of
basic research funding.In the course of the committeeÕs work, the following four themes emergedand are addressed in the sections below:¥Definitions and Their Role in Managing Basic Research;
¥Basic Research in the Wider Cycle of Discovery and Technology
Exploitation;¥Multiple Missions, Motivations, and Management Approaches; and

¥The Demand Versus the Supply.
DEFINITIONS AND THEIR ROLE IN MANAGING BASIC RESEARCHOn the basis of its plenary sessions and contacts with program managers andresearchers, the committee concludes that those responsible for directing and
managing basic research in the DOD are well motivated and generally successful
in directing basic research resources for purposes appropriate to the DOD defini-
tion of basic research: that is, Òsystematic study directed toward greater knowl-
edge or understanding of the fundamental aspects of phenomena and of observ-
able facts without specific applications towards process or products in mind.Ó1Research managers comply generally with the spirit of this definition, although if
it was taken literally and researchers had specific applications in mind, their pro-
grams would be disqualified from receiving basic research support. Research
managers and the committee agree that such a practice would be inappropriate.
Hence, although the military departments and defense agencies have the motiva-
tion and processes to ensure that 6.1 funding is spent on basic research that has
the potential for fundamental discovery, these bodies would not deny 6.1 support
for research simply because it would also fund discovery intended for developing1Department of Defense, Financial Management Regulation, DOD 7000.14-R, Vol. 2B, Ch. 5, June2004. Available online at http://www.dtic.mil/descriptivesum/budget_activities.pdf. Last accessed onNovember 16, 2004.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCH9technology for military needs. If there were such constraints, there would be muchless support for basic research.Furthermore, if a literal interpretation of the DOD definition was applied, thespecifics of what the researcher had in mind could be regarded as a key discrimi-
nator in determining whether a program was basic research or applied research.
Fortunately, the committee found that research managers apply consistent and
reasonable judgment on the level of specificity that is appropriate to the purposes
of basic research.The committee concludes that, although managers are able to apply thecurrent definition of basic research effectively to achieve the purposes of basic
research, the phrase Òwithout specific applications towards process or products inmindÓ is not useful either to furthering the purposes of basic research or to help-
ing ensure that 6.1 funding is properly directed.2 Various motivations for this
distinction may exist. However, the view presented to the committee by several
senior managers, and strongly reinforced by members of the committee with
extensive experience in senior DOD positions, was that this distinction primarily
serves the need for a uniform budget and fiscal accounting classification. The
committee concludes that this distinction is not a useful research management
tool. Ideally it should be possible to convey the purposes of basic research in such
a way as to discriminate basic from applied research on the basis of well-
understood and accepted principles.The committee devoted significant time to creating a reasonably simple,straightforward description of basic research and concluded that the combination
of slight change in the current DOD definition and a description of characteristics
would best serve the needs of effective management of basic research. Accord-
ingly, the first change that the committee suggests is that the opening statement in
the DOD definition (see Appendix D for the current definition) be changed to
read as follows:Basic research is systematic study directed toward greater knowledgeor understanding of the fundamental aspects of phenomena and has the
potential for broad, rather than specific, application.It is important to note here that this revised opening statement does notsuggest that basic research ends when a specific application or set of specific
applications is identified. The committee is aware of many instances in which
work on a specific application led to expanded basic research that provided fur-
ther fundamental discoveries with far broader application than what the researcher2This assertion is consistent with the concept of use-inspired basic research proposed by Stokes.Donald E. Stokes, PasteurÕs Quadrant: Basic Science and Technological Innovation, Washington,D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 1997, pp. 58-89.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCHhad in mind, even as the potential of specific applications emerged. The currentdefinition, however, precludes basic research when specific applications have
been identified.3Regarding characteristics of basic research, the committee found that, whilethere may be differences in detail, there is a fairly strong consensus on a set of
characteristics of basic research that help guide research management. The
committee found it useful to assemble a list of the most commonly accepted
characteristics. The following is such a listÑnot a set of criteria. Basic researchin universities, for example, should accommodate the following:¥A spirit that seeks first and foremost to discover new fundamental under-standing,¥Flexibility to modify goals or approaches in the near term based ondiscovery,¥Freedom to pursue unexpected paths opened by new insights,¥High-risk research questions with the potential for high payoff in futuredevelopments,¥Minimum requirements for detailed reporting,¥Open communications with other researchers and external peers,¥Freedom to publish in journals and present at meetings without restrictionand permission,¥Unrestricted involvement of students and postdoctoral candidates,¥No restrictions on the nationality of researchers, and¥Stable funding for an agreed timetable to carry out the research.Some characteristics that are not consistent with the purposes of basicresearch include the following:¥Inquiry directed to addressing only specified applications,¥Restricted dissemination of results,¥Specific capabilities as research deliverables,¥Short time horizons for reporting, and¥Contractually restricted direction, method, research staff, and problemstatement.3The complete proposed definition, included in Recommendation 1 in this section, is the currentDOD definition of basic research, slightly revised to address what the committee believes is the most
serious problem with the current definition. Rather than propose an entirely new definition that mighthave its own shortcomings, the committee decided that it would be better to recommend the minimumchange necessary to the current definition.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCH11FindingsFinding 1. Department of Defense basic research funds under 6.1 have not beendirected in significant amounts to support projects typical of 6.2 or 6.3 funding.Finding 2. Research managers are well motivated and generally successful in
focusing 6.1 funding on the discovery of fundamental knowledge in support of
the range of Department of Defense needs.Finding 3. Having specific applications in mind is not a useful criterion for dis-
criminating between basic and applied research.Finding 4. The set of attributes and desirable characteristics of basic research
widely shared among experienced basic research managers can be beneficial in
distinguishing between basic and applied research.RecommendationsRecommendation 1. The Department of Defense should change its definition of
basic research to the following:Basic research is systematic study directed toward greater knowledgeor understanding of the fundamental aspects of phenomena and has the
potential for broad, rather than specific, application. It includes all
scientific study and experimentation directed toward increasing funda-
mental knowledge and understanding in those fields of the physical,
engineering, environmental, social, and life sciences related to long-
term national security needs. It is farsighted high-payoff research that
provides the bases for technological progress. Basic research may lead
to (a) subsequent applied research and advance technology develop-
ments in Defense-related technologies, (b) new and improved military
functional capabilities, or (c) the discovery of new knowledge that may
later lead to more focused advances in areas relevant to the Department
of Defense.Recommendation 2. The Department of Defense should include the following
attributes in its guidance to basic research managers and direct that these attributes
be used to characterize 6.1-funded research: a spirit that seeks first and foremost
to discover new fundamental understanding, flexibility to modify goals or
approaches in the near term based on discovery, freedom to pursue unexpected
paths opened by new insights, high-risk research questions with the potential for
high payoff in future developments, minimum requirements for detailed report-
ing, open communications with other researchers and external peers, freedom toAssessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCHpublish in journals and present at meetings without restriction and permission,unrestricted involvement of students and postdoctoral candidates, no restrictions
on the nationality of researchers, and stable funding for an agreed timetable to
carry out the research.BASIC RESEARCH IN THE WIDER CYCLE OF DISCOVERY ANDTECHNOLOGY EXPLOITATIONOn the basis of anecdotal evidence received during its briefings and discus-sions, the committee notes that there would be a significant difference in the basic
research program of the Department of Defense if a literal interpretation of the
current definition of basic research in the DOD regulations were followed, rather
than the actual practices common to successful multiple levels of research in the
DOD and elsewhere. A literal interpretation could lead to the perception that the
levels of research in 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, and so on, are sequentialÑthat is, it could leadto the erroneous view that basic research (funded as 6.1) provides fundamental
knowledge that, when it is to be directed at specific applications, transitions to
applied research (funded by 6.2), which, when appropriate, transitions to system
development (funded by 6.3, 6.4, and so on). This erroneous sequential vision of
research is illustrated in Figure 1.The linear process and sharp lines of demarcation illustrated in Figure 1 mayhave correctly described the innovation process in the past and may serve some
perceived accounting and other important needs in the present. However, that
vision is inconsistent with the best practices in the process of discovery and inno-
vation that support the development of new capabilities to meet national security
needs. The sequential-and-separate description projects the understanding that
technology pushes system development, whereas in practice, system develop-
ment often pulls science and technology. A more accurate depiction of effective
research activity is shown in Figure 2.As basic research, applied research, and system development proceed in par-allel, continuous communication and interaction take place among the levels ofFIGURE 1Erroneous sequential and separate vision of research.6.16.26.3, 6.4Broadly Defined Specific Application IdentifiedTechnology Ready for System DevelopmentAssessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCH13FIGURE 2A more accurate vision: parallel fundamental research.Multiple 6.2 Efforts
Continued Basic Work
Multiple Fundamental Research Efforts
in Support of Applications
System Development with Continued
Fundamental Research Support
research. Basic research enables the potential for broadly defined specific appli-cations and continues to contribute until basic and applied research together bring
the technology to system development. There is no formal or symbolic handover
from basic research to applied research to system development. Even in late stages
of system development and testing, issues arise requiring continued or renewed
fundamental discovery and applied research. This occurrence is common in the
management of industrial product development as well. Product development
processes are recognized to involve both reentrant loops to earlier stages and
cyclic performance of multiple stages until the product requirements are fully
met.4 Hence, Figure 2 is consistent with current best practices in industrial
research and development (R&D).FindingsFinding 5. The basic research needs of the Department of Defense are complex
and do not end when specific applications are identified.Finding 6. The need for ongoing discovery from basic research can, and usuallydoes, continue through the applied research, system development, and system
operation phases.RecommendationRecommendation 3. The Department of Defense should abandon its view of
basic research as being part of a sequential or linear process of research and
development (in this view, the results of basic research are handed off to applied4Steven C. Wheelright and Kim B. Clark, Revolutionizing Product Development: Quantum Leapsin Speed, Efficiency, and Quality, New York: Free Press, 1992, Ch. 7 (see especially Exhibit 7-4) andCh. 9 (see especially Exhibit 9-3).Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCHresearch, the results of applied research are handed off to advanced technologydevelopment, and so forth). Instead, the DOD should view basic research, applied
research, and the other phases of research as continuing activities that occur in
parallel, with numerous supporting connections among them.MULTIPLE MISSIONS, MOTIVATIONS, ANDMANAGEMENT APPROACHESDepartment of Defense 6.1-funded research consists of multiple types ofactivities, and the mix varies over time in response to multiple missions and
motivations. The DODÕs needs for the fundamental discovery expected of 6.1-funded research are complex and variable, and they will not fit a simple, one-
dimensional mold. One type of research need seeks the unfettered5 exploration of
a fundamentally new frontier of knowledge, which, if developed, could have pro-
found influence on military capabilities. Examples of such research include that
in nuclear physics in the 1930s and 1940s, in solid-state electronics in the 1950s
and 1960s, in photonics in the 1960s to 1980s, and the concept and creation of the
ARPAnet as an exploratory, robust communications system in the 1970s. Such
high-risk research, although enormously valuable, cannot be the only basic
research, even though some part of it leads to new military capabilities that have
historically been major sources of U.S. military superiority.Another type of basic research is the development of standard reference data,such as the properties of materials and their relationship to materials processing.
Although this purpose may sound somewhat routine, such information is manda-
tory for engineering design in the development process and for the assessment of
the technical feasibility and cost assessment of incorporating a material in
weapons and support systems.Still another type of basic research constructs exploratory systems or devicesthat enhance functionality or performance without regard to the design of a robust,
cost-effective version. This basic research is usually focused on a well-defined,
often near-term technology need that can be relevant to a range of applications.A consistent and important observation of this committee, based on its inter-views, was the current de-emphasis on the first type of basic research described
aboveÑthe high-risk, high-payoff discoveryÑand an increased focus on thesecond and third types. R&D managers find the latter two types of research easier
to Òjustify,Ó given the range of well-defined current needs, whereas the benefits
of the first type are more uncertain in the early stages of research. Yet, as noted,5The term ÒunfetteredÓ as used by the committee does not mean unfocused or totally unconstrained.
It does mean not being tied to short-term goals or specific applications. It is the kind of research thatis truly exploratory and that may or may not, by itself, produce exploitable results. Still, in those casesin which it does not, it is likely to advance knowledge in areas that will have a longer-term payoff.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCH15projects exhibiting the attributes of the first type create the breakthrough benefitsfor military capabilities. As is the case in private industry,6 the abnormally large
payoffs of a few Òbig hitsÓ make defense basic research a productive investment
overall.DOD resources committed to basic research create and deliver a portfolio offuture valuable returns. It is useful to think of these investments as resulting in
options which, if exercised, will lead to solutions for future military challenges as
they emerge.7 The outputs of basic research are not the options themselves, but
rather the raw materials used to construct the options in 6.2 and 6.3 research.Three classes of key research participants generate these raw materials ofbasic research: universities (receiving about 60 percent of 6.1 funds), government
laboratories (receiving about 30 percent), and commercial firms (about 10 per-
cent). Each class has its role in developing the resulting options. Universities
create raw materials in the form of new knowledge and human competencies
across broad areas of science and engineering. DOD laboratories create new
knowledge, but normally in focused areas of importance to DOD applications.
Both DOD laboratories and commercial firms have the responsibility of convert-
ing the raw materials from basic research into particular technology investment
options. The value created by activities conducted by each of these classes can be
categorized into several (somewhat overlapping) types that include the following:¥Expansion of the base of technical knowledge underlying the DODÕs needs,¥Creation of new technology options,¥Creation of a cadre of technical experts to provide expert advice whenneeded,¥Recruitment of skilled technical people into the DOD for key positions, and¥Insight into future technology potential and military applications.These are the values expected from 6.1 investments in basic research. Atevery level of the R&D chain of command, the values expected should be com-
municated, so that the sponsors of 6.1 research have a clear and explicit under-
standing of the value delivered by their investment.The characteristics, which determine the value of the returns on investment,depend on the broad mission of the investing organization (e.g., the Army, Air6Lewis M. Branscomb and Philip E. Auerswald, 2001, Taking Technical Risks: How Innovators,Executives and Investors Manage High-Tech Risks, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press (see, especially,Ch. 4); and F.M. Scherer and Dietmar Harhoff, 2000, ÒTechnology Policy for a World of Skew-Distributed Outcomes,Ó Research Policy 29 (4-5): 559-566. Available online at http://dx.doi.org/
doi:10.1016/S0048-7333(99)00089-X. Last accessed on November 16, 2004.7Peter Boer, The Valuation of Technology: Business and Financial Issues in R&D, New York,N.Y.: Wiley, 1999; Johnathan Mun, Real Options Analysis: Tools and Techniques for ValuingStrategic Investments and Decisions, New York, N.Y.: Wiley, 2002.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCHForce, Navy, DARPA, and so on). The values expected from a particular invest-ment reflect strongly the mission of the organization performing the research
(e.g., a university, government laboratory, or commercial firm). The mix of values
created is different for a university than it is for a government laboratory. For a
university, the discovery and acquisition of knowledge and the development of
skilled personnel are primary values, and they are the values delivered to the
DOD for its investment. Research internal to the Service laboratories is focused
on exploiting knowledge and human assets to meet military needs. In some cases
this work satisfies the ÒpullÓ from gaps in the knowledge of science where the
DOD has interests that have not attracted the attention of universities and
privatefirms.
To serve the needs of the DOD, the overall values expected from 6.1 invest-ments must be acquired on multiple levels for each Service, laboratory, and
investing organization. And the values expected evolve continuously, reflecting
the dynamic character of the need for military capabilities. Strategic planning,
investment decisions, and retrospective evaluation of the results achieved based
on the values expected are the core of an effective management system. Done
well, this leads to strong and sustained support for basic research at all levels of
the DOD because the investments are well aimed and managed to provide valued
returns.Although the committee believes that the variety of missions, motivations,and management approaches is essential to the range of basic research needs, it is
concerned about the clear trend toward increasing short-timescale research in
support of near-term applications at the expense of long-term, unfettered explora-
tion of high-risk but potentially large-payoff areas. In one instance among many,
the relevance of the proposed work includes potential application to Òland vehiclecontrol, sensor networks, control of networks of smart mines and weapon
platforms. . . .Ó8Other indicators of this trend toward sharply focused research are illustratedby DARPAÕs intent in ensuring a direct connection between 6.1 funding and thespecifics of funded projects9 and by the comment of senior leadership in theOffice of Naval Research that Òmuch if not allÓ of the 6.1 efforts will transition to
6.2 programs.10 At the same time, the committee found in its site visits and
discussions that many research managers and researchers at universities do not
know whether 6.1 or 6.2 funds support a particular research effort. This latter fact
supports the argument that the ambiguity has not been a serious impediment to
attracting university talent and managing their basic research. In any case, given8U.S. Army Research Laboratory (ARL), ÒFunding by Organization During FY 2003,Ó e-mail
provided by Carolyn Nash to James Garcia, June 15, 2004.9Committee visit to the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, June 15, 2004, Arlington, Va.10Committee visit to the Office of Naval Research, June 21, 2004, Arlington, Va.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCH17the current research limitations discussed in the next section of this report, thereasons for the trend described here are understood but, if it is continued over the
long term, it will not serve national security interests. The committee also
observed that there are other sources of funding for basic research in which the
mission does not drive specific focus as strongly as in the DOD. The National
Science Foundation is one of the more notable such sources.The existence of significant differences in research management approacheswithin the military departments and defense agencies is consistent with the range
of needs. The Air Force, for example, through its Air Force Office of Scientific
Research, manages all 6.1 funding in the Air Force, while the Army, Navy, and
DARPA manage 6.1 and 6.2 in the same organizations. Furthermore, the Navy
manages 6.1 funding centrally in the Office of Naval Research (ONR), while the
Army manages 6.1 funding across a number of research organizations. Each of
these approaches has strengths and weaknesses, and the committee found no
reason to recommend one approach over another. Instead, the committee con-
cludes that the key to effective management of basic research lies in having a
cadre of experienced, empowered, and respected 6.1 program managers, sup-
ported by uniformly understanding senior leadership deeply committed to basic
research. From presentations by DOD research managers, the committee has some
concerns relative to the degree of emphasis on maintaining a strong cadre of
program managers. In some of the Services, particularly at ONR, substantial
numbers of positions have not been refilled when senior people have left. Further-
more, on the basis of the extensive experience of committee members with
research in the DOD, the committee feels strongly that an enduring and genuine
commitment to basic research needs to be authentic and visible at the Service
acquisition executive and senior military levels.FindingsFinding 7. Included in the range of values expected from basic research in the
Department of Defense are (1) discovery arising from unfettered exploration,
(2)focused research in response to identified DOD technology needs, and

(3) assessment of technical feasibility.Finding 8. A recent trend in basic research emphasis within the Department of
Defense has led to a reduced effort in unfettered exploration, which historically
has been a critical enabler of the most important breakthroughs in military
capabilities.Finding 9. Generated by important near-term Department of Defense needs and
by limitations in available resources, there is significant pressure to focus DOD
basic research more narrowly in support of more specific needs.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCHFinding 10. Universities, government laboratories, and industry have overlappingroles in basic research: Universities primarily address the creation of broad new
knowledge and human competencies, and Department of Defense laboratories
and industry are more sharply focused on discovery tied more directly to identi-
fied DOD needs.Finding 11. A clear understanding of the value expected from basic research
across its full range provides the most reliable assurance of long-term Depart-
ment of Defense leadership support for the basic research.Finding 12. A variety of management approaches in the Department of Defense
is appropriate to the widely diverse missions and motivations for basic research.Finding 13. The key to effective management of basic research lies in having
experienced and empowered program managers. Current assignment policies and
priorities (such as leaving substantial numbers of program manager positions
unfilled) are not always consistent with this need, which might result in negative
consequences for the effectiveness of basic research management in the long term.RecommendationsRecommendation 4. The Department of Defense should set the balance of sup-port within 6.1 basic research more in favor of unfettered exploration than of
research related to short-term needs.Recommendation 5. Senior Department of Defense leadership should clearlycommunicate to research managers its understanding of the need for long-term
exploration and discovery.Recommendation 6. Personnel policies should provide for the needed continuityof research management in order to ensure a cadre of experienced managers
capable of exercising the level of authority needed to effectively direct research
resources. Further, in light of the reductions in positions reported to the Com-
mittee on Department of Defense Basic Research, the Department of Defense
should carefully examine the adequacy of the number of basic research manage-
ment positions.THE DEMAND VERSUS THE SUPPLYThe reason for the pressure for more focused basic research at the presenttime is the intense pressure on all science and technology resources throughout
the DOD. Over the past decade, the expectations of military forces have grown to
include a far wider range of technologies in far greater depth. The U.S. nationalAssessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCH19military strategy no longer calls for incrementally better capabilities than those ofa known adversary. Instead it calls for dominance over a wide range of adversaries
in a wide range of circumstances. Innovation is central to underwriting the con-
cepts and supporting the transformation needed to meet these objectives.11The expansion of the range and depth of the DODÕs needs should expand therange of researchers and research relevant to those needs. For many reasons, the
DOD needs to attract the best and brightest university researchers. The demand
for innovation across a wide range of disciplines places a premium on attracting a
broad range of research talent. University programs provide proven access to new
research vistas, offering new options for meeting challenges. The university pro-
grams also give the DOD ready access to eminent scientists and engineers whose
talents are needed to address scientific and technical challenges.To meet these expectations, the expanding range of technologies essential tothe DOD mission includes new levels of interest in biological sciences, social
sciences, environmental sciences, nanotechnology, robotics, and information
technologies. Innovations in these and other areas are as essential to the success
of future operations as past innovations in technology were to the success of
earlier weapons systems.12 This circumstance places much greater demand on
both basic and applied research. At the same time, pressures on the defense budget
are intense with the added costs of transformation and current operations.Figure 3 shows the change in annual DOD 6.1 funding in real terms (constantdollars) from the 1993 level. The graph shows three lines corresponding to three
different sets of inflation indexes (used to convert then-year dollar amounts to
base-year, constant-dollar amounts). The figure shows that DOD basic research
funding decreased in real terms from 1993 to 1998, then started to increase until
2002, when it began to level out.As shown in Figure 3, in the face of competing pressures, the 6.1 fundingdecrease in 2004 from what it was in 1993 was about 10 percent in real termsaccording to the inflation indexes used by the DOD. The decrease in 2004 was
significantly more in real terms if it is calculated using the Consumer Price Index
(CPI) or Higher Education Price Index (HEPI) instead of the indexes used by the
DOD. Using the CPI, the decrease was about 18 percent. Using the higher educa-
tion inflation index, it was about 27 percent. The most common concern expressed by the university community is its
perception of shrinking support for university research (corresponding to11Office of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joint Vision 2020, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government PrintingOffice, June 2000. Available online at http://www.dtic.mil/jointvision/jvpub2.htm. Last accessed onNovember 16, 2004.12Defense Science Board, Defense Science Board Letter Report on DoD Science and TechnologyProgram, Washington, D.C., August 2000; and DSB, Report of the Defense Science Board TaskForce on Future Strategic Strike Forces, Washington, D.C., February 2004.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCHFIGURE 3Constant-dollar change in annual Department of Defense 6.1 funding (aspercentage change from 1993 value).Ð40Ð35Ð30Ð25Ð20Ð15Ð10Ð50199319941995199619971998199920002001200220032004
YearPercentChange
DepartmentofDefense(DOD)
HigherEducationPriceIndex(HEPI)
ConsumerPriceIndex(CPI)
decreases in DOD 6.1 funding shown in Figure 3). This is broader than the 6.1funding issue. As noted above, many researchers do not know whether they are
funded by 6.1 or by 6.2, and some see an advantage in seeking 6.2 research to
attract more substantial funding. University interest in 6.2 should also be wel-
comed by the DOD and brings many of the same benefits to the DOD as univer-
sity involvement in 6.1. However, DOD sponsors of 6.2 work are more likely to
seek restrictionsÑsuch as those on the foreign researcher involvement, therequirement of prepublication review, short time horizons and frequent reporting,
and demands for specific findingsÑthat are inconsistent with basic research, andespecially with basic research conducted in universities.University research is also affected by reductions in basic research fundingby the states and industry, resulting in more reliance by universities on federal
funds. Industry also competes for these funds. A number of the committeeÕs dis-cussions and interviews described the aggregate effects of this environment.
While the committee was unable to compile statistically significant data, it found
the described effects to be credible. They include the following:Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCH21¥The funding reduction in 6.1 research is particularly difficult for univer-sity engineering and for mathematical and computer sciences. NSF and
the DOD are the largest funders of engineering, with the DOD funding
about 40 percent, with major concentrations in electrical and mechanical
engineering. In these two fields, the DOD provides over half of the federalfunding. Regarding computer science and mathematics basic researchinvestment, the DOD funds 17 percent and the Department of Energy
funds 3 percent, while NSF funds 75 percent.13¥The historical increases in the costs of supporting a graduate student, withno increase in research funding in real terms, results in shorter performance
periods and/or fewer graduate students involved in support for DOD needs.¥University research managers indicated that the shrinking support for uni-versity research makes it difficult for younger faculty members interested
in working on DOD research to get started in DOD research.14 Con-
sequently, they turn their research attention elsewhere.¥With the increased reporting requirements, principal investigators andgraduate students spend more time preparing reports and less time on
research.¥The DOD is funding larger grants with industry personnel as the principalinvestigators.¥Industry funding for basic research has decreased sharply, and many high-tech firms are shifting basic research offshore.An additional limitation on attracting the best and the brightest to the basicresearch needs of the United States and the Department of Defense could be the
limitation of access to foreign students and scholars. Issues identified during com-
mittee discussions and interviews that may have an adverse effect on attracting
the best research talent include the following:¥Visa problems that limit the number of foreign students and postdoctoralcandidates who are admitted, or who even apply for graduate study in the13All percentages are calculated for 2001 based on data found in National Science Foundation,Division of Science Resources Statistics, Federal Funds for Research and Development, Research toUniversities and Colleges by Agency and Field of Science: Fiscal Years 1973-2003, NSF 04-332,
Arlington, Va., 2004. Available online at http://www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/nsf04332/start.htm. Lastaccessed on December 2, 2004.14All researchers are affected by funding shortages. During periods of shrinking funding, youngerresearchers who want to get started in DOD research are at a particular disadvantage relative to thosewho already have established, ongoing support relationships with DOD research sponsors. Withshrinking funds, DOD sponsorsÕ first priority is to continue and complete ongoing research. There islittle funding to start new research. Limited funding also means that younger researchers must attractDOD research sponsor support at the expense of support that would have otherwise been given tomore established researchers who have already been Òproven.ÓAssessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCHfirst place (the number of international graduate student applicationsacross the nation has decreased by about one-third from fall 2003 to fall
2004);15¥Contracts that prohibit foreign student and postdoctoral candidate
participation;¥Recent threats to the exemption of basic research from export controlsunder National Security Decision Directive (NSDD) 189;¥Possible restrictions placed on the use in research of equipment underexport control by foreign students and scholars; and¥Restrictions on foreign student and scholar participation in subcontractsby industry to universities for basic research.The issue of limitations of access to foreign students and scholars is particu-larly critical to engineering and the physical, mathematical, and computer sciences.
In 1999, 49 percent of all engineering Ph.D. graduates and 47 percent of the
mathematics and computer science graduates were foreign nationals (not perma-
nent residents).16 Those numbers have increased since 1999, and today more than
50 percent of the Ph.D.Õs in these areas are on temporary visas. The positiveaspect of this problem is that more than 50 percent of these Ph.D.Õs remain in theUnited States.Recognizing the important contributions of foreign nationals in basicresearch, President Reagan signed NSDD-189 in 1985, stating that the products
of fundamental research should remain unrestricted to the maximum extent pos-
sible, and that classification (rather than regulation such as export controls) is the
mechanism for control of information.
17 The current Bush administration affirmed
that the policy in NSDD-189 Òshall remain in effect, and we will ensure that thispolicy is followed.Ó1815Heath A. Brown and Peter D. Syverson, Findings from U.S. Graduate Schools on International
Graduate Student Admissions Trends, Washington, D.C.: Council of Graduate Schools, 2004. Avail-able online at http://www.cgsnet.org/pdf/Sept04FinalIntlAdmissionsSurveyReport.pdf. Last accessed
on November 16, 2004.16National Science Board, Science and Engineering IndicatorsÐ2002, Arlington, Va: NationalScience Foundation, 2002, NSB-02-1. Available online at http://www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/seind02/

start.htm. Last accessed on November 16, 2004.17National Security Decision Directive 189 was a response to the 1982 report Scientific Communi-cation and National Security. The recommendations of the Panel on Scientific Communication andNational Security, chaired by Dale Corson, of the Committee on Science, Engineering, and PublicPolicy, concluded that there is no practical way to restrict international scientific communicationwithout also disrupting domestic scientific information (Scientific Communication and NationalSecurity, Washington D.C.: National Academy Press, 1982).18Letter from National Security Advisor Condoleeza Rice to Harold Brown, Council on the Futureof Technology and Public Policy, November 1, 2001.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCH23However, recent reports from the inspectors general of the DOD19 and the
Department of Commerce20 appear to restrict foreign student and scholar partici-
pation in university basic research. As a result, the joint Association of American
Universities (AAU)/Council on Governmental Relations (COGR) Task Force on
Restrictions on Research Awards and Troublesome Research Clauses found in
April 2004 that Òdespite affirmations of NSDD-189 by the Administration . . . ,troublesome clauses restricting publication and participation by foreign nationals
in research awards continue to be a significant problem for universities.Ó21If this trend continues or expands, inadequate access to engineering talentwill be a strategic problem. The solution to the problem will, at best, cost the
United States dearly; at worst the problem could cost the nation preeminence in
vital areas of technical competence.The net effect of the pressures on resources and the DOD responses to thosepressures is that the increase in research resources is not keeping pace with infla-
tion, let alone with the expanded demand for innovation across a broader set of
disciplines. It is not surprising, then, that the DOD seeks increased focus in 6.1
research that will support identified capability shortfalls. This emphasis may serve
the DOD in the near term, but it certainly will not accommodate the long-term
view that is essential to meeting the needs of the department. In short, we are
eating our proverbial seed corn.An additional concern to the committee is the lack of visibility on whathappens to 6.1 funding during budget year execution. The committee could find
no source of comprehensive information on this subject.FindingsFinding 14. The breadth and depth of the sciences and technologies essential to
the Department of Defense mission have greatly expanded over the past decade.19Department of Defense Inspector General, Report of the Department of Defense InspectorGeneral, Export-Controlled Technology at Contractor, University, and Federally Funded Researchand Development Center Facilities, D-2004-061, Washington, D.C., March 25, 2004. Available onlineat http://www.dodig.osd.mil/audit/reports/fy04/04-061.pdf. Last accessed on December 2, 2004.20Department of Commerce Inspector General, Report of the Department of Commerce InspectorGeneral, Deemed Export Controls May Not Stop the Transfer of Sensitive Technology to Foreign
Nationals in the U.S., IPE-16176, Washington, D.C., March 31, 2004. Available online at http://www.oig.doc.gov/oig/reports/2004/BIS-IPE-16176-03-2004.pdf. Last accessed on December 2, 2004.21Association of American Universities, Council on Government Relations, Restrictions onResearch Awards: Troublesome Clauses: A Report of the AAU/COGR Task Force, Julie T. Norris,chair. Available online at http://206.151.87.67/docs/Troublesomeclauses.doc. Last accessed onNovember 16, 2004.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCHFinding 15. In real terms the resources provided for Department of Defense basic
research have declined substantially over the past decade.Finding 16. The demand for new discovery argues for significantly increased
involvement of university researchers. Yet some younger university researchers
in the expanded fields of interest to the Department of Defense are often discour-
aged by the difficulty in acquiring research support from the department.Finding 17. Recent pressures to apply restrictions on participation and publica-tion through export controls on Department of Defense-sponsored research funded
in 6.1 both disqualify it from being considered basic research as defined by
National Security Decision Directive 189 and threaten to change fundamentally
the open and public character of basic university research. This finding does not
apply to research funded in 6.2.RecommendationsRecommendation 7. The Department of Defense should redress the imbalance
between its current basic research allocation, which has declined critically over
the past decade, and its need to better support the expanded areas of technology,
the need for increased unfettered basic research, and the support of new researchers.Recommendation 8. The Department of Defense should, through its funding and
policies for university research, encourage increased participation by younger
researchers as principal investigators.Recommendation 9. To avoid weakening the long and fruitful partnershipbetween universities and Department of Defense agencies, DOD agreements and
subagreements with universities for basic research should recognize National

Security Decision Directive 189, the fundamental research exclusion providing
for the open and unrestricted character of basic research. DOD program managers
should also explicitly retain the authority to negotiate export compliance clauses
out of basic research grants to universities, on the basis of both the programÕsspecific technologies and its objectives.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendixes
Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.27APPENDIX ABiographical Sketches of
Committee MembersLarry D. Welch (Chair) (U.S. Air Force, retired) is senior fellow and immediatepast president of the Institute for Defense Analyses (IDA). Prior to joining IDA,
he was the 12th chief of staff of the U.S. Air Force, from 1986 to 1990. As chief,
he served as the senior uniformed Air Force officer responsible for the organiza-
tion, training, and equipage of a combined active duty, Guard, Reserve, and
civilian force serving at locations in the United States and overseas. As a member
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, he served with the other Service chiefs as the principal
military advisers to the Secretary of Defense, National Security Council, and the
President. General Welch received a B.A. degree in business administration from
the University of Maryland and an M.S. degree in international relations from the
George Washington University. He also completed the Armed Forces Staff
College and National War College. He was recently awarded the Eugene G.
Fubini Award for 2003. This award recognizes highly significant contributions to
the Department of Defense in an advisory capacity over a sustained period of
time and the providing of expert advice on a diverse range of issues including
ballistic missile defense, weapons of mass destruction threats, strategic roadmaps,

operational plans, and various transformational technologies.C.D. (Dan) Mote, Jr. (Vice Chair) (NAE) began his tenure as president of theUniversity of Maryland and as Glenn L. Martin Institute Professor of Engineer-
ing in September 1998. Prior to assuming the presidency at the University of
Maryland, Dr. Mote served on the University of California, Berkeley, faculty for
31 years. From 1991 to 1998, he was vice chancellor at the University of California,
Berkeley, and held an endowed chair in mechanical systems. Prior to this, he
served as chair of the Department of Mechanical Engineering at Berkeley.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCHDr.Mote
s research lies in dynamic systems and biomechanics. Internationallyrecognized for his research on the dynamics of gyroscopic systems and bio-
mechanics, he has authored more than 300 publications; holds patents in the
United States, Norway, Finland, and Sweden; and has mentored more than
50Ph.D. students. He received all his degrees in mechanical engineering from

the University of California, Berkeley. Dr. Mote has received numerous awards
and honors, including the Humboldt Prize awarded by the Federal Republic of
Germany. He is a recipient of the Berkeley Citation and was named Distinguished

Engineering Alumnus. He is a member of the American Academy of Arts and
Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering and currently serves on its
council. He was elected to honorary membership in the American Society of
Mechanical Engineers International and is a fellow of the Acoustical Society of
America and the American Association for the Advancement of Science. He

serves on the Technology Council of Maryland and heads its Technology Trans-
fer Committee of the Greater Washington Board of Trade.Albert J. Baciocco, Jr. (U.S. Navy, retired) completed his career in the U.S.
Navy as a vice admiral in 1987 after 34 years of distinguished service, principally
within the nuclear submarine force and directing the Department of the Navy
research and technology development enterprise. A graduate of the U.S. Naval
Academy in 1953, where he received a Bachelor of Science degree in engineer-
ing, he subsequently completed graduate-level studies in nuclear engineering as
part of his training for the naval nuclear propulsion program. He served as Chief
of Naval Research from 1978 to 1981 and as the director of Research, Develop-
ment and Acquisition from 1983 to 1987. Since retirement, Admiral Baciocco
has been engaged in a broad range of business and pro bono activities with
industry, government, and academe, including memberships on the Naval Studies
Board and the Army Science Board and on the boards of directors of several
corporations, both public and private. He is a trustee of the South Carolina
Research Authority and serves as a director of the Research Foundations of the
University of South Carolina and the Medical University of South Carolina. He is
a member of Tau Beta Pi, a national engineering honor society, and is a recipient
of an honorary doctorate in engineering from Florida Atlantic University. Admiral
Baciocco has been designated a lifetime national associate of the National

Academies by the Council of the National Academies of Sciences.Jack R. Borsting is professor of business administration and dean emeritus,
Marshall School of Business, University of Southern California (USC). From
1994 to September 2001, he served as the executive director of the Center for
Telecommunications Management (CTM) at USC, as well as the Morgan Stanley
Professor of Business Administration. From 1988 to 1994, Dr. Borsting was dean
of USCs School of Business Administration and Robert Dockson Professor ofBusiness Administration. From 1983 to 1988, he was dean of the School of Busi-Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A29ness Administration at the University of Miami. Previously, Dr. Borsting wasAssistant Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) for the U.S. Department of Defense,
appointed by Presidents Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan. As Comptroller, he
acted as chief financial officer for the Secretary of Defense, with overall respon-
sibility for the departments information and budgeting systems, and was amember of the Defense Resources Board. Dr. Borsting has served as provost and
academic dean at the Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey, California, and has
been the Visiting Distinguished Professor at Oregon State University. He served
2 years with the Air Force as project officer at the Air Force Special Weapons
Center in Albuquerque, New Mexico. Dr. Borsting is past president of the Opera-
tions Research Society of America and the Military Operations Research Society
(MORS), and he is a fellow of the Institute for Operations Research and the
Management Sciences, the American Association for the Advancement of Science,
the International Engineering Consortium, and MORS. He is past chair and a
member of the board of directors of the Los Angeles Orthopaedic Hospital and
serves on the advisory council of the Electric Power Research Institute.
Dr.Borsting is a trustee of the Rose Hills Foundation and MetLife Investors Trust

and also serves on a number of corporate boards. He received his M.A. and Ph.D.
degrees in statistics from the University of Oregon and his B.A. degree in math-
ematics from Oregon State University. He has published articles on operations
research and statistics.John M. Deutch is an Institute Professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Tech-nology (MIT). He served as Director of Central Intelligence from May 1995 to
December 1996. From 1994 to 1995, he served as Deputy Secretary of Defense
and as Undersecretary of Defense for Acquisition and Technology from 1993 to
1994. Dr. Deutch has also served as Director of Energy Research (1977 to 1979),
acting Assistant Secretary for Energy Technology (1979), and Undersecretary
(1979 to 1980) in the U.S. Department of Energy. In addition, he has served on
the Presidents Nuclear Safety Oversight Committee (1980 to 1981), the PresidentsCommission on Strategic Forces (1983), the White House Science Council (1985
to 1989), the Presidents Intelligence Advisory Board (1990 to 1993), the PresidentsCommission on Aviation Safety and Security (1996), and the Presidents Com-mission on Reducing and Protecting Government Secrecy (1996). He served as a
member of the Presidents Committee of Advisors on Science and Technology(1997 to 2001) and as chair of the Presidents Commission to Assess the Organi-zation of the Federal Government to Combat the Proliferation of Weapons of
Mass Destruction (1998 to 1999). Dr. Deutch serves as director for the following
publicly held companies: Citicorp, Cummins, Raytheon, and Schlumberger Ltd.
He has been a member of the MIT faculty since 1970 and has served as chair of
the Department of Chemistry, dean of science, and provost. Dr. Deutch has pub-
lished more than 150 technical publications in physical chemistry, as well as
numerous publications on technology, international security, and public policy issues.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCHCharles B. Duke (NAS/NAE) is vice president and senior research fellow in the
Xerox Innovation Group. Prior to holding this position, he was deputy director
and chief scientist of the Pacific Northwest Division of the Battelle Memorial
Institute and affiliate professor of physics at the University of Washington. From
1972 to 1988 he held various technical and management positions at the Xerox
Research Laboratories in Webster, New York, and was an adjunct professor of
physics at the University of Rochester. From 1969 to 1972, he was a professor of
physics and member of the Materials Research Laboratory and Coordinated Sci-
ence Laboratory at the University of Illinois in Urbana, following 6 years as a
staff member of 
the General Electric Corporate Research and DevelopmentCenter in Schenectady, New York. He received his Ph.D. in physics fromPrinceton University in 1963, following a B.S. degree summa cum laude with
distinction in mathematics from Duke University in 1959. He is a fellow and an
honorary member of the American Vacuum Society, a fellow of the American
Physical Society, a fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers,
a member of the Materials Research Society, and a life member of Sigma Xi. In
1977, Dr. Duke received the Medard W. Welch Award in Vacuum Science and
Technology. He served as president of the American Vacuum Society in 1979, on
its board of directors for 7years, and as a trustee from 2003 to 2005. In 1981 he

was named one of the ISI 1000 internationally most cited scientists. From 1985 to
1986 he served as founding editor in chief of the Journal of Materials Research,and from 1992 to 2001 he was editor in chief of Surface Science and 
SurfaceScience Letters. He was on the council of the Materials Research Society for7years, serving as treasurer from 1991 to 1992. In 1993 he was elected to the

National Academy of Engineering and in 2001 to the National Academy of Sci-
ences. During the period 1995 to 1999 he served on the council and executive
board of the American Physical Society. From 1997 to 2000 he served as general
chair of the Physical Electronics Conference. He served on the Governing Board
of the American Institute of Physics for 11 years and continues to serve on its
Corporate Associates Advisory Committee. He has written more than 350 papers
on surface science, materials research, semiconductor physics, and the electronic
structure of molecular solids. He holds several patents on the use of feedback in
the design of digital imaging and printing systems, wrote a monograph on electron
tunneling in solids, and has edited three books: Surface Science: The First ThirtyYears (1994), 
Color Systems Integration (1998), and 
Frontiers in Surface andInterface Science (2002).
John S. Foster, Jr. (NAE) is chair of the board of GNK Aerospace Transparency
Systems; chair of Technology Strategies and Alliances; a member of the board of
Wackenhut Services, Inc., and Diana-Hi-Tech; and consultant to Northrop Grumman
Space Technology, Sikorsky Aircraft Corporation, Ninesigma, and Defense
Group, Inc. He retired from TRW as vice president for science and technology in
1988 and continued to serve on the board of directors of TRW from 1988 to 1994.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A31Dr. Foster was also Director of Defense Research and Engineering for the
Department of Defense, serving for 8 years. He began his career at the Radio
Research Laboratory of Harvard University. He spent 2 years as an advisor to the
15th Air Force on radar and radar countermeasures in the Mediterranean theater
of operations, and the two summers with the National Research Council of Chalk
River, Ontario. Dr. Foster became a division leader in experimental physics at the
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. He was promoted to associate director,
and 3 years later was promoted to director of the Livermore Laboratory and asso-
ciate director of the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. He received his
B.S. degree from McGill University, Montreal, in 1948. He received his Ph.D. in
physics from the University of California, Berkeley, in 1952.Mary L. Good (NAE) is well known for her distinguished career. She has heldmany high-level positions in academia, industry, and government. The 143,000-
member American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) elected
Dr. Good to serve as its president following the presidency of Stephen Jay Gould.
Dr. Good was the first female winner of the AAASs Philip Hogue Abelson Prizefor outstanding achievements in education, research and development manage-
ment, and public service, spanning the academic, industrial, and government
sectors. Two of her more than 27 awards include the National Science Foundation
Distinguished Service medal and the American Chemical Society Priestley Medal.
Dr. Good is currently the dean of the Donaghey College of Information Science
and Systems Engineering at the University of Arkansas, Little Rock. In addition,
she serves as the managing partner of Venture Capital Investors, LLC, in Little
Rock. Dr. Good was voted one of Arkansass Top 100 Women by Arkansas Busi-ness. During the terms of Presidents Carter and Reagan, Dr. Good served on the
National Science Board and chaired it from 1988 to 1991. She was a member of
President George H.W. Bushs Council of Advisors on Science and Technology.Dr. Good was the Undersecretary for Technology in the U.S. Department of Com-
merce and Technology during President Clintons first term. This agency assistsAmerican industry to advance productivity, technology, and innovation in order
to make U.S. companies more competitive in the global market.Robert J. Hermann (NAE) is currently a senior partner of Global Technology
Partners, LLC, a Boston-based investment firm, specializing in investments in
technology, defense, aerospace, and related businesses worldwide. In 1998,
Dr.Hermann retired from United Technologies Corporation (UTC), where he

was senior vice president, science and technology. Prior to joining UTC in 1982,
Dr.Hermann served 20 years with the National Security Agency, with assign-

ments in research and development, operations, and NATO. In 1977, he was
appointed Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Communications,
Command, Control, and Intelligence. In 1979, he was named Assistant Secretary
of the Air Force for research, development, and logistics, and in parallel he wasAssessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCHdirector of the National Reconnaissance Office. He received B.S., M.S., and Ph.D.
degrees in electrical engineering from Iowa State University. He is currently a
member of the following organizations: the Defense Science Board, the National
Academy of Engineering, and the board of directors of Orbital Sciences Corpora-
tion. His prior organizational memberships include the National Society of Pro-
fessional Engineers Industry Advisory Group; chair of the Visiting Committee on
Advanced Technology of the National Institute of Standards and Technology;
board of trustees for the Hartford Graduate Center; chair, co-chair, National
Research Council Commission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and Applica-
tions; the Presidents Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board; the Commission onthe Roles and Missions of the U.S. Intelligence Activities; chair, board of directors
of the American National Standards Institute; chair, board of directors of Draper
Laboratory; and board of directors, Condor Systems, Inc.James C. McGroddy (NAE) retired from IBM Corporation as a senior vice
president for research at the end of 1996, after leading its research laboratories
from 1989 to 1995. During his tenure, which spanned the period of IBMs mostdifficult challenges, he led a major restructuring of its research efforts, building a
model and management system that is now widely emulated. One of the measures
of success was the creation during this period of two new laboratories, one in
Beijing and one in Austin, Texas. His leadership was recognized by being
awarded the Frederik Philips Medal of the IEEE and the George Pake Award of
the American Physical Society. He is currently an advisor to several government
agencies, a participant in a number of National Research Council groups, and an
advisor and a visitor at several universities in the United States and Europe.
Dr.McGroddy is the chair of the board of MIQS, a company providing clinical

information systems and electronic medical record capability aimed at improving
the quality and cost-effectiveness of the care of the chronically ill. As chair of the
board of the Stellaris Healthcare Network in 2000 and 2001 and as former chair
of the board of Phelps Memorial Hospital Center, he has been heavily involved in
the restructuring of the local health care delivery system in Westchester County.
He is a director of Paxar, Inc., a New York Stock Exchange traded company, and
of Advanced Networks and Services, Inc. He is also a trustee of his alma mater,
St. Joseph
s University in Philadelphia, as well as a member of the advisory
boards of a number of start-up firms and university departments. Dr. McGroddy
originally joined IBM in its Research Division in 1965 after receiving a Ph.D. in
physics from the University of Maryland. He earned his B.S. in physics from
St.Joseph
s University in Philadelphia in 1958. In his first years at IBM hefocused on research in solid-state physics and electronic devices, and as a result
of achievements in these areas was named a fellow of both the Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers and of the American Physical Society. In the
1970-1971 academic year, he was a visiting professor of physics at the Danish Tech-
nical University. Returning to IBM, he served in a number of management positionsAssessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A33in research, development, and manufacturing before being named IBMs director ofresearch in 1989. He is a member of the National Academy of Engineering.C. Bradley Moore (NAE) is a dynamic leader and internationally recognizedchemist. He went to Northwestern University in 2003 from the Ohio State
University where, as vice president for research and president of the Ohio State
University Research Foundation, he spearheaded dramatic increases in research
growth. Improvements in the universitys research support services and promo-tion of multidisciplinary programs across the campus were vital hallmarks of
Dr.Moore
s tenure at Ohio State. While promoting growth and innovation asvice president for research, he was also a Distinguished Professor of Mathematical
and Physical Sciences and a professor of chemistry at Ohio State, where he
directed an active research program on molecular energy transfer, chemical
reaction dynamics, photochemistry, and spectroscopy. A member of the faculty
at the University of California, Berkeley, from 1963 to 2000, Dr. Moore also
served as chair of the Chemistry Department and dean of the College of Chemistry.
In addition, he was a faculty senior scientist at the Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory from 1974 to 2000, serving as director of its Chemical Sciences
Division from 1998 to 2000. Dr. Moore received his undergraduate degree in
chemistry from Harvard University in 1960 and his Ph.D. in chemistry from the
University of California, Berkeley, in 1963.James G. OÕConnor (NAE) is the former president of Pratt & Whitney. His 34-year career there started in engineering and included key assignments in customer
support, program management, manufacturing operations, and general manage-
ment. He was involved in both military and commercial programs and businesses.
His engineering assignments included development and certification of key com-
mercial engines for the Boeing and Douglas aircraft companies. In early 1981,
Dr. OConnor was named vice president of Pratt & Whitney Commercial EngineBusiness in East Hartford, Connecticut, responsible for all product support. In
1982, he joined Pratt & Whitneys Government Engine Business in West PalmBeach, Florida, as senior vice president for the F100 engine program. He was
appointed executive vice president of the Government Engine Business in Janu-
ary 1984 and assumed the post of president in March 1985. In this position he was
responsible for all aspects of Pratts $2 billion business with the U.S. governmentand 15 foreign governments. In October 1987, Dr. OConnor returned to EastHartford and was named vice president of manufacturing operations. In 1989 he
became the chief executive for Pratt & Whitney. He was responsible for all of the
aircraft engine manufacturers $7 billion operations. He retired in 1993. He iscurrently chair of the board of trustees of Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University.
In addition, he is a member of the National Academy of Engineering, the Con-
necticut Academy of Science and Engineering, the Presidents Advisory Councilat Clemson University, and the Wings Club.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCHRichard C. Powell is currently vice president for research and graduate studies
and professor at the Optical Sciences Center, University of Arizona. He received
his B.S. in physics in 1962 from the U.S. Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland;
his Ph.D. and M.S. in physics in 1964 and 1967 from Arizona State University,
Tempe. From 1964 to 1968, Dr. Powell was a staff scientist at the Air Force
Cambridge Research Laboratories in Bedford, Massachusetts, where he worked
on the development of new solid-state laser materials and radiation damage in
semiconductor devices. Between 1968 and 1971, Dr. Powell was a staff scientist
at the Sandia National Laboratories in Albuquerque, New Mexico, where hisresearch involved exciton dynamics in organic crystals and polymers and satura-tion effects in plastic scintillators. In 1971, Dr. Powell moved to Oklahoma StateUniversity in Stillwater, 
where he was a professor in the Physics Department anddirector of the Center for Laser Research until 1992. He also served as head of the
Physics Department and associate dean of the College of Arts and Sciences.
During that period, his research involved laser spectroscopy of solids for use in
lasers and nonlinear optics applications. In addition, he participated in several
projects involving laser applications in medicine. Dr. Powell also had several
temporary assignments, including positions at Motorola Semiconductor Division,
the California Institute of Technology, and the Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory. During his scientific career, he has published more than 200 articles,
two books, and participated in many national and international conferences.Fawwaz T. Ulaby (NAE) is the vice president for research and the R. Jamison
and Betty Williams Professor of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at
the University of Michigan. He is a member of the National Academy of Engi-
neering and serves on several national scientific boards and commissions. Since
joining the University of Michigan faculty in 1984, Professor Ulaby has been
directing large, interdisciplinary National Aeronautics and Space Administration
(NASA) projects aimed at the development of high-resolution satellite radar
sensors for mapping Earths terrestrial environment. He also served as the found-ing director of the NASA-funded Center for Space Terahertz Technology. The
centers research focuses on the development of microelectronic devices and
circuits that operate at wavelengths intermediate between the infrared and the
microwave regions of the electromagnetic spectrum. Professor Ulaby has authored
eight books, contributed chapters to several others, and published more than 600
scientific papers and reports. His recent undergraduate textbook, Applied Electro-magnetics, published by Prentice-Hall in January 1997, has been adopted by some80 universities across the United States. Professor Ulaby is the recipient of
numerous awards, including the Eta Kappa Nu Association C. Holmes MacDonald
Award as an Outstanding Electrical Engineering Professor in the United Statesof America for 1975, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)
Centennial Medal (1984), the American Society of Photogrammetrys Presiden-tial Citation for Meritorious Service (1984), the Kuwait Prize in applied scienceAssessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A35(1986), the NASA Group Achievement Award (1990), the University ofMichigans Distinguished Faculty Achievement Award (1991), the University ofMichigan Regents Medal for Meritorious Service (1996), the IEEE Millennium
Medal for Outstanding Achievements and Contributions (2000), and the 2001
IEEE Electromagnetics Award. Over his 30-year academic career, Professor

Ulaby has supervised more than 100 M.S. and Ph.D. graduate students and served
as principal investigator on about $40 million in research grants and contracts. In
January 2001 he assumed the position of editor in chief of the IEEE Proceedings,the most highly cited journal in electrical and computer engineering. In 2002 he
received the William Pecora Award, a joint recognition by NASA and the Depart-
ment of the Interior.Barbara A. Wilson is currently a program manager in the Solar System Explora-
tion Programs Directorate at the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), where
she manages the development of communications, computing, electronics, and
imaging technologies for NASAs Office of Exploration Systems. From 2001 to2003, she served as the chief technologist of the Air Force Research Laboratory
under an Intergovernmental Personnel Act loan agreement between NASA and
the Air Force, and as JPLs chief technologist from 1999 to 2001. After earningher Ph.D. in physics from the University of Wisconsin-Madison in 1978, she
worked in basic research at AT&T Bell Laboratories, with a focus on quantum
structures. Her research contributions were recognized with an AT&T Excep-
tional Contribution Award. She moved to JPL in 1988, where she has also served
as director of the Center for Space Microelectronics, as manager of the Microdevices
Laboratory, and as deputy manager and chief technologist of NASAs NewMillennium flight validation program. Her leadership in the New Millennium
Program earned her both JPL and NASA achievement awards. Dr. Wilson is a
fellow of the American Physical Society (APS) and former general councilor and
member of the APS Executive Board. She was appointed to the International
Academy of Astronautics in 2000. She is currently serving her second term on the
Air Force Scientific Advisory Board (SAB). As an SAB member, she has partici-
pated in a number of U.S. Air Force studies and was appointed science and tech-
nology chair of the SAB in 2004. In this capacity she will lead the external review
of the Air Force science and technology programs. Dr. Wilson has also served on
numerous other National Science Foundation, National Research Council, and
NASA panels.Johnnie E. Wilson (U.S. Army, retired) is the president and chief operating
officer of Dimensions International, Inc. (DI), an information technology com-
pany specializing in information integration and providing solutions for the
acquisition, analysis, management, and transformation of data into information.
His primary responsibility is on the program side, providing oversight to the tech-
nical directors and program managers. He assists them in managing, marketing,Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCHand expanding their operations. His extensive network, both military and civilian,is a great asset in maturing opportunities that will enhance DIs growth and devel-opment. General Wilson entered the Army in August 1961 as an enlisted soldier,
attaining the rank of SSG before attending Officer Candidate School (OCS). On
completion of OCS in 1967, he was commissioned a second lieutenant in the
Ordnance Corps. He was awarded a B.S. degree in business administration from
the University of Nebraska at Omaha. General Wilson also holds an M.S. degree
in logistics management from the Florida Institute of Technology. Additionally,
his military education includes completion of the Ordnance Officer Basic and
Advanced Courses, the Army Command and General Staff College, and the
Industrial College of the Armed Forces. General Wilson has held a wide variety
of important command and staff positions, culminating in his last assignment as
the Commanding General, U.S. Army Materiel Command (AMC), an organiza-
tion of 80,000 people serving throughout the world. As the commanding general
of AMC, he was responsible for the Armys wholesale logistics, acquisition, andtechnology generation operations. As a result, General Wilson possesses exten-
sive knowledge in supply-chain management, acquisition reform, and strategic
logistics planning. General Wilson also served as the deputy commanding general,
21st Theater Army Area Command (TAACOM), the Armys largest and mostdiverse logistics unit. Based on his wide experience with leading soldiers, General
Wilson was selected to command the Ordnance Center and School responsible
for the training and professional development of thousands of soldiers, non-
commissioned officers, and officers every year. Following this successful assign-
ment, he served as the chief of staff, AMC, where he was responsible for resource
and personnel management for a workforce with more than 80,000 military and
civilian members. From 1994 to 1996, General Wilson served as the Deputy Chief

of Staff for Logistics, Department of the Army, where he was responsible for
worldwide logistics.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.37APPENDIX BGuest Speaker Presentations
to the CommitteeThe Committee on Department of Defense Basic Research conducted twomeetings in May 2004 at which it received presentations by invited speakers. The
titles of the presentations and speakers are listed in this appendix. (See Appendix C
for a list of committee interviews and site visits to Department of Defense [DOD]
basic research organizations and universities.)The committee devoted its first meeting, on May 5-6, 2004, to understandingthe DOD definitions for basic and applied research and the characteristics associ-
ated with fundamental research and to gathering data and information relevant to
the study from representatives of the research community.The second meeting, held on May 26-27, 2004, was devoted to reviewing theDODÕs basic research program. Presentations were made by representatives of
the Army, Navy, Air Force, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency,
Defense Threat Reduction Agency, and the Office of the Secretary of Defense.MEETING 1, WASHINGTON, D.C., MAY 5-6, 2004ÒDepartment of Defense S&T Management Definitions/Policies Regarding BasicResearchÓWilliam O. Berry, Director for Basic Research
Office of the Director of Defense Research and EngineeringÒBackground Leading to Congressional TaskingÓCarolyn Hanna, Special Assistant for Science and Technology Community Affairs
Department of Homeland Security
Former staff member, Senate Committee on Armed ServicesAssessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCHÒDepartment of Defense Basic Research Funding: Some Personal Experiencesand ReflectionsÓGreg Voth, Professor of Chemistry
University of Utah
Chair, Public Policy Committee, American Chemical SocietyÒSome OMB Thoughts on Proper Counting of Department of Defense BasicResearchÓGreg Henry, Senior Program Examiner and Operations Research Analyst
National Security Division, Office Management and BudgetÒThe Federal Investment in Defense ResearchÓKei Koizumi, Director of Research and Development Budget and Policy Program
American Association for the Advancement of ScienceÒAssociation of American Universities InsightsÓKenneth F. Galloway, Dean of the School of Engineering and Professor ofElectrical EngineeringVanderbilt UniversityÒDOD Comptroller Definitions/Policies Regarding Basic ResearchÓCaral Spangler, Director for Investment
Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)ÒBasic Research: The Leading Edge of Science and EngineeringÓMary E. Clutter, Assistant Director for Biological Sciences
National Science FoundationÒBasic Research and the Office of Science InsightsÓWalt Stevens, Director, Chemical Sciences, Geosciences, and Biosciences Division,Office of ScienceDepartment of EnergyÒDepartment of Defense Sponsored Basic ResearchÓClaude R. Canizares, Associate Provost, and Bruno Rossi Professor of Experi-mental PhysicsMassachusetts Institute of TechnologyÒUniversity of Southern California Insight on Basic ResearchÓCornelius W. Sullivan, Vice Provost for Research and Professor of BiologicalSciencesUniversity of Southern CaliforniaAssessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B39ÒDepartment of Defense Research and the Historically Black College and Uni-versities Community: Challenges and OpportunitiesÓOrlando Taylor, Vice Provost for Research, Dean, Graduate School, and Professor,School of CommunicationsHoward UniversityÒ6.1Ð6.X?ÓRobert A. Frosch, Senior Research Associate
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs
Harvard UniversityÒ6.1, 6.2, 6.3? The End of ÔR&DÕÓPhilip Auerswald, Director, Center for Science and Public Policy, and AssistantProfessor of Public PolicyGeorge Mason UniversityÒWhat DOD Wants to Get from StudyÓWilliam O. Berry, Director of Basic Research
Office of the Director of Defense Research and EngineeringMEETING 2, WASHINGTON, D.C., MAY 26-27, 2004ÒArmy Basic Research . . . Accelerating the Pace of TransformationÓJohn Parmentola, Director for Research and Laboratory Management
Office of the Assistant Secretary of the Army for Acquisition, Logistics, andTechnologyÒArmy Research Laboratory Basic ResearchÓJohn Pellegrino, Acting Deputy Director
Army Research LaboratoryÒArmy Medical Research and Materiel Command Basic Research OverviewÓCol. James Romano, Deputy Commander
Army Medical Research and Materiel CommandÒArmy Research Institute for the Behavioral Sciences Basic ResearchÓJonathan Kaplan, Program Manager
Army Research Institute for the Behavioral SciencesÒArmy Corps of Engineers: Engineer Research and Development Center BasicResearchÓRick Morrison, Deputy Director
Army Corps of Engineers, Engineer Research and Development CenterAssessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCHÒBasic Research at Army Research, Development and Engineering CentersÓRobin Keesee, Acting Deputy Director
Army Research, Development, and Engineering CommandÒAir Force Basic ResearchÓLyle Schwartz, Director
Air Force Office of Scientific ResearchÒBasic Research at Air Force Research Laboratory Technical DirectoratesÓBarry Farmer, Chief Scientist, Materials and Manufacturing Directorate
Air Force Research LaboratoryÒNavy S&T Overview and IntroductionÓStephen Lubard, Technical Director, Science and Technology
Office of Naval ResearchÒNaval Basic ResearchÑOffice of Naval Research ContributionsÓJames Murday, Chief Scientist
Office of Naval ResearchÒNaval Basic ResearchÑNaval Research Laboratory ContributionsÓBhakta Rath, Associate Director of Research, Materials Science, and ComponentTechnology DirectorateNaval Research LaboratoryÒNaval S&TÑWarfare Center ContributionsÓRobert Kavetsky, Warfare Center Liaison to Office of Naval Research
Office of Naval ResearchÒDefense Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive ResearchÓKeith Thompson, Manager, Defense Experimental Program to Stimulate Com-petitive ResearchOffice of the Director of Defense Research and EngineeringÒOverview of DARPA Basic Research ProgramÓSteven G. Wax, Director, Defense Sciences Office
Defense Advanced Research Projects AgencyÒChemical and Biological Defense Program Basic ResearchÓCharles Gallaway, Director, Chemical and Biological Defense
Defense Threat Reduction AgencyAssessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.41APPENDIX CDOD Basic Research Organizations
and Universities:
Committee Site Visits and/or Interviews
The site visits and interviews conducted by the Committee on Department ofDefense Basic Research included discussions with approximately 140 people
from 7 Department of Defense (DOD) research organizations and 14 universities,
as listed in this appendix. (See Appendix B for a list of guest speaker presenta-
tions to the committee at its two meetings in Washington, D.C., in May 2004.)DOD BASIC RESEARCH ORGANIZATIONS VISITEDThe committee conducted site visits at the seven (including the ArmyResearch Office) DOD basic research organizations listed below. Committee
members met with key organization leadership in addition to one or more groups
of researchers and/or research managers at each site. Discussion topics included
the DOD definition of basic research; the perceptions of those in leadership
positions, researchers, and managers about how well their research fits this defi-
nition and about characteristics associated with basic research; trends; concerns;
and suggested improvements. The basic research organizations visited are these:¥Air Force Office of Scientific Research (AFOSR)
Arlington, Virginia¥Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL)
Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio
(included video conference participation by several AFRL directorates
across the United States)Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCH¥Army Research Laboratory (ARL)Adelphi, Maryland
(included participants from Army Research Office [ARO], Research
Triangle Park, North Carolina)¥Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)Arlington, Virginia¥Naval Research Laboratory (NRL)Washington, D.C.¥Office of Naval Research (ONR)Arlington, VirginiaVISITS AND/OR INTERVIEWS AT UNIVERSITIESCommittee members made site visits and/or conducted interviews withresearch leaders of 14 universities. Each visit included a meeting with the key
person responsible for research at the university, as well as one or more groups of
DOD-sponsored researchers. In addition to the same topics addressed during the
DOD site visits, these discussions addressed the importance of DOD research
funding to the university research enterprise. (These same topics were discussed
during interviews of university research leaders who were not visited in person.)
The 14 universities are these:¥Cornell UniversityIthaca, New York¥Massachusetts Institute of Technology Institute for Soldier NanotechnologiesCambridge¥North Carolina State UniversityRaleigh¥Northwestern UniversityEvanston, Illinois¥Ohio State UniversityColumbus¥Pennsylvania State UniversityState CollegeAssessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C43¥University of ArizonaTucson¥University of California, Los Angeles¥University of California, Santa Barbara¥University of MichiganAnn Arbor¥University of New MexicoAlbuquerque¥University of Southern California Information Sciences InstituteLos Angeles¥University of Texas at Austin¥University of WashingtonSeattleAssessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44APPENDIX DDefinitions of Basic, Applied, and
Fundamental ResearchThis appendix contains definitions of basic, applied, and fundamentalresearch quoted from various sources.BASIC RESEARCHDOD Financial Management Regulation, DOD 7000.14-R, Vol. 2B, Ch. 5:Basic research is systematic study directed toward greater knowledge or under-standing of the fundamental aspects of phenomena and of observable factswithout specific applications towards processes or products in mind. It includes
all scientific study and experimentation directed toward increasing fundamentalknowledge and understanding in those fields of the physical, engineering, envi-ronmental, and life sciences related to long-term national security needs. It is
farsighted high payoff research that provides the basis for technological progress.
Basic research may lead to: (a) subsequent applied research and advanced tech-nology developments in Defense-related technologies, and (b) new and improved
military functional capabilities in areas such as communications, detection, track-
ing, surveillance, propulsion, mobility, guidance and control, navigation, energyconversion, materials and structures, and personnel support. Program elements
in this category involve pre-Milestone A efforts. Available online at http://www.dod.mil/comptroller/fmr/02b/Chapter05.pdf. Last accessed on November16, 2004.The objective of basic research is to gain more comprehensive knowledge orunderstanding of the subject under study, without specific applications in mind.
In industry, basic research is defined as research that advances scientific knowl-edge but does not have specific immediate commercial objectives, although itAssessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D45may be in fields of present or potential commercial interest. [National ScienceFoundation, Directorate for Social, Behavioral & Economic Sciences, US defi-
nitions for resource surveys, 1996.] Available online at http://www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/seind96/ch4_defn.htm. Last accessed on November 16, 2004.Scientific efforts that seek to gain more comprehensive knowledge or under-standing of the subject under study, without specific applications or commercialobjectives in mind. Available online at http://energytrends.pnl.gov/glosn_z.htm.
Last accessed on November 16, 2004.Basic research analyzes properties, structures, and relationships toward formu-lating and testing hypotheses, theories, or laws. As used in this survey, industrialbasic research is the pursuit of new scientific knowledge or understanding thatdoes not have specific immediate commercial objectives, although it may be in
fields of present or potential commercial interest. Available online at http://
caspar.nsf.gov/nsf/srs/IndRD/glossary.htm. Last accessed on November 16,
2004.The investigation of the natural phenomena as contrasted with applied research.Available online at http://www.onlineethics.org/glossary.html. Last accessed on

November 16, 2004.Systematic study directed toward greater knowledge or understanding of thefundamental aspects of phenomena and of observable facts without specificapplications towards processes or products in mind. [OMB Circular A-11, June1996.] See Conduct of Research and Development. Available online at https://

radius.rand.org/radius/demo/glossary.html. Last accessed on November 16,2004.Fundamental scientific inquiry to understand the unknown and contribute toimproved general knowledge (cf. with applied research). Available online athttp://www.ipmrc.com/lib/glossary.shtml. Last accessed on November 16, 2004.Research done to further knowledge for knowledgeÕs sake. Available online athttp://www.modernhumanorigins.com/b.html. Last accessed on November 16,

2004.Fundamental research; it often produces a wide range of applications, but theoutput of basic research itself usually is not of direct commercial value. Theoutput is knowledge, rather than a product; it typically cannot be patented. Avail-able online at http://www.wwnorton.com/stiglitzwalsh/economics/glossary.htm.

Last accessed on November 16, 2004.Research aimed at expanding knowledge rather than solving a specific, pragmaticproblem. Available online at https://www.quirks.com/resources/glossary.asp.
Last accessed on November 16, 2004.Focused, systematic study and investigation undertaken to discover new knowl-edge or interpretations and establish facts or principles in a particular field. SeeResearch. Available online at http://www.siu.edu/orda/general/glossary.html.
Last accessed on November 16, 2004.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCHFundamental research; it often produces a wide range of applications, but theoutput of basic research itself usually is not of direct commercial value; the
output is knowledge, rather than a product; the output of basic research typicallycannot be patented. Available online at http://wellspring.isinj.com/sample/econ/
micro/glossb.htm. Last accessed on November 16, 2004.Research emphasizing the solution of theoretical problems. Binomial probabilitydistribution: The probabilities associated with every possible outcome of an
experiment involving n independent trials and a success or failure on each trial.
Bivariate analysis: The analysis of relationships among pairs of variables.Available online at http://www.prm.nau.edu/prm447/definitions.htm. Last
accessed on November 16, 2004.Basic research is research undertaken to advance the knowledge of methodolo-gies and techniques of research. (Compare applied research.) Available online athttp://www.rigneyassoc.com/glossary.html. Last accessed on November 16, 2004.Research that is directed at the growth of scientific knowledge, without anynear-term expectations of commercial applications. Available online at http://highered.mcgraw-hill.com/sites/0072443901/student_view0/chapter4/
glossary.html. Last accessed on November 16, 2004.Research which adds something new to the body of knowledge of a particular field.Available online at http://researchoffice.astate.edu/glossary_of_proposal_terms.htm.
Last accessed on November 16, 2004.Designed to test and refine theory. The purpose is to increase our knowledge
about communication phenomena by testing, refining, and elaborating theory.Available online at http://www.uky.edu/~drlane/cohort/define.htm. Last
accessed on November 16, 2004.The purpose is to increase knowledge without concern for practical application.Available online at http://www.ied.edu.hk/csnsie/ar/chap1/1_glossary.htm. Last
accessed on November 16, 2004.In basic research the objective of the sponsoring agency is to gain more com-plete knowledge or understanding of the fundamental aspects of phenomena andof observable facts, without specific applications toward processes or products
in mind. Available online at http://www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/fedfunds/glossary/def.htm. Last accessed on November 16, 2004.NSF Definition of Basic Research: Basic research is defined as systematicstudy directed toward fuller knowledge or understanding of the fundamentalaspects of phenomena and of observable facts without specific applications
towards processes or products in mind. (In Bill BerryÕs presentation, Meeting 1,Committee on Department of Defense Basic Research.)In basic research the objective of the sponsoring agency is to gain fuller knowl-edge or understanding of the fundamental aspects of phenomena and of observ-able facts without specific applications toward processes or products in mind.
Available online at http://www.aaas.org/spp/cstc/pne/pubs/regrep/alaska/appendices.htm. Last accessed on November 16, 2004.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D47OMB (Circular A-11, 2003): Basic research is defined as systematic studydirected toward fuller knowledge or understanding of the fundamental aspects
of phenomena and of observable facts without specific applications towards pro-cesses or products in mind.Research directed toward the increase of knowledge, the primary aim being agreater knowledge or understanding of the subject under study. Available onlineat http://usmilitary.about.com/library/glossary/b/bldef00823.htm. Last accessed

on November 16, 2004.Commission of the European Communities: While there is no strict,unanimously accepted definition of what constitutes basic research, in prac-tice one can identify and distinguish from other types of research, thosewhich are carried out with no direct link to a given application and, if not
exclusively, in any case and above all with the objective of progressingknowledge. Available online at http://europa.eu.int/comm/research/press/2004/pdf/acte_en_version_final_15janv_04.pdf. Last accessed on November 16,
2004.APPLIED RESEARCHOMB (Circular A-11, 2003): Applied research is defined as systematic study togain knowledge or understanding necessary to determine the means by which arecognized and specific need may be met.The investigation of some phenomena to discover whether its properties areappropriate to a particular need or want. In contrast, basic research investigatesphenomena without reference to particular human needs and wants. Available
online at http://www.onlineethics.org/glossary.html. Last accessed on Novem-ber 16, 2004.Aimed at gaining knowledge or understanding to determine the means by whicha specific, recognized need may be met. In industry, applied research includesinvestigations oriented to discovering new scientific knowledge that has specific
commercial objectives with respect to products, processes, or services. [NationalScience Foundation, Directorate for Social, Behavioral & Economic Sciences,US definitions for resource surveys, 1996.] Available online at http://

www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/seind96/ch4_defn.htm. Last accessed on November 16,2004.Applied research is undertaken either to determine possible uses for the findingsof basic research or to determine new ways of achieving some specific, predeter-mined objectives. As used in this survey, industrial applied research is investiga-
tion that may use findings of basic research toward discovering new scientificknowledge that has specific commercial objectives with respect to new products,services, processes, or methods. Available online at http://www.caspar.nsf.gov/

nsf/srs/IndRD/glossary.htm. Last accessed on November 16, 2004.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCHInquiry aimed at gaining the knowledge or understanding to meet a specific,recognized need of a practical nature, especially needs to achieve specific com-
mercial objectives with respect to products, processes, or services. Availableonline at http://energytrends.pnl.gov/glosn_z.htm. Last accessed on November16, 2004.Any research which is used to answer a specific question, determine why some-thing failed or succeeded, solve a specific, pragmatic problem, or to gain better
understanding. Available online at https://www.quirks.com/resources/glossary.asp.Last accessed on November 16, 2004.Focused, systematic study and investigation undertaken to discover the applica-tions and uses of theories, knowledge, and principles in actual work or in solvingproblems. See Research. Available online at http://www.siu.edu/orda/general/

glossary.html. Last accessed on November 16, 2004.Systematic study to gain knowledge or understanding necessary to determinethe means by which a recognized and specific need may be met. [OMB CircularA-11, June 1996.] See also Conduct of Research and Development.Available online at https://radius.rand.org/radius/demo/glossary.html. Last
accessed on November 16, 2004.The investigation of some phenomena to discover whether its properties areappropriate to a particular need or want. In contrast, basic research investigatesphenomena without reference to particular human needs and wants.Available online at http://www.unmc.edu/ethics/words.html. Last accessed on

November 16, 2004.Is designed to solve practical problems of the modern world, rather than to acquireknowledge for knowledgeÕs sake. Available online at http://ventureline.com/glossary_A.asp. Last accessed on November 16, 2004.Research designed for the purpose of producing results that may be applied toreal world situations. Topic areas: Accountability and Evaluation. Availableonline at http://www.nonprofitbasics.org/SearchEntireSite.aspx?Source=2&
SiteSearchText=research&PW=No&PreviousWord=research&C0=178&C4=1&C3=4&C5=36&C6=18&C1=92&C2=1. Last accessed on November 16, 2004.Research that studies the relationship or applicability for theories or principlesof a particular field to a particular problem. Available online at http://researchoffice.astate.edu/glossary_of_proposal_terms.htm. Last accessed on
November 16, 2004.Research done with the intent of applying results to a specific problem. Evalua-tion is a form of applied research. This can be conducted as part of an actionresearch approach. Available online at http://www.sachru.sa.gov.au/pew/glossary.htm. Last accessed on November 16, 2004.Research aimed at improving the quality of life and solving practical problems.Available online at http://highered.mcgraw-hill.com/sites/0072358327/
student_view0/chapter1/glossary.html. Last accessed on November 16, 2004.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D49The aim is to address an immediate problem. The purpose is to try ideas inthe context of educational (classroom) settings. Available online at http://
www.ied.edu.hk/csnsie/ar/chap1/1_glossary.htm. Last accessed on Novem-ber 16, 2004.Applied research is that effort that (1) normally follows basic research, but maynot be severable from the related basic research, (2) attempts to determine andexploit the potential of scientific discoveries or improvements in technology,
materials, processes, methods, devices, or techniques, and (3) attempts toadvance the state of the art. Applied research does not include efforts whoseprincipal aim is design, development, or test of specific items or services to be
considered for sale; these efforts are within the definition of the term develop-ment.  Available online at http://www-agecon.ag.ohio-state.edu/class/AEDE601/
glossary/glossa.htm. Last accessed on November 16, 2004.Conducted to solve particular problems or answer specific questions.Available online at http://www.nelson.com/nelson/hmcanada/ob/glossary.html.

Last accessed on November 16, 2004.In applied research the objective of the sponsoring agency is to gain knowledgeor understanding necessary to determine how a recognized need may be met.Available online at http://www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/sfsucni/method99/help/glossary.htm. Last accessed on November 16, 2004.Utilizing pure research to develop real-world products. Available online at http://www.investorwords.com/236/applied_research.html. Last accessed on Novem-

ber 16, 2004.As opposed to basic research, applied research is the type of research which isconducted to solve practical problems, find cures to illnesses, develop therapieswith the purpose of helping people, and other similar types of practical problem-solving research. Available online at http://www.alleydog.com/glossary/
definition.cfm?term=Applied%20Research. Last accessed on November 16, 2004.FUNDAMENTAL RESEARCHNational Security Decision Directives: ÒFundamental researchÓ means basic
and applied research in science and engineering, the results of which ordinarilyare published and shared broadly within the scientific community, as distin-guished from proprietary research and from industrial development, design, pro-
duction, and product utilization, the results of which ordinarily are restricted forproprietary or national security reasons. Available online at http://www.fas.org/
irp/offdocs/nsdd/nsdd-189.htm. Last accessed on November 16, 2004.
Fundamental research is basic and applied research in science and engineeringwhere the resulting information is ordinarily published and shared broadly within
the scientific community. It is distinguished from proprietary research and fromindustrial development, design, production, and product utilizations, the resultsof which ordinarily are restricted for proprietary and/or specific national secu-Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCHrity reasons. Normally, the results of Òfundamental research.Ó are published in
scientific literature, thus making it publicly available. Research which is intended
for publication, whether it is ever accepted by scientific journals or not, is con-sidered to be Òfundamental research.Ó A large segment of academic research is
considered Òfundamental researchÓ. Because any information, technological orotherwise, that is publicly available is not subject to the Export AdministrationRegulations (EAR) (except for encryption object code and source code in elec-tronic form or media) and thus does not require a license, Ôfundamental researchÕis not subject to the EAR and does not require a license. Available online athttp://www.umbi.umd.edu/rcc/fundamentalresearch.pdf. Last accessed onNovember 16, 2004.National Security Decision Directive 189: Fundamental Research defined: basicand applied research in science and engineering, the results of which are avail-
able to interested scientific community. National Policy: No restriction may beplaced upon the conduct or reporting of federally funded Fundamental Researchthat has not received national security classification. This is reflected in ITAR at
22 CFRR 120.11(8). Executive Order 12356 (1985). Available online at http://www.epic.org/open_gov/eo_12356.html. Last accessed on November 16, 2004.Federal Acquisition Regulation 27.404 (g) (2): In contracts for basic or applied
research universities or colleges, no restrictions may be placed upon the conductof or reporting on the results of unclassified basic or applied research, except as
provided in applicable U.S. Statutes. Available online at http://supply.lanl.gov/Property/ecco/History/2004/presentations2004/default.shtml. Last accessed onNovember 16, 2004.DoD Supplement to the FAR: It is DOD policy . . . to allow the publication andpublic presentation of unclassified contracted fundamental research results. The
mechanism for control of information generated by DOT funded contractedfundamental research . . . is security classification. Available online at http://supply.lanl.gov/Property/ecco/History/2004/presentations2004/default.shtml.
Last accessed on November 16, 2004.OTHERDefense of Basic Research by Joseph Henry: In 1852, Henry defended basicresearch. It was Òprofitable,Ó he said, when that word was defined properly.
ÒThe true, the beautiful, as well as the immediately practical, are all entitled to ashare of attention. All knowledge is profitable; profitable in its ennobling effect
on the character, in the pleasure it imparts in its acquisition, as well as in thepower it gives over the operations of mind and matter. All knowledge is useful;every part of this complex system of nature is connected with every other.
Nothing is isolated. The discovery of to-day, which appears unconnected withany useful process, may, in the course of a few years, become the fruitful sourceof a thousand inventions.Ó Available online at http://www.si.edu/archives/ihd/
jhp/joseph04.htm. Last accessed on November 16, 2004.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.51APPENDIX EUniversities That Received
Department of Defense 6.1 and 6.2 Fundingin Fiscal Year 2002
Tables E-1 through E-3 show the top 50 university recipients of DOD 6.1,6.2, and 6.1 + 6.2 funding in fiscal year 2002. The tables were constructed on the
basis of data provided in personal communication from Mark Herbst, a member
of the staff of the Office of the Director of Basic Research, within the Office of
the Secretary of Defense, to James Garcia of the National Research Council.
Institution names in boldface type and shaded background are those of universi-ties at which committee members conducted site visits and interviews and/or held
discussions with university research leaders who were not visited in person.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCHTABLE E-1Top 50 University Recipients of DOD 6.1 Funding in Fiscal Year2002Institution NameStateTotal 6.1 ($000)
1Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyMA43,802
2Pennsylvania State University, All CampusesPA35,357
3University of California, Los AngelesCA31,784
4University of WashingtonWA29,884
5Stanford UniversityCA25,811
6University of Southern CaliforniaCA25,758
7Duke UniversityNC25,607

8University of Michigan, All CampusesMI24,245
9University of California, San DiegoCA24,117
10University of California, Santa BarbaraCA19,964
11University of Illinois at Urbana-ChampaignIL19,925
12California Institute of TechnologyCA19,478

13Georgia Institute of Technology, All CampusesGA19,098

14Johns Hopkins UniversityMD18,888

15University of Texas at AustinTX17,044
16Carnegie Mellon UniversityPA16,527
17Cornell University, All CampusesNY15,209
18Princeton UniversityNJ13,452

19State University of New York, System OfficeNY12,598

20Woods Hole Oceanographic InstitutionMA12,493

21University of PennsylvaniaPA12,282

22Virginia Polytechnic Institute & State UniversityVA11,476
23University of New Mexico, All CampusesNM11,032
24University of ArizonaAZ10,977
25University of Wisconsin - MadisonWI10,389

26University of Maryland System AdministrationMD10,334

27University of Colorado, All CampusesCO10,303

28Harvard UniversityMA10,081
29Northwestern UniversityIL9,692
30Purdue University, All CampusesIN9,479

31North Carolina State University at RaleighNC9,311
32Ohio State University, All CampusesOH9,190
33Arizona State University MainAZ9,051

34University of Minnesota, All CampusesMN8,667
35University of Virginia, All CampusesVA8,335
36Rutgers, State University of New Jersey, All CampusesNJ8,262

37University of MiamiFL8,105

38University of California, DavisCA7,776

39University of California, IrvineCA7,672

40Brown UniversityRI7,491
41Baylor College of MedicineTX7,040
42Rice UniversityTX6,918

43San Diego State UniversityCA6,893

44University of North Carolina at Chapel HillNC6,576

45University of Pittsburgh, All CampusesPA6,305

46New Mexico Institute of Mining and TechnologyNM6,129
47Boston UniversityMA6,005
48University of South Carolina, All CampusesSC5,967

49University of FloridaFL5,947

50University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, DallasTX5,862
SOURCE: Based on data provided in personal communication from Mark Herbst, Office of the

Director of Basic Research, Office of the Secretary of Defense, Washington, D.C., to James Garcia,
National Research Council, June 2004.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX E53TABLE E-2Top 50 University Recipients of DOD 6.2 Funding in Fiscal Year2002Institution NameStateTotal 6.2 ($000)
1University of Southern CaliforniaCA32,586
2University of Hawaii System OfficeHI20,131

3Pennsylvania State University, All CampusesPA16,757
4University of South FloridaFL15,729
5University of DaytonOH14,528
6Carnegie Mellon UniversityPA12,883

7Georgia Institute of Technology, All CampusesGA10,429

8Johns Hopkins UniversityMD9,687

9Auburn University, All CampusesAL7,572
10University of Central FloridaFL7,369
11Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyMA7,206
12University of Texas at AustinTX6,794
13Vanderbilt UniversityTN6,051

14Florida State UniversityFL6,000

15University of WashingtonWA5,727
16Stanford UniversityCA5,274
17University of PennsylvaniaPA4,727
18Northwestern UniversityIL4,677
19Florida Atlantic UniversityFL3,640

20University of Maryland System AdministrationMD3,519

21University of California, Los AngelesCA3,441
22University of California, IrvineCA3,426
23University of Mississippi, All CampusesMS3,391
24Boston UniversityMA3,287

25University of Illinois at Urbana-ChampaignIL3,269

26Washington State UniversityWA3,221

27University of DelawareDE3,051

28Cornell University, All CampusesNY2,839
29Ohio State University, All CampusesOH2,821
30Rutgers, State University of New Jersey, All CampusesNJ2,709

31New York UniversityNY2,686

32Utah State UniversityUT2,519

33University of California, San DiegoCA2,513

34Washington UniversityMO2,388
35University of Rhode IslandRI2,322
36University of Massachusetts at AmherstMA2,282

37University of California, Santa BarbaraCA2,202
38Colorado State UniversityCO2,090

39Purdue University, All CampusesIN2,015

40University of California, RiversideCA1,996
41University of North Carolina at CharlotteNC1,980
42Georgetown UniversityDC1,922

43Princeton UniversityNJ1,909

44University of Texas at DallasTX1,879

45Yale UniversityCT1,854

46Columbia UniversityNY1,821
47University of ArizonaAZ1,801
48Rensselaer Polytechnic InstituteNY1,789

49University of Colorado, All CampusesCO1,777

50Drexel UniversityPA1,694
SOURCE: Based on data provided in personal communication from Mark Herbst, Office of the

Director of Basic Research, Office of the Secretary of Defense, Washington, D.C., to James Garcia,
National Research Council, June 2004.Assessment of Department of Defense Basic ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54ASSESSMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASIC RESEARCHTABLE E-3Top 50 University Recipients of DOD 6.1 + 6.2 Funding inFiscal Year 2002Institution NameStateTotal 6.1 + 6.2 ($000)
1University of Southern CaliforniaCA58,343
2Pennsylvania State University, All CampusesPA52,114
3Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyMA51,007
4University of WashingtonWA35,611
5University of California, Los AngelesCA35,225
6Stanford UniversityCA31,085

7Georgia Institute of Technology, All CampusesGA29,527

8Carnegie Mellon UniversityPA29,410

9Johns Hopkins UniversityMD28,575
10University of California, San DiegoCA26,629
11University of Michigan, All CampusesMI25,935
12Duke UniversityNC25,774

13University of Texas at AustinTX23,838
14University of Illinois at Urbana-ChampaignIL23,194

15University of Hawaii System OfficeHI22,269

16University of California, Santa BarbaraCA22,166
17University of South FloridaFL20,409
18California Institute of TechnologyCA20,363

19Cornell University, All CampusesNY18,048
20University of DaytonOH17,762

21University of PennsylvaniaPA17,009

22Princeton UniversityNJ15,361
23Northwestern UniversityIL14,369
24State University of New York System OfficeNY13,969

25University of Maryland System AdministrationMD13,853

26Woods Hole Oceanographic InstitutionMA13,549

27University of Central FloridaFL13,224

28University of ArizonaAZ12,778
29Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State UniversityVA12,221
30University of Colorado, All CampusesCO12,080

31Ohio State University, All CampusesOH12,011
32University of Wisconsin-MadisonWI11,990

33University of New Mexico, All CampusesNM11,869
34Purdue University, All CampusesIN11,494
35Harvard UniversityMA11,346
36University of California, IrvineCA11,098

37Rutgers, State University of New Jersey, All CampusesNJ10,971

38Vanderbilt UniversityTN10,643

39Auburn University, All CampusesAL10,484

40North Carolina State University at RaleighNC10,168
41Arizona State University MainAZ9,893
42University of MiamiFL9,682

43University of Minnesota, All CampusesMN9,333

44Boston UniversityMA9,292

45University of Virginia, All CampusesVA9,220

46Brown UniversityRI9,147
47Florida State UniversityFL9,135
48University of DelawareDE8,313

49University of California, DavisCA7,876

50Yale UniversityCT7,700
SOURCE: Based on data provided in personal communication from Mark Herbst, Office of the

Director of Basic Research, Office of the Secretary of Defense, Washington, D.C., to James Garcia,
National Research Council, June 2004.