DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/11205An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure toPAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array Radiofrequency Energy214 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-09309-5 | DOI 10.17226/11205Committee to Assess Potential Health Effects from Exposures to PAVE PAWSLow-Level Phased-Array Radiofrequency Energy; Board on Radiation EffectsResearch; Division on Earth and Life Studies; National Research CouncilAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array Radiofrequency...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee to Assess Potential Health Effects from Exposures to PAVE PAWSLow-Level Phased-Array Radiofrequency EnergyBoard on Radiation Effects ResearchDivision on Earth and Life StudiesAN ASSESSMENT OF
POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS
FROMEXPOSURETOPAVE PAWSLOW-LEVEL 
PHASED-ARRAY
RADIOFREQUENCY ENERGYAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS 500 Fifth Street, N.W. Washington, DC 20001NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the GoverningBoard of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils ofthe National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Insti-tute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen
for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.This study was supported by contract F05604-01-C-9000, between the National Academyof Sciences and the U.S. Air Force. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommenda-tions expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflectthe views of the organizations or agencies that provided support for the project.International Standard Book Number 0-309-09309-0Additional copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 500Fifth Street, N.W., Lockbox 285, Washington, DC 20055; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area); Internet, http://www.nap.edu.Copyright 2005 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Printed in the United States of America.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society ofdistinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to thefurtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. Upon theauthority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandatethat requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. Dr.
Bruce M. Alberts is president of the National Academy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter ofthe National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. Itis autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with theNational Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government.The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at
meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superiorachievements of engineers. Dr. Wm. A. Wulf is president of the National Academy ofEngineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sci-ences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the exami-nation of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The Institute acts under the
responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter tobe an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues ofmedical care, research, and education. Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Insti-
tute of Medicine.The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the AcademyÕspurposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. Functioning inaccordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the Council has become theprincipal operating agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the National
Academy of Engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and thescientific and engineering communities. The Council is administered jointly by both Acad-emies and the Institute of Medicine. Dr. Bruce M. Alberts and Dr. Wm. A. Wulf are chair
and vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.www.national-academies.orgAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ivCOMMITTEE TO ASSESS POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROMEXPOSURES TO PAVE PAWS LOW-LEVEL PHASED-ARRAYRADIOFREQUENCY ENERGYFRANK S. BARNES (Chairman), University of Colorado, Boulder, COROBERT C. HANSEN (Vice-Chairman), R. C. Hansen, Inc., Tarzana, CALARRY E. ANDERSON, Battelle, Pacific Northwest National Laboratories,Richland, WAGRAHAM A. COLDITZ, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MAFRANCESCA DOMINICI, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MDKENNETH J. McLEOD, State University of New York, Binghamton, NYKEITH D. PAULSEN, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NHLESLIE L. ROBISON, University of Minnesota Cancer Center,Minneapolis, MNSUSAN L. SANTOS, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New JerseySchool of Public Health and East Orange New Jersey Veterans
Administration Medical Center War Related Illness and Injury Study
Center, Medford, MAJAN A. J. STOLWIJK, Yale University School of Medicine (emeritus),Beltsville, MDGAYLE E. WOLOSCHAK, Northwestern University, Chicago, ILConsultantDAVID R. CHALLONER, University of Florida, Gainesville, FLNational Research Council Staff
RICK JOSTES, Study DirectorEVAN B. DOUPLE, BRER DirectorCOURTNEY GIBBS, Program AssistantDORIS E. TAYLOR, Staff AssistantAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vBOARD ON RADIATION EFFECTS RESEARCHS. JAMES ADELSTEIN (Chairman), Harvard Medical School, Boston, MAHAROLD L. BECK, Department of Energy Environmental Laboratory(Retired), New York, NYJOEL S. BEDFORD, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, COJAMES E. CLEAVER, University of California San Francisco Cancer Center,San Francisco, CASARAH C. DARBY, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom
SHARON L. DUNWOODY, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WIC. CLIFTON LING, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NYDANIEL KREWSKI, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, CanadaTHEODORE L. PHILLIPS, University of California, San Francisco, CAANDREW M. SESSLER, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,Berkeley, CAJOHN C. VILLFORTH, Food and Drug Law Institute (Retired), Derwood, MDPAUL L. ZEIMER, Purdue University, West Lafayette, INEDWARD R. EPP (Board Liaison to the Committee), Massachusetts GeneralHospital (Retired), Boston, MANational Research Council StaffEVAN B. DOUPLE, Director, Board on Radiation Effects ResearchISAF AL-NABULSI, Senior Program OfficerRICK JOSTES, Senior Program OfficerCATHERINE S. BERKLEY, Administrative AssociateDORIS E. TAYLOR, Staff AssistantCOURTNEY GIBBS, Program AssistantAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiPreface
In a January 11, 2001, letter from Senator Edward M. Kennedy to the Secre-tary of the Air Force, F. Whitten Peters, Senator Kennedy asked that the AirForce fund an independent study through the National Research Council of the
National Academies Òto examine the health effects of the PAVE PAWS system.ÓKennedy further requested that Òthis follow-on study (to the previous 1979 Na-tional Research Council report) should address, at a minimum, the effects, if any,
of the PAVE PAWS radar over the past two decades and should also examine the
validity of using continuous-wave and pulsed non-ionizing radiation biological-
effects data as surrogates for phased-array non-ionizing radiation biological ef-
fects data.Ó The offices of Senators Kennedy and Kerry, and CongressmanDelehunt, participated in discussions with the Air Force and the National Re-
search Council to establish the task that is addressed by this committee in this
report.A committee composed of individuals with engineering, biology, epidemiol-ogy, risk communication, and biostatistics expertise was established by the Na-
tional Research Council to address the task. The committee heard from interested
citizens in a public forum held in Sandwich, MA on May 28, 2002. In additional
open sessions of the committee, the committee gathered information from the Air
Force, the Massachusetts Department of Public Health, the PAVE PAWS Public
Health Steering Group, various experts from universities and other institutions,
and the Cape Cod public.The committee also evaluated information provided to the committee by in-terested parties, surveyed the scientific literature, and conducted a preliminary
statistical correlation analysis to evaluate the potential for biological and health
effects from the PAVE PAWS radar. A letter report was published providingAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.advice regarding the Air Force waveform measurement effort and a second in-terim letter report was published that commented on the adequacy, at that time, of
available information and outlined the general characteristics of information that
the committee deemed useful in its evaluation of the potential biological and
health effects of the PAVE PAWS radar.This report is an update of a prior 1979 National Research Council report(Analysis of the Exposure Levels and Potential Biologic Effects of the PAVEPAWS Radar System) and addresses the following:1.The applicability of, and the level of uncertainty associated with, using
data derived from cell, animal, and epidemiological studies employing pulsed
and continuous-wave exposure for evaluation of potential adverse health effects
following phased-array exposures;2.The extent of the exposure of the public to electromagnetic energy from
the PAVE PAWS system;3.Potential biological and health effects of the PAVE PAWS Radar Sys-
tem; and4.Recommendations for appropriate follow-on study design issues, includ-
ing the strengths and limitations of the approaches suggested and the potential
value of the proposed work.Frank S. Barnes, Ph.D.
ChairviiiPREFACEAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ixReviewers
This report has been reviewed in draft form by persons chosen for their di-verse perspectives and technical expertise in accordance with procedures ap-proved by the National Research CouncilÕs Report Review Committee. The pur-
poses of this review are to provide candid and critical comments that will assistthe institution in making the published report as sound as possible and to ensurethat the report meets institutional standards of objectivity, evidence, and respon-
siveness to the study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript remain
confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. We wish to thank

the following for their participation in the review of this report:Thomas F. Budinger, University of California, Berkeley, CADavid G. Hoel, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SCDaniel Krewski, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, CanadaSteven C. Lewis, University of Texas, Dallas, TXFrank Prato, St. JosephÕs Health Centre, London, CanadaAndrew M. Sessler, E.O. Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,Berkeley, CAZenon Sienkiewicz, National Radiological Protection Board, Chilton, UnitedKingdomBernard Veyret, University of Bordeaux, Pessac Cedex, FranceAlthough the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive com-ments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recom-
mendations, nor did they see the final draft of the report before its release. The

review of this report was overseen by John F. Ahearne, Sigma Xi and DukeAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.University, Research Triangle Park, NC, and Richard B. Setlow, BrookhavenNational Laboratory, Upton, NY. Appointed by the National Research Council,they were responsible for making certain that an independent examination of this
report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all
review comments were carefully considered. Responsibility for the final content

of this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the National Re-
search Council.xREVIEWERSAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiAcknowledgments
The committee would like to thank Dr. Richard Albanese for directing thecommitteeÕs attention to aspects of the PAVE PAWS waveform that merited in-vestigation. Richard and Sharon Judge, Charles Kleecamp, Ron Cronin, JimTomlin, and Victor Vyssotsky provided many insightful comments to the com-mittee. We thank the Massachusetts Department of Public Health, the PAVEPAWS Public Health Steering Group, the Coalition to Operate PAVE PAWS
Safely, and the U.S. Air Force for providing information to the committee.We would also like to thank the following speakers at committee informa-tion-gathering sessions: Stephen Cleary, Stetson Hall, Robert S. Knorr, Joseph
Roti-Roti, Kurt Oughstun, Thomas Roberts, Daniel Wartenberg, Robert Torres,
and Donald McLemore.The committee is especially indebted to the conscientious support and guid-ance provided by the study director, Rick Jostes. He sought and provided impor-
tant information from a number of sources and he diligently kept the committee
focused on its timeline and its charge. Dr. Jostes was well assisted in the admin-
istration of the committeeÕs work by Courtney Gibbs and Doris Taylor. CourtneySlack, a Christine Mirzayan Science & Technology Policy Graduate Fellow, pro-
vided additional valuable assistance to NRC staff.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiiContentsPUBLIC SUMMARY1
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY9
Introduction, 9Task for the Report, 10
Applicability of Using Non-Phased-Array Data, 10
Radar Characteristics, 11
Uncertainties Involved in Using Non-Phased-Array Data forEvaluation of Potential Adverse Health Effects Following
Phased-Array Exposures, 11Biology, 13
Epidemiology, 14
Recommendations, 151INTRODUCTION18
History of the Facility, 18
Origin of Present Study, 21
Statement of Task, 22
Information Available to This Committee, 23
Uncertainties Associated with the Evaluation ofPAVE PAWS Health Effects, 232ASSESSMENT OF CLASSIFIED RESEARCH RELEVANT
TO PAVE PAWS26

Introduction 26An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xivCONTENTSVisit Details, 26Conclusions and Findings, 293PHYSICAL MECHANISMS FOR RF EFFECTS ON
BIOLOGICAL SYSTEMS31

Summary, 354 EXPOSURE LEVELS37
Overview, 37
PAVE PAWS Operation, 37
The Beam Characteristics, 38
PAVE PAWS Power-Density Estimates and Measurements, 40
Population Exposure to Other RF Sources, 48
Summary of PAVE PAWS Exposure Data, 515PAVE PAWS EXPOSURE CONDITIONS53
Exposure Characteristics, 53
Waveform Decay, 55
Precursors, 68
Summary, 76
Annex 5-1: Dispersion in Biological Tissues, 78
Annex 5-2: Papers on Precursor Measurements, 78
Annex 5-3: Papers on Precursor Calculations, 82
Annex 5-4: Related Papers on Precursors, 88
Annex 5-5: Papers by Professor Oughstun and Colleagues, 906EVIDENCE OF BIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF RF EXPOSURE
RELEVANT TO PAVE PAWS RADAR SYSTEM94

Introduction, 94
Literature Review, 97
Indirect Molecular Effects, 100
Phenotypic Responses, 101
Summary And Conclusions, 1057ANIMAL AND HUMAN STUDIES ADDRESSING HEALTH
EFFECTS110

Introduction, 110
CancerÑHuman Studies, 111CancerÑStudies In Animal Models, 111Human Behavioral Studies, 114
Animal Behavior, 115
Other Physiological Studies, 116An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSxvImmune- and Endocrine-Function Studies, 119Teratology, Reproduction, and Development, 120
In Vivo Studies: Conclusions, 1238EPIDEMIOLOGICAL STUDIES OF THE POSSIBLE ADVERSE
HEALTH EFFECTS OF PULSED RADAR EMISSIONS133

Exposures at the U.S. Embassy in Moscow, 133
Exposures at the MIT Radiation Laboratory, 134
Two Studies of a U.S. Navy Cohort, 134
Radio Location Station at Skrunda, 135
Polish Military Studies, 136
Summary, 1379HEALTH CONSIDERATIONS IN THE CAPE CODPOPULATION139

Introduction, 139
Issues in Epidemiologic Research, 140
Health on Cape Cod, 142
Massachusetts Military Reservation, 147
Sample Size and Statistical Power to InvestigateHealth Risks of the PAVE PAWS Radar, 154
Statistical Analyses, 157
Exposure Assessment Study, 158
Geographic Correlation Study, 169
Summary, 172
Annex 9-1: Data Sources, 174
Annex 9-2: GeoBugs Code, 17510SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS176
Radar Characteristics, 176
Exposure Levels, 177
Biology, 177
Epidemiology, 180APPENDIXESAINTERIM LETTER REPORT183
BACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS189
COMMITTEE BIOSKETCHES194
An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Map of Cape Cod in Massachusetts showing the ÒUpper CapeÓ as a shaded area.  TheUpper Cape is the portion of the Cape which is closest to the mainland and is commonlytaken to extend to Barnstable.  The location of the PAVE PAWS radar is indicated by the
solid triangle near the town of Sagamore. The dashed lines extending from the radarindicate the approximate boundaries of the main beam when the radar is scanning (radarbeam projects angled upward and to the East). From http://www.wordiq.com/definition/
Cape_Cod on 10/27/2004.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1INTRODUCTIONThis report examines the potential biological and human-health effects fromexposure to PAVE PAWS low-level phased-array radiofrequency energy. The
PAVE PAWS radar system, part of the U.S. Air Force Space Command, is lo-
cated at the Cape Cod Air Force Station in Cape Cod, Massachusetts (see map
that precedes the Public Summary). The facility has been in continuous operation
since 1979. ÒPAVEÓ is an Air Force program name and ÒPAWSÓ stands for
Phased Array Warning System. The primary purpose of the facility is to detect
and track sea-launched and intercontinental ballistic missiles. The systemÕs sec-
ondary function is to track earth satellites and identify other space objects.Even before the facility began operation, there had been concerns expressedby at least some members of the public regarding its safety and whether or not the
facility had the potential to cause adverse health impacts. In 1979, concerns voiced
by the public included the possibility of thermal effects, disruption of implanted
medical devices (such as pacemakers), and secondary radiation effects from im-
properly grounded structures exposed to the radar. Those concerns in part led to a
1979 National Research Council (NRC) report on exposure levels and potential
biological effects of the PAVE PAWS radar. That committee found that Ò. . . the
PAVE PAWS radar may be anticipated to expose a limited number of members
of the general public intermittently to low intensities of pulse-modulated micro-
wave fields with maximal intensities of 100 W/cm2 or less and time-averaged
intensities lower by two orders of magnitude. There are no known irreversible
effects of such exposure on either morbidity and mortality in humans or other
species.Ó That committee also recommended that the Air Force conduct addi-Public SummaryAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWStional research and surveillance to evaluate the potential exposure effects ofPAVE PAWS. Specifically, the 1979 report recommended:¥ÒAdditional research is recommended to clarify further the possible ef-fects of long-term exposure to microwave radiation at low power densities,Ó and¥ ÒIn view of the known sensitivity of the mammalian central nervoussystem to electromagnetic fields, especially those modulated at brainwave fre-
quencies, the possibility cannot be ruled out that exposure to PAVE PAWS radia-
tion may have some effects on exposed people. Because these effects are still
hypothetical, it is not feasible to access their health implications. Such assess-
ment will require additional research and surveillance and must be addressed in
future evaluations of the potential exposure effects of PAVE PAWS and other
high-power-output radar systems.ÓThe present NRC committee found no evidence that the Air Force or others fol-lowed up substantially on the above two recommendations.Public concerns over the possibility for adverse effects from the PAVEPAWS facility have continued over the years since the time of the 1979 NRC
report. In recent years, public concerns have shifted away from thermal effects of
the radiofrequency (RF). Concerns instead have focused on:¥the possible biological relevance of the waveform itself;¥the inherent time delay of the phased-array radar including the second-ary beams or sidelobes that are below the main beam; and¥the possible implications for health arising from the propagation of theRF energy in tissue. Some members of the public have questioned whether radia-
tion from the PAVE PAWS system is unique such that existing safety measures
may not adequately protect the public. Others have stated that the systemÑinspite of its unique configurationÑis not that dissimilar from the other sources ofRF energy to which the public is constantly exposed such as FM radio stations,
TV stations, or continuous-wave radar systems.In an effort to try to address the questions that have been raised regarding thesafety and uniqueness of the system, in January 2001, Senator Edward M.
Kennedy asked the U.S. Air Force to fund an independent study through the
National Research Council of the National Academies Òto examine the healtheffects of the PAVE PAWS systemÓ and to address, in a follow-on report to the
1979 NRC report, the effects if any, of the PAVE PAWS radar over its two-plus
decades of operation.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PUBLIC SUMMARY3What the Committee DidThe committee undertook an extensive data- and information-gathering ef-fort. That effort included 4 sessions that members of the public were invited to
attend and at which researchers whose work was referenced as important by mem-
bers of the public, or considered important by the committee, were invited to
provide the committee with information. An additional meeting of the committee
was held as a public forum in which interested members of the public were en-
couraged to present their viewpoints to the committee. In addition, there were
several members of the public, who, on a number of occasions, requested that the
committee review specific information they wished to be made available to the
committee. Over 200 submissions of information were made to the committee by
interested parties. Because there have been no studies of a phased-array system
similar to PAVE PAWS in the public domain, we reviewed all the relevant avail-
able data (i.e., peer reviewed and scientifically available) in the radiofrequency
range most applicable to the PAVE PAWS system (see appendix A). Further, in
response to concerns raised by some members of the public that classified data
might exist showing effects of a phased-array radar, a number of committee mem-
bers with sufficient scientific expertise and security clearances also examined
and assessed whether there was any classified research done by the U.S. Air
Force that might show any evidence of biological effects with potential relevance
to human-health effects of radiation similar in characteristics to PAVE PAWS.The committee found no evidence of any classified, phased-array experi-ments that either were relevant to the PAVE PAWS exposure conditions or indi-
cated a potential for PAVE PAWS human-health effects. Thus, we do not believe
there is any classified data showing potential harm from the PAVE PAWS sys-
tem.RESULTS/CONCLUSIONSThe committeeÕs conclusions address three primary areas: the implicationsof the PAVE PAWS waveform, the potential for biological effects, and the poten-
tial for human-health effects.The PAVE PAWS WaveformThe recently collected waveform-characterization data that the committeereviewed has answered many questions. Based on that review and some addi-
tional statistical analyses we performed, we reached the following conclusions:1.The PAVE PAWS narrow-band radiation is in fact similar to that of
continuous narrow-band reflectors or so-called dish antennas. Those large para-
bolic reflector (dish) antennas are widely used for satellite earth terminals and forAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSradars. Both reflectors and phased arrays have time delays, and comparable sizereflector antennas also have comparable delays.2.The large number of PAVE PAWS active elements (1792) and their
irregular spacing make the discrete beam formation almost indistinguishable from
a continuous formation.3.The existence and possible biological significance of precursors (addi-
tions to a signal waveform that may occur before, during, or after the signal wave-
form) forming would be extremely small and probably not measurable for the
narrow-band PAVE PAWS system.Potential for Biological EffectsThe committee concluded:4.Relevant data exist from experiments with animals and cells exposed
under certain RF conditions that contribute to an understanding of RF biological
effects and to an understanding of the potential for human-health effects from
PAVE PAWS.5.There is no risk of cancer, reproductive or developmental effects, or
neurobehaviorial effects based on a comprehensive review of animal studies or
studies in other biological systems. A few statistically significant biological
changes have been reported from RF exposures, but the relevance of those bio-
logical changes is not known and may or may not have any impact on human
health.Potential Public-Health EffectsThe committee recognizes the concerns of some of the members of the pub-lic regarding the ongoing operation of the facility, especially in light of the in-
crease in colorectal, breast, prostate, and lung cancers that have been reported in
the upper Cape over time. To date, those observed elevated cancer-incidence rates
among residents of upper Cape Cod have not been adequately explained through
previous investigations exploring a variety of environmental factors including
PAVE PAWS. The inability of investigators to explore the possibility of health
effects from the PAVE PAWS radar was due principally to the lack of PAVE
PAWS RF power-density information at that time.To determine the potential for health effects, it is important to have an esti-mate of exposure. One of the consistent problems in most epidemiologic studies
is the lack of adequate exposure data. This was true in the relevant epidemiologic
studies evaluated by the committee for other populations exposed to either pulsed
or continuous radiofrequency energy. Unfortunately, there are too many limita-
tions in those epidemiological studies to rely on them for making a determination
of the potential impact of radar exposure on human health. With regard to PAVEAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PUBLIC SUMMARY5PAWS exposures, the historic lack of waveform characterization data and expo-sure data (in the form of power-density measurements) at locations where expo-
sure to the Cape Cod population occurs has made assessment of the potential for
health effects difficult. Recent waveform and power-density models and mea-
surements by the Air Force and Broadcast Signal Laboratories have enabled some
analyses by this committee and enabled a forthcoming health study by the Inter-
national Epidemiology Institute.The committee concluded:6.The available power-density measurements are generally consistent and
show that the spatial distribution of the PAVE PAWS radiofrequency energy, and
thus potential for exposure, is strongly influenced by site-specific local topogra-
phy and intervening terrain at any given location. The measured data show that
average power densities are consistently below 0.1 mW/cm2 and generally in the
0.001-0.01 mW/cm2 range at locations where the public would be expected to be
exposed. Measured peak levels are generally less than 1 mW/cm
2, although val-ues as high as 15 mW/cm2 have been found at a few elevated locations near the
radar where exposure might occur. The levels of exposure can be compared to
Environmental Protection Agency studies of FM and TV broadcast bands (54-
900 MHz) in the 1970s. Those studies estimated that the median exposure in
urban areas was 0.005 mW/cm
2 and that 95% of the urban population was ex-
posed to less than 0.1mW/cm2 from FM and TV broadcasts. Recent studies oncell-phone base stations in Great Britain, Canada, and Australia show RF fre-
quencies in the vicinity of base stations ranging from 0.01 mW/cm2 to a highreading of 2.6 mW/cm2.7.The potential for an individual
Õs exposure over time is determined byhow long he or she resides at any possible point(s) where exposure might occur,
and the level of exposure at that particular point, which will vary with time and
other factors. In spite of recent site-specific measurements and estimates of the
PAVE PAWS waveforms and power densities that now exist for a number of
geographic locations, there are still no data currently available to determine an
individualÕs personal exposure to RF radiation from the PAVE PAWS radar.8.Using information on population density, topography, and direction of
the PAVE PAWS radar beam, we estimated that, based on the 1990 census, 12,773
of the total resident population (11.8% including children) of upper Cape Cod
were living in the line of sight1 of the PAVE PAWS antenna and most likely
receiving some exposure from the sidelobes of the PAVE PAWS radar beam (but
not the primary beam, which is angled upward). Based on 2000 census data, the1Line of sight means that there are no hills between the resident and the radar that would block theradar emissions. The main beam is aimed above the population and residents in the line of sight areexposed to the sidelobes of the main beam.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSestimated number of population living in the area exposed to the PAVE PAWSradar-beam sidelobes was 16,403 (12.4%).9.Using power-density information from models provided by Mitre and
recent power-density measurements and models provided by Broadcast Signal
Laboratories, this committee also did its own statistical analysis. Based on our
own statistical analyses, we did not identify any increase in cancer risk with ex-
posure to the PAVE PAWS beam using peak and average power-density esti-
mates. The analyses looked at the reported occurrences of all cancers combined
on the upper Cape as well as specific cancers, including colorectal, breast (fe-
male), prostate, and lung. We are also aware of the epidemiologic investigation
that is currently being conducted by the International Epidemiology Institute, but
data from that study were not available to review as of the writing of this report.10.Socioeconomic status does not appear to influence results. We performed
additional analyses to see whether some indicators of socioeconomic status might
influence the results (an adjustment routinely made in health or epidemiologic
studies). We found that adjusting for the proportion of the population below the
poverty level did not influence the results.11.As another overall measure of health for the upper Cape Cod towns, the
committee looked at premature mortality before age 75 as a useful indicator.
Based on 2001 data, Barnstable, Falmouth, Mashpee, and Sandwich have lower
mortality than the Massachusetts state average, while Bourne has elevated mor-
tality.12.Further analysis by the committee indicates that increasing duration of
exposure to the PAVE PAWS radiofrequency energy has not resulted in increased
incidence of cancer over time. The committee compared the standard cancer-
incidence rates, or SIRs, for 5 categories consisting of total cancers, breast, colon,
lung, and prostate cancer for the period of 1987-1994 versus 1995-1999 (which
are the periods that the State of Massachusetts reports data) for the 5 towns in
upper Cape Cod and found that there was no consistent pattern of increase. Dur-
ing those two time periods, a decrease in SIR was observed in 15 out of 25 SIRs,
an increase in 6 out of 25 SIRs, and no change in 4 out of 25 SIRs. Again, the
results indicate that increasing exposure to PAVE PAWS over time has not re-
sulted in an increased incidence of cancer.SummaryIn summary, based on the available scientific evidence, the committee con-cludes there are no adverse health effects to the population resulting from con-
tinuing or long-term exposure to the PAVE PAWS radiation. In particular, the
committee concludes that there is no increase in total cancers or cancers of the
prostate, breast, lung, or colon due to exposure to the PAVE PAWS radiation.
Further, there are many studies and data that support the finding of no health or
biological effects from RF exposures. There are a number of possible mecha-An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PUBLIC SUMMARY7nisms and pathways by which electric and magnetic fields could lead to changesat higher power-density levels than the public is exposed to from the PAVE
PAWS radar. However, at this time, the committee has not found evidence of a
mechanism shown to change biologic processes at power levels that are associ-
ated with the PAVE PAWS radar. The recent waveform-characterization data
collected for the PAVE PAWS radar have also shown that they are similar to
exposures from ÒdishÓ radars to which the public is also continuously exposed.
It is extremely difficult, if not impossible, to prove ultimate safety. In theUnited States, various forms of safety or risk assessment are used along with
regulatory guidelines to ensure that facilities, products, technologies, and other
factors will not pose undo risk or harm to the public or environment. The scien-
tific community, including medical professionals, is often reluctant to call some-
thing ÒsafeÓ and so often speaks of having or not having some degree of evidence
of harm or lack thereof. There is also growing interest in what is referred to as the
Òprecautionary principle,Ó which seeks to avoid taking actions that might have
the potential for harm unless a relative degree of safety can be assured. Those
decisions are policy or management decisions and not solely a matter of science.
This committee has focused on the scientific evidence and carefully evaluated all
the scientific evidence available to determine whether there is a reasonable de-
gree of certainty regarding the presence or absence of harm from exposure to the
PAVE PAWS phased-array radar. To those who live in the vicinity of that sys-
tem, no less would be acceptable.Recommendations Regarding Further StudiesThe committee was also tasked to recommend further studies if warranted.The committee recognizes that while biological responses do not necessarily
translate into human-health effects, studies on the biological effects of RF expo-
sures should be done that build upon several existing studies demonstrating a
statistically significant response to RF exposure, such as the effect of radars on
studies of tree growth. Future studies should approximate the PAVE PAWS ex-
posure characteristics as closely as possible. Specifically, we recommend thatstudies of tree growth in the vicinity of the PAVE PAWS facility should be done.
A study of long-term exposures under conditions similar to human exposures
might provide useful information as to any possible mechanisms for a biological
response that currently does not exist. In addition, we recommend that a replica-
tion of a central nervous system endocrine function study be undertaken to con-
firm or refute previous Air Force-sponsored studies showing a significant and
extended influence on brain dopamine levels during low-level RF exposures simi-
lar to that of PAVE PAWS. The Toler and other studies demonstrating a significant and long-lasting
effect on serum dopamine levelsdoes point to a biological effect that might result

in a detrimental health effect. TheToler study is one of the few studies we areAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSaware of that utilized 435 MHZ, and effects on brain activity were a major con-cern of the 1979 NRC review committee, so this study holds additional impor-
tance. Moreover, the study utilized a 1 KHz modulation that would not be ex-
pected to have as profound an effect as a modulation frequency similar to that of
PAVE PAWS, which is in the 10-100 Hz range. For those reasons, it is recom-

mended that this study be refined and repeated.
Finally, because of the limitations and uncertainties that exist in estimatedexposure at the individual level and the number of health outcomes of interest,
future health investigations or epidemiologic studies should look at exposures at
both the census-tract2 and census-block levels, and try to better estimate personal
exposure and consider the types of factors known to complicate human-health
investigations. Future or ongoing health studies should also specifically address
possible early age of exposure and/or early age at onset of an adverse health
effect. Finally, future epidemiologic studies should not be conducted unless they
are expected to have sufficient statistical ability, or so-called power, to be able to
detect any possible health effects in the Cape Cod population.2For census reasons, states are divided into counties, which are in turn are divided into censustracts, which are further subdivided into census blocks. Most census tracts have between 1500 and8000 people and they average about 4000 inhabitants. Census blocks are subdivisions of a census tractand are the smallest area for which decennial census data are available to the public.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.9 Executive Summary
INTRODUCTIONThis report, prepared by the National Academies Committee to Assess Po-tential Health Effects from Exposures to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-ArrayRadiofrequency Energy is the fifth Academies report on the PAVE PAWS radarlocated at the Massachusetts Military Reservation in Cape Cod, Massachusetts.
Two previous reports evaluated the engineering and potential for population ex-
posure associated with the PAVE PAWS radar in 1979, just prior to the radar
becoming operational.1 Two recent letter reports by this committee provided ad-
vice on the Phase IV waveform measurement effort and evaluated the status of
information available to the committee.2Individuals in the Cape Cod community have raised concerns that exposureto PAVE PAWS radiation represents a unique type of radiation exposure due to
the possibility that there are:1NRC (National Research Council). 1979a. Analysis of the Exposure Levels and Potential BiologicEffects of the PAVE PAWS Radar System. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; NRC. 1979b.Radiation Intensity of the PAVE PAWS Radar System, Engineering Panel on the PAVE PAWSRadar System, Final Report. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.2NRC. 2002. Letter Report to the Department of the Air Force from the Committee to AssessPotential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array RadiofrequencyEnergy: Recommendations for Phase IV Measurements. Washington, DC; NRC. 2002. Interim Letter
Report to the Department of the Air Force from the Committee to Assess Potential Health Effectsfrom Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array Radiofrequency Energy: Adequacy ofAvailable Research Data (see Appendix A of this report). Washington, DC.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWS¥Particularly ÒsteepÓ rise-times associated with the PAVE PAWS wave-
form, and¥Overlapping wave fronts originating from multiple antennas on the
PAVE PAWS radar.It has been suggested that if those temporal characteristics exist, then the PAVEPAWS radar signal could give rise to precursor formation that might result in
greater exposure to biological tissue.TASK FOR THE REPORTThis committee has been tasked to provide an update of the 1979 Academyreport that includes a discussion of:1.The applicability of, and the level of uncertainty associated with, using
data derived from cell, animal, and epidemiological studies employing continu-
ous-wave exposure for evaluation of potential adverse health effects following
phased-array exposures;2.The extent of the exposure of the public to electromagnetic energy from
the PAVE PAWS system;3.Potential biological and health effects of the PAVE PAWS radar system,
and4.Recommendations for appropriate follow-on study-design issues, includ-
ing the strengths and limitations of the approaches suggested and the potential
value of the proposed work.The Executive Summary addresses the task items in order of appearanceabove.1. The applicability of, and the level of uncertainty associated with, us-ing data derived from cell, animal, and epidemiological studies employ-
ing continuous-wave exposure for evaluation of potential adverse health
effects following phased-array exposures.APPLICABILITY OF USING NON-PHASED-ARRAY DATABecause there were essentially no PAVE PAWS data provided to or discov-ered by the committee that specifically addressed PAVE PAWS health effects,
the first task of the committee was to determine whether continuous and pulsed
radiofrequency (RF) energy research are adequate for determining the biological
and potential health effects of the PAVE PAWS phased-array system. As stated
in our interim report, the committee concluded that certain waveforms and power-
density levels are applicable in the evaluation of biological effects and their rel-An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY11evance to potential health effects. For the purposes of this study the committeehas reviewed cell, plant, animal, and epidemiological data derived from pulse-
modulation RF exposures. A major focus of the committee was a review of data
with exposure characteristics defined in the committeeÕs interim report (for adescription of these exposure characteristics, see the committeeÕs interim reportin Appendix A).The conclusions above were based in part on the committeeÕs understandingof the PAVE PAWS radar characteristics as noted below.RADAR CHARACTERISTICSWhile minor differences have been measured in sidelobe energy characteris-tics, phased-array radar characteristics are substantially equivalent to those of
dish radars. That observation is based on the following results of measurements
made during the Phase IV waveform measurement investigation carried out by
the Air Force Research Laboratory:¥PAVE PAWS is a narrow-band system (5 MHz) consistent with itstheory of operation.¥Phased-array antennas and reflector antennas have measurable time de-lays at wide angles. Both arrays and dishes of comparable size have comparable
delays.¥The large number of PAVE PAWS active elements (1792) and theirirregular spacing make the discrete beam formation almost indistinguishable from
a continuous formation and thus, the role of individual elements is usually not
evident.¥Precursors are additions to a signal waveform, and may occur before,during, or after the signal waveform. They have been calculated and

measured, but only for wideband signalsÑtypically, 10,000 MHz bandwidth indispersive media. They may decay slowly, but only after significant attenuation

in the cellular media. For the narrow-band PAVE PAWS radar, any precursors

would be extremely small and probably not measurable. Precursor formation is

directly related to bandwidth (rise time), and dispersion, but not to electric field
slope (V/m/nsec).UNCERTAINTIES INVOLVED IN USING NON-PHASED-ARRAYDATA FOR EVALUATION OF POTENTIAL ADVERSE HEALTHEFFECTS FOLLOWING PHASED-ARRAY EXPOSURES.There are a number of uncertainties associated with using data derived fromcell, animal, and epidemiological studies employing continuous-wave and pulsed
RF exposures for evaluation of potential adverse health effects in humans fol-
lowing phased-array exposures. Those uncertainties relate to the significance ofAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSthe waveforms, their repetition rates and power levels on the biological systems,and the significance of induced biological responses as a predictor of human-
health effects. Those uncertainties are summarized at the end of Chapter 1.2. The extent of the exposure of the public to electromagnetic energyfrom the PAVE PAWS system.Various measurements of PAVE PAWS power-density levels in the CapeCod community have been made by the Air Force and by citizen groups. PAVE
PAWS power-densities were also modeled by Mitre Corporation, a contractor to
the Air Force. A recent analysis by Broadcast Signal Labs included measured and
modeled power-density information. After evaluating the information, the com-
mittee concludes that:¥The measured data show that average power densities are consistentlybelow 0.1 W/cm2 and generally in the 0.001-0.01 
W/cm2 range at locations
where the public would be expected to be exposed.¥Measured peak levels are generally less than 1 W/cm2, although valuesas high as 15 W/cm2 have been found at elevated locations near the radar.
¥Power-density measurements recorded by different groups at differenttimes within the communities surrounding the Cape Cod PAVE PAWS radar are
generally consistent with each other and with modeled results.¥The measurements show distribution patterns that are strongly influencedby site-specific local topography and intervening terrain at any given location.¥The modeled data are generally consistent with the measured data withthe exception that the modeling results are higher overall than the measured re-
sults. However, this is to be expected from the approximations that were made in
setting up the simulations that do not include scattering and other losses.¥The available measurement data and models of the PAVE PAWS power-density emissions provide a good first-order characterization of the spatial distri-
bution of the exposures occurring throughout the communities of Cape Cod.¥In spite of the measurements and estimates of the PAVE PAWS wave-forms and power densities, currently there are no data for estimating personal
exposure at the level of an individual.¥Using information on population density, topography, and direction ofthe PAVE PAWS radar beam, the committee estimated that the proportion of the
population of upper Cape Cod whose primary residence is in direct line of sight3to the PAVE PAWS beam was 11.8% in 1990 and 12.4% in 2000.3Line of sight means that there are no hills between the resident and the radar that would block theradar emissions. The main beam is aimed above the population and residents in the line of sight areexposed to the sidelobes of the main beam.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY133. Potential biological and health effects of the PAVE PAWS radarsystem.After a review of the information available to this committee at this time, thecommittee concludes that there is no health hazard from exposure to the PAVE
PAWS radiation. There are however, a few statistically significant biological re-
sponses that have been reported. Since biological effects do not necessarily trans-
late into adverse health effects, the implications of the biological observations are
not known. At this time it is not known which characteristics of RF radiation, at
the power levels associated with the exposures to the general public from the
PAVE PAWS radar, are biologically significant, if any.The committeeÕs conclusions from its review of biology and epidemiologyrelevant to the PAVE PAWS radar are outlined below.BIOLOGY Mechanisms
There are a number of physical mechanisms by which electric and magneticfields of radiofrequencies are known to lead to biological changes. There are no
known physical mechanisms that predict a physical interaction with tissue result-
ing in a biological response at power densities, on the order of 1 W/cm2, that areassociated with the PAVE PAWS radar.Animal Studies¥Evidence from animal studies does not provide a case for an increase incancer risk with low-level RF exposure.¥There is no evidence of adverse effects on mammalian reproduction anddevelopment during exposure of animals to RF at levels that do not produce a
significant temperature rise in tissues.¥There is some evidence of low-level RF exposure being capable of sig-nificantly reducing dopamine (a neurotransmitter in the brain involved in the
control of movement) levels. Given the magnitude of the reduction observed,

and the extended duration of the effect, we believe these studies merit replication.¥Alteration of behaviors, both learned and unlearned, can occur at expo-sure levels as low as 1 mW/cm2 (a thousandfold higher than PAVE PAWS expo-
sures); however, those changes appear to be reversible with no long-term or per-
manent effects.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSOther Biological Studies¥Few biological studies have been completed using RF exposures whosephysical characteristics are similar to the PAVE PAWS system; however, a wide
variety of biological studies have been undertaken based on RF exposures in the
frequency range of PAVE PAWS. No biological experiments have employed the
exposure durations that some Cape Cod residents have experienced.¥No endpoints traditionally associated with carcinogenesis have beenfound to be reproducibly affected by RF exposure in cell systems.¥Long-term exposure (multiple-year) studies on plant growth undertakenwith radar exposures very similar to that of PAVE PAWS showed a dose- and
distance-dependent decrease in tree growth, but there is currently no means for
extrapolating from the biological responses reported in these studies to any health
effect in humans.EPIDEMIOLOGYEpidemiology of Radiofrequency Exposures Other than PAVE PAWS¥Studies reported in the peer-reviewed scientific literature describinghealth outcomes among human populations exposed to pulsed or continuous-wave
radiofrequency exposures vary in scientific quality and provide conflicting re-
sults.¥The methodological issues associated with those investigations prima-rily relate to the lack of precision in the exposure assessments, which seriously
limits the use of the data in making a determination of the potential impact of
radar exposure on human health.Epidemiology of the Cape Cod PopulationGeneral Cancer Incidence Rates on Cape Cod¥Using the upper Cape Cod cancer-incidence review of 1986-1994 fromthe Massachusetts Department of Public Health, statistically significant increases
in the standardized incidence ratio (SIR) are seen on Cape Cod for the following
cancers: colorectal (SIR 112), breast (SIR 110), prostate (SIR 130), and lung (SIR
112). The observed elevated cancer-incidence rates among residents of upper
Cape Cod have not been adequately explained through subsequent investigations.¥As an overall measure of health for the upper Cape Cod towns, prema-ture mortality before age 75 is a useful indicator. Based on 2001 data, Barnstable,
Falmouth, Mashpee, and Sandwich have lower mortality than the Massachusetts
state average, while Bourne has elevated mortality.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY15¥Contrasting the calculated SIRs for 5 categories (total cancers, breast,colon, lung, and prostate cancer) during 1987-1994 versus 1995-1999 for 5 towns
in upper Cape Cod demonstrated no consistent pattern of increase. During those

two time periods, a decrease in SIR was observed in 15 out of 25 SIRs, no change
in 4 out of 25 SIRs, and an increase in 6 out of 25 SIRs, suggesting that increasing
duration of the presence of the PAVE PAWS radar has not resulted in increased
incidence of cancer. Analyses covering longer durations may be required to con-
firm this initial observation.Committee Analysis of Cancer Incidence and the PAVE PAWS Radar¥Health-outcome data on cancers in the population surrounding the PAVEPAWS radar have been published in the upper Cape Cod cancer-incidence review
of 1986-1994. A statistical analysis was conducted by this committee using the
1986-1994 data and peak and average power density as the measure of residential
exposure. The committee evaluated the occurrence of all cancers combined, as
well as specific cancers, including colorectal, breast (female), prostate, and lung,
and did not identify any increase in cancer risk with exposure to the PAVE PAWS
radar.¥Adjustment for socioeconomic status (utilizing the percent of popula-tion below the poverty level) had little impact on the observed lack of correlation
between the radar and health outcomes evaluated.¥The population size of upper Cape Cod places limits on the ability toconduct well-designed and well-conducted research to evaluate health outcomes
associated with PAVE PAWS; however, moderately low levels of increased risk
ranging between 40% and 100% (i.e., relative risks between 1.4 and 2.0) could be
investigated, with acceptable statistical power, for some of the more common
forms of cancer.4. Recommendations for appropriate follow-on study-design issues, in-cluding the strengths and limitations of the approaches suggested and
the potential value of the proposed work.RECOMMENDATIONS¥Because of the limitations of human-exposure assessment, confounders,and range of health outcomes, the committee does not recommend that further
PAVE PAWS health investigations be conducted unless they integrate: (1) expo-
sure assessment and health outcomes at the census-block level; (2) strategies to
quantify personal exposure in addition to residential location; and (3) appropriate
considerations of potential confounders. In addition, it is recommended that fu-
ture geographical correlation studies should be carried out for age-specific strataAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSthat address early age of exposure and/or early age at onset of adverse healthoutcomes.¥To determine the levels of extremely low-frequency (ELF) sideband en-ergy in the PAVE PAWS radar signal, a Fourier analysis should be made of a
representative search pulse pattern, including the dead (maintenance) interval.
Non-linearities in tissue impedance (which need to be determined) might convert
the sideband energy to ELF energy that may have biological effects. This rela-
tively simple analysis could identify or rule out potential effects from ELF that
may be generated by the PAVE PAWS RF exposure. Many other radar systems
employ diagnostic and calibration pulse sequences and it should be noted that
many radars may have small ELF sideband energy; the possible ELF is due to the
waveform characteristics, not to the phased-array antenna.¥Theoretical work is needed to establish connections between the phys-ics of the electromagnetic fields and changes in chemical reaction rates and the
binding of molecules to membranes. Such investigations would lend insight

into possible mechanisms of biological effects of RF exposures. The strength of
such theoretical investigations is that they can help determinewhich of a large

number of possible experiments  are likely to identify changes that lead to bio-

logical effects and how such effects are a function of parameters such as the field
strengths, frequency, and exposure times.The limitation of such theoretical

work is that the models that are analyzed may not accurately describe the prob-
lems of interest and may miss some important parameters.¥Selected studies on the biological effects of RF exposures are warranted,particularly those that build upon existing studies demonstrating statistically sig-
nificant responses to RF exposure. While biological responses do not necessarily
translate into health effects, it is important to follow up on known biological
effects to determine if they relate to an identifiable health effect.Therefore, we suggest two types of biological studies:1. Studies are recommended that should include large-scale genomic andproteomic screening to identify gene and protein expression patterns in cells and
animals after exposure to simulated PAVE PAWS radiation, both at levels ap-
proximating peak exposure levels to the Cape Cod population and at higher power
levels to identify potential threshold power densities for biological effects. The
committee recognizes that the limitation to these in vitro and animal studies is
that they may have limited applicability to the human situation. However, the
strength of these studies is that they will provide information covering a wide
range of cellular activity in a limited number of experiments and the information
gained may be useful in generating mechanism-related hypotheses of the effects
of PAVE PAWS exposures in cell and animal systems.2. Studies of plant growth in the vicinity of the PAVE PAWS facility, such astree ring width before and after the facility became operational, are also recom-An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY17mended. While these studies have the limitation of not being directly applicableto human health, they have the specific strength of involving long-term exposures
(years) under very similar conditions as the human exposures. In addition, it is
anticipated that the information from these studies could relate to mechanism-
generating hypotheses, particularly if initial plant investigations are followed up
with more detailed analytical studies that investigate the mechanism of effect.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.181IntroductionThis report contains the results and process of the National Research Coun-cil Committee to Assess the Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE
PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array Radiofrequency Energy. The PAVE PAWS
radar system is located on Cape Cod, MassachusettsÑnear several populatedresidential areas and in a region known for its scenic beauty and ecological rich-ness as well as being a popular tourist area. The purpose of this section is to
describe the history of the facility and, in particular, the history of public con-
cerns that have led to the committeeÕs charge as well as to a number of other
studies and investigations.While the committee was established to perform an independent assessmentof the possible biological and potential health effects of the PAVE PAWS phased-
array radar system, and has a very specific statement of work (see below), the
committee has taken very seriously the genesis for this study and, in particular,
the specific concerns expressed by some members of the public.HISTORY OF THE FACILITYThe PAVE PAWS phased-array radar system on Cape Cod was first con-ceived by the Joint Chiefs of Staff in 1972. The Raytheon Company was se-lected as the primary contractor on April 12, 1976, to build the facility. On
March 17, 1976, the Air Force issued an environmental assessment of the PAVE
PAWS radar system. For the purposes of that assessment, a power desity of 10
milliwatts per square centimeter (mW/cm2) as averaged over any 6-minute pe-riod was established as a guideline for limiting occupational exposure. This

guideline was provided by the U.S. Air Force School of Aerospace Medicine onAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION19the basis of existing Occupational Safety and Health Administration guidelines.In understanding the history of the communityÕs concerns, it is important to notethat these guidelines were not specified for non-occupational, continuous expo-
sure. The Air ForceÕs assessment considered a number of potentially detrimentalscenarios to the environment due to the construction and operation of the radar
and judged the impact to be minimal. It also noted considerations that were
thought to offset the identified potential adverse environmental effects. The Air
Force Environmental Assessment concluded in part that the proposed installa-
tion and operation of PAVE PAWS Òis not a major federal action with signifi-cant adverse impact on the quality of the human environment.Ó A report was
also issued by a Department of Defense contractor, the Illinois Institute of Tech-
nology Research Institute, in May of 1976 that evaluated the impact of the pro-
posed PAVE PAWS radar system on the electromagnetic environment at and
near the proposed facility (IITRI 1976). Subsequently, on December 22, 1977,
the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) issued an environmental impact
analysis of the PAVE PAWS system at the request of Massachusetts Represen-
tative Gerry E. Studds. For locations selected for evaluation that were beyond
the boundaries of Otis AFB, the report concluded that Òthe predicted values oftime-averaged power density are considered to be well below values that should
have any health impact.ÓFollowing those studies, the Cape Cod Environmental Coalition, Inc.(CCEC), a citizens group, undertook court action in the U.S. District Court against

various Air Force officials on March 3, 1978. The suit contended that the PAVE
PAWS project was in violation of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969
because an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) had not been prepared. On
October 31, 1978, the CCEC and the Air Force entered into an agreement tempo-
rarily suspending further litigation brought by the citizens group. Under the agree-
ment, the Air Force was allowed to continue construction of the facility while it
completed an EIS. The EIS was prepared by Stanford Research International un-
der a contract with the Air Force in May of 1979.Prior to completion of the EIS, the Air Force asked the National Academy ofSciences to perform two studies relevant to the EIS. One study was to focus on
the safety measures inherent in the engineering design of the radar system and the
second study was to focus on the extent of human exposure from the radar. These
studies were completed in 1979. The results from the studies concluded that the
ÒPAVE PAWS system may be anticipated to expose a limited number of mem-bers of the general public intermittently to low intensities of pulse-modulated
microwave fields with maximal instantaneous intensities of 100 W/cm2 or less
and time-averaged intensities lower by two orders of magnitude. There are no
known irreversible effects of such exposure on either morbidity or mortality in
humans or other species. Thus it is improbable that exposure will present any
hazard to the public.Ó However, the report went on to add, 
ÒIn view of the knownsensitivity of the mammalian central nervous system to electromagnetic fields,An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSespecially those modulated at brainwave frequencies, the possibility cannot beruled out that exposure to PAVE PAWS radiation may have some effects on
exposed people. Because these effects are still hypothetical, it is not feasible to
assess their health implications. Such assessment will require additional research
and surveillance and must be addressed in future evaluations of the potential
exposure effects of PAVE PAWS and other high-power-output radar systems.ÓFinally, the report recommended that additional research be conducted to clarify
the possible effects of long-term exposure to the radar system. It is this recom-
mendation that has formed the basis, in part, for some of the concerns expressed
in the intervening 23 years by some local citizens prior to the start of this
committeeÕs current study.Some of the concerns voiced by the public at the time of the 1979 studyincluded concerns about possible thermal effects, disruption of implanted medi-
cal devices (such as pacemakers), and secondary radiation effects from improp-
erly grounded structures exposed to the radar. In recent years, public concerns
have shifted away from thermal effects of RF energy emitted by the radar and
have centered on theories that relate to the waveform of the phased-array radar
and concerns over the possible health ramifications from the propagation of the
RF energy in tissue. A number of hypotheses have been advanced that propose
possible mechanisms for health effects. In particular, some community members
have made mention of studies done, and possible mechanisms of action advanced,
by Dr. Richard Albanes.1Dr. AlbaneseÕs concerns include potential biological effects on cells and tis-sues from:¥ÒSteepÓ rise-times in the PAVE-PAWS waveform,
¥Overlapping wave fronts originating from multiple antennas on thePAVE PAWS radar, and¥The possibility of precursor formation in tissue.Public concern over the potential for health effects from PAVE PAWS havebeen heightened by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health Cancer Reg-
istry reports, which for the last 10-plus years have reported on several excess
cancers in the Cape Cod area, and, for certain cancers, on the upper Cape. Chap-
ter 9 includes a summary and review of the available health studies and cancer
registry information. Concern over the potential excess in cancers has been linked,
for some members of the public, to potential environmental sources including
PAVE PAWS.Citizens expressed further concern over the PAVE PAWS radar system when1Dr. Albanese is an Air Force employee who has raised concerns about the safety of the PAVEPAWS radar.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION21the Air Force announced in 1999 its proposed plans to upgrade the PAVE PAWSsystem. The Air Force has noted that the upgrades only involve system upgrades
and do not involve physical expansion of the system. Following the Air ForceÕsproposal, the Sandwich Board of Selectman and Senator Kennedy called for a
site-specific EIS. The Sandwich Board of Selectman also requested that the Air
Force perform laboratory studies of the effects of long-term exposure to PAVE
PAWS and that a retrospective epidemiological study be done on Cape Cod to
investigate the elevated cancer rates.Since the time of this committeeÕs inception, there have been citizens statingconcerns on behalf of at least some members of the public about the absence of
phased- array site-specific measurement data on PAVE PAWS from the Air Force
for the past 23-plus years. That lack of data and failure to follow through on the
recommendation made in the original NRC report have appeared to heighten the
publicÕs generalized concern and, for some, resulted in severe distrust of the AirForce. One such citizenÕs group is the Coalition for the Operation of PAVE PAWSSafely (COPPS). There has also been concern expressed by some members of the
public that the group currently tasked with recommending and overseeing health
or epidemiological studiesÑthe local PAVE PAWS Public Health Steering Group(PPPHSG)Ñis not totally objective or independent of the Air Force, and thus,might not wholly represent some of the citizens who have been expressing con-
cern. Distrust has been further elevated by a concern over potential information
contained in the classified Air Force Environmental Health and Safety (EHS)
program to which citizens requested that the current NRC committee be provided
access. The committeeÕs review of the EHS program and the committeeÕs evalu-ation of the classified information are contained in Chapter 2 of this report.Although laboratory studies of the effects of long-term exposure to PAVEPAWS waveforms have not been done, a retrospective epidemiological study and
supporting power-density analysis have been commissioned by the PPPHSG. The

power-density study was completed in May of 2004 and this committee antici-
pates an NRC review of the epidemiological study when it is completed in 2005.
The committeeÕs evaluation of the PPPHSG power-density study appears in Chap-ter 4 (Exposure Levels).In summary, there are members of the Cape Cod public who have had long-standing concern over the potential health effects of the PAVE PAWS radar sys-
tem. The absence of measured data and further specific studies since the facility
was constructed and became operational have increased concerns and frustrated
many residents.ORIGIN OF PRESENT STUDYIn a January 11, 2001, letter from Senator Edward M. Kennedy to the Secre-tary of the Air Force, F. Whitten Peters, Kennedy asked that the Air Force fund an
independent study through the National Research Council of the National Acad-An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSemies Òto examine the health effects of the PAVE PAWS system.Ó Kennedy fur-
ther requested that this follow-on study (to the previous 1979 report) should ad-
dress, at a minimum, the effects, if any, of the PAVE PAWS radar over the past
two decades and should also examine the validity of using continuous-wave and
pulsed non-ionizing radiation biological-effects data as surrogates for phased-
array non-ionizing radiation biological-effects data. The following Statement of
Task evolved out of discussions between the Massachusetts congressional del-
egation (Senators Kennedy and Kerry, and Congressman Delehunt), the Air Force,
and the National Academies.STATEMENT OF TASKThe committee will first determine whether continuous and pulsed radio-frequency (RF) energy research data are adequate for determining the biological
and potential health effects of the PAVE PAWS phased-array system. This de-
termination will be communicated to the sponsor as a letter report. If the re-
search data from continuous and pulsed RF energies are considered to be appli-
cable for the determination of possible health effects of phased-array RF energy,
the committee will use this information to update the 1979 National Research
Council analysis of the exposure levels and potential biological effects of the
PAVE PAWS Radar System. If the data are not applicable, the committee will
use other information that it determines to be relevant to phased-array health
effects to update the 1979 report. In this update the committee will evaluate
potential biological and health effects, evaluate exposures of the public to elec-
tromagnetic energy from the PAVE PAWS system, and make recommendations
for the need for, and focus of, additional scientific studies to address continued
scientific uncertainty related to health outcomes and exposure to low-level
radiofrequency energy emitted by the PAVE PAWS Radar System. At the
completion of its work, the committee will provide an update of the 1979 Re-
search Council report that includes a discussion of:1.The applicability of, and the level of uncertainty associated with, using
data derived from cell, animal, and epidemiological studies employing continu-
ous-wave exposure for evaluation of potential adverse health effects following
phased-array exposures;2.The extent of the exposure of the public to electromagnetic energy from
the PAVE PAWS system;3.Potential biological and health effects of the PAVE PAWS Radar Sys-
tem; and4.Recommendations for appropriate follow-on study-design issues, includ-
ing the strengths and limitations of the approaches suggested and the potential
value of the proposed work.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION23Within the above specific scope, the committee has reviewed the informationprovided to us by members of the public, outside scientists, and the Air Force.
The committeeÕs scientific review process and deliberations in carrying out thestatement of task have been performed with the highest level of scientific and
professional integrity. It was also our intent that the process we used be made as
transparent as possible. Furthermore, the draft report went through a rigorous
independent peer review before the National Academies approved its issuance.
The peer reviewers were anonymous to the committee until publication and the
committee was required to respond to the satisfaction of the National Academies
Report Review Committee before the draft was approved for release as a report of
the National Academies. It is extremely difficult, if not impossible, to prove
safetyÑit is, however, possible to examine whether there is a reasonable degreeof certainty regarding the presence or absence of harm. In carrying out our state-
ment of work and writing this report, the committee has attempted to evaluate the
best available science and used this information and evaluation to address the
publicÕs concerns.INFORMATION AVAILABLE TO THIS COMMITTEEA large body of information on radiofrequency effects was available to thiscommittee including RF information databases and recent reviews such as
AGNIR (2001, 2003), Boice and McLaughlin (2002), GAO (2001), HCN (2000,
2002, 2003), ICNIRP 2001), Krewski and others (2001a, 2001b), NCRP (2002),
NRPB (2004), SSI (2003), and Zmirou (2001). In addition to these databases and
reviews, the committee had access to personal libraries accumulated during years
of research by committee members on this and related subjects. To evaluate in-
formation the committee felt was most relevant to the PAVE PAWS issue, a table
was constructed to focus the literature review on those components that the com-
mittee felt would be most useful to the present study. That table of criteria was
published in a letter report delivered to the Air Force on November 15, 2002, and
is included in this report as Appendix A.Secondly, the Air Force made a PAVE PAWS waveform study available tothe committee (AFRL 2003) and the PAVE PAWS Public Health Steering Group
made a PAVE PAWS power-density study available to the committee through
their contractor, Broadcast Signal Laboratories (BSL 2004).Finally, a large amount of information was made available to the committeeby citizens and other individuals interested in the Academies PAVE PAWS study.UNCERTAINTIES ASSOCIATED WITH THE EVALUATION OFPAVE PAWS HEALTH EFFECTSThe Statement of Task asks the committee to discuss the level of uncertaintyassociated with using data derived from cell, animal, and epidemiological studiesAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSemploying continuous-wave exposure for evaluation of potential adverse healtheffects following phased-array exposures. Some of the uncertainties associatedwith using data derived from studies employing continuous-wave or pulsed-wave
exposure for evaluation of potential adverse health effects following phased-ar-
ray exposures include:¥The extent to which pulse shape, repetition rate, and carrier frequencyaffect biological systems;¥The extent to which power levels and exposure duration for a givenwaveform affect biological systems; and¥Identification of the relevant biological effects and how they relate tohealth outcomes, including the state of the biological system and the pathways by
which biological changes occur. Biological test systems may not closely approxi-
mate the physiological state in humans, and human physiological conditions vary
widely. The approaches to extrapolate from biological effects to health effects are
frequently not well defined.The committee emphasizes that uncertainties are associated with all scien-tific information and analyses and these uncertainties and others were taken into
account in reaching the committeeÕs conclusions and recommendations.REFERENCESAFRL (The Air Force Research Laboratory). 2003. Phase IVÑTime-domain Waveform Character-ization Measurements of the PAVE PAWS Radar. Air Force Research Laboratory, Kirtland Air
Force Base, Albuquerque, NM.AGNIR (Advisory Group on Non-Ionising Radiation). 2001. Possible Health Effects from TerrestrialTrunked Radio (TETRA). Report of an Advisory Group on Non-ionising Radiation. Docs NRPB,

(12)2 1-53. Available from http://www.nrpb.org/publications/documents_of_nrpb/abstracts/absd12-2.htm.AGNIR. 2003. Health Effects from Radiofrequency Electromagnetic Fields. Report of an indepen-dent Advisory Group on Non-ionising Radiation. Docs NRPB, 14 1-177. Available from http:
//www.nrpb.org/publications/documents_of_nrpb/abstracts/absd12-4.htm.Boice, J.D. and J.K. McLaughlin. 2002. Epidemiologic Studies of Cellular Telephones and CancerRiskÑA Review. SSI Report 2002:16. Stockholm: Statens Str„lskyddsinstitut. Available fromhttp://www.ssi.se/english/Press_release_rapp2001_16.html.BSL (Broadcast Signal Lab). 2004. A Survey of Radio Frequency Energy Field Emissions from theCape Cod Air Force Station PAVE PAWS Radar Facility: Final Test Report, prepared for PAVEPAWS Public Health Steering Group by Broadcast Signal Lab, Medfield MA.GAO (General Acct. Office). 2001. Telecommunications: Research and Regulatory Efforts on MobilePhone Health Issues. Report to Congressional Requesters. GAO-01-545. Washington DC:United States General Accounting Office. Available from http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d01545.pdf.HCN (Health Council of the Netherlands). 2000. Electromagnetic Fields Committee. GSM Base Sta-tions. Publication Number 2000/16E. The Hague: Health Council of the Netherlands.HCN. 2002. Electromagnetic Fields Committee. Mobile Telephones: An Evaluation of Health Ef-fects. Publication Number 2002/01E. The Hague: Health Council of the Netherlands.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION25HCN. 2003. Health Effects of Exposure to Radiofrequency Electromagnetic Fields: Recommenda-tions for Research. Publication Number 2003/03. The Hague: Health Council of the Nether-
lands.ICNIRP (International Commission on Non-ionizing Radiation Protection). 2001. Biological Effects,Health Consequences and Standards for Pulsed Radiofrequency Fields in Proceedings of the
International Seminar on Biological Effects, Health Consequences and Standards for PulsedRadiofrequency Fields, Erice, Italy, November 21-25, 1999, R. Matthes, J.H. Bernhardt, andM.H. Repacholi eds. International Commission on Non-ionizing Radiation Protection ISBN
3934994008.IITRI (Illinois Institute of Technology Research Institute). 1976. EMC Analysis of Otis AFB PAVEPAWS Site. Electromagnetic Compatibiliy Analysis Center ECAC-PR-76-020, Annapolis, MD.Krewski, D., C.V. Byus, B.W. Glickman, W.G. Lotz, R. Mandeville, M.L. McBride, F.S. Prato, andD.F. Weaver. 2001a. Potential health risks of radiofrequency fields from wireless telecommuni-cation devices. J Toxicol Env Heal B 4:1-143.Krewski, D., C.V. Byus, B.W. Glickman, W.G. Lotz, R. Mandeville, M.L. McBride, F.S. Prato, andD.F. Weaver. 2001b. Recent advances in research on radiofrequency fields and health. J ToxicolEnv Heal B 4:145-159.NCRP (National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements). 2002. Biological Effects ofModulated Radiofrequency Fields. NRCP Commentary No 18. Bethesda, Maryland: NationalCouncil on Radiation Protection and Measurements.NRC (National Research Council). 1979. Analysis of the Exposure Levels and Potential BiologicEffects of the PAVE PAWS Radar System. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.NRPB (National Radiological Protection Board). 2004. Review of the Scientific Evidence for Limit-ing Exposure to Electromagnetic Fields (0-300 GHz). Docs NRPB 15 (3) 1-215. Available fromhttp://www.nrpb.org/publications/documents_of_nrpb/abstracts/absd15-3.htm.SSI (Swedish Radiation Protection Institute). 2003. Recent Research on Mobile Telephony and Can-cer and Other Selected Biological Effects: First Annual Report from SSIÕs Independent ExpertGroup on Electromagnetic Fields. Available from http://www.ssi.se/english/EMF_exp_Eng_2003.pdf.Zmirou, D. 2001. Mobile Phones, Their Base Stations, and Health. Report to the French Health Direc-torate. France, Direction G”n”rale de la Sant”. Available from http://www.sante.gouv.fr. Sum-mary in English available from http://www.sante.gouv.fr/htm/dossiers/telephon_mobil/pdf/
teleph_uk.doc.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.262Assessment of Classified Research
Relevant to PAVE PAWS
INTRODUCTIONBecause radars are an important feature in the operation of the military intimes of peace and war and because microwave and laser systems have beendeveloped as strategic weapons to deliver energy as well as systems for guidanceor surveillance, one would expect that the U.S. Air Force and perhaps other
branches of the military might have conducted research to explore effects of mi-
crowaves on biological systems. A major source of that type of research has been
a responsibility of the Directed Energy Bioeffects Division in the Human Effects
Division (HED) of the Air Force Research Laboratories (AFRL) at Brooks Air
Force Base in San Antonio, Texas. For obvious reasons, some of that work has
been classified by the U.S. government, while other results in biological systems
have been published in the open scientific literature or in unclassified U.S. De-
partment of Defense documents. The congressionally mandated study conducted
by the NRC committee included a charge to examine and assess all classified
national security data that might be relevant to PAVE PAWS.VISIT DETAILSIn order to ascertain whether research by the U.S. Air Force had producedany evidence for biological effects that might relate to potential health effects of
electromagnetic radiation with characteristics relevant to the radiations produced
by the PAVE PAWS beam, members of the NRC committee with appropriate
personnel security clearances and expertise in the engineering and biological dis-
ciplines were asked to review the Air ForceÕs classified research and results. ToAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSESSMENT OF CLASSIFIED RESEARCH RELEVANT TO PAVE PAWS27do that part of the charge, two site visits were conducted. The first was a prelimi-nary visit conducted on April 25, 2002, in which the goal was to examine the
reports and documents summarizing all of the classified research results that might
be relevant to the PAVE PAWS study and to determine whether additional exper-
tise and a second visit would be necessary to review the Air ForceÕs results ofclassified research. The Director of the Board on Radiation Effects Research and
two committee members, one with biological expertise and one with physics ex-
pertise, examined the classified reports and data summaries in the Directed En-
ergy Bioeffects Division of the laboratories at Brooks AFB. The site-visit team
asked the Air Force to provide all reports and data summaries for all electromag-
netic radiation research related to the PAVE PAWS beam characteristics. This
visit included an extensive presentation by Dr. Albanese, in addition to presenta-
tions by other scientists, including Air Force personnel and civilians who were
associated and familiar with the Air ForceÕs research activities related to electro-magnetic radiation interactions with biological systems. The team was hosted in
Building 1162 (Tejeda Laboratory) at Brooks Air Force Base by Richard L.
Miller, Ph.D., Chief, Directed Energy Bioeffects Division (AFRL/HED). Also
present were Major Lester Ogawa, Dr. Johnathan Kiel, the Senior Scientist in
Electromagnetic Radiation Effects, and Dr. Walter Rogers. At the time of the
NRC committeeÕs visit, Dr. Rogers was a Research Electrophysiologist forVeridian, but he had been the key investigator on the Electromagnetic Health and
Safety program report when he was an employee for Southwest Research Insti-
tute. Part of the review included a discussion and answer session with scientists
and Air Force administrative staff and part of the review included an executive
session in which the NRC site-visit team examined reports and data summaries.The second site visit was conducted on January 30-31, 2003. For the secondvisit, two additional committee members with appropriate personnel security
clearance and scientific expertise (the additional expertise requirement was based
on the review conducted by the first review team) were added to the team. In
addition, a physician with appropriate personnel security clearance was included
as an unpaid consultant. A total of four committee members, plus an M.D. con-
sultant (a member of the Institute of Medicine of the National Academies) and the
NRC board director, reviewed the classified information provided during the two-
day visit.Prior to the site-visit teamÕs arrival, the full committeeÕs members developeda series of questions that they instructed the review team to ask of the Air Force
during their visit. Those questions included:1. Where did the parameter Ò1 volt/meter/nanosecond rise timeÓ come from?
2. Does the Air Force have any evidence for actual measurements ofprecursors?3. Does the Department of Defense have any other data (molecular, cellular,or animal) that are relevant to the PAVE PAWS exposures (i.e., other experimen-An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWStal results known to the Air Force from experiments conducted using relevantwavelengths and power densities that are below thermal thresholds)?In addition to focusing on a discussion of the Air ForceÕs answers to theabove questions, a major focus of the review was a final report of the U.S. Air
ForceÕs Electromagnetic Health and Safety (EHS) research program. The resultsof the Air Force-sponsored studies conducted over a period of approximately 15
years (from the 1980s to 1996) were reviewed from the perspective of whether
any of the results obtained are relevant to exposure of humans to the PAVE PAWS
system or informative about effects that might relate to potential human health
effects from exposures to PAVE PAWS. As stated in the final report provided by
the Air Force, the thrust of the EHS program is summed up by the unclassified
title Biological Effects of Exposure to Ultra-wideband Electromagnetic Energy(U) (AFRL-HEX 2002). Copies of the final classified report were provided to
each review-team member for use during the two-day visit.In its review of the classified data, the review team had to rely on the respon-sible Air Force personnel to provide access to all data as requested by the com-
mittee. The Air Force administrative personnel were very cooperative in making
the classified materials of the EHS program available to the committee. In this
particular review, the committee has no evidence to suggest that summaries of
data obtained by the Air Force in research related to the EHS research program
were withheld from the committee. Because of the large volume of data obtained
over several years in this multimillion-dollar research program, the reviewed
materials were primarily summary and tabulated material. Information provided
in the summary reports did not indicate the existence of biological effects in the
accumulated data that are relative to PAVE PAWS exposures. It was helpful that
the review team was able to meet separately with Dr. Albanese, given that he had
raised his personal concerns on several occasions to the full NRC committee and
to the site-visit team. Dr. Albanese was able to observe the materials and brief-
ings that were provided to the review team, and was asked specifically whether
there was any additional information that should be reviewed by the team. The
two suggestions made by Dr. Albanese were followed up by the team: first, the
suggestion that the U.S. Navy might have conducted some relevant research; and
second, the suggestion that contractors at other sites conducted experiments that
might be relevant (see Chapter 5, Annex 5-2). Finally, members of the review
team and the full NRC committee feel that it would be prudent for the Air Force
to declassify as much of the classified EHS material as possible in the interest of
improving the publicÕs confidence in the U.S. Air ForceÕs disclosure, even thoughthe review team saw no evidence of results that would change the NRC
committeeÕs conclusions or recommendations related to its assessment.The NRCÕs review team members produced an unclassified summary andpresented it to the full committee at its meeting the following month in Washing-
ton, DC, February 10-11, 2003. Based on the report by the review-team members,An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSESSMENT OF CLASSIFIED RESEARCH RELEVANT TO PAVE PAWS29and following discussion by the full committee, the following conclusions andfindings were made:CONCLUSIONS AND FINDINGS1. As best as could be determined from materials provided at our request, theAir Force did not design or conduct any classified studies addressing long-term
exposure effects experiments directly relevant to the PAVE PAWS exposure con-
ditions and therefore did not respond to the recommendations in the 1979 NRC
Report.12. However, the Air Force has completed a series of studies using high-power,short-duration RF exposures that include energy in the frequency range and aver-
age power of PAVE PAWS.3. There are no classified experimental studies in the EHS program relatingto carcinogenesis.Experimental results reviewed by the site-visit team, while not generally sta-tistically significant or at exposure conditions representative of PAVE PAWS,
suggest that stimulation of cardiac or skeletal muscle might be demonstrated at
high power levels and sub-second exposures. It was somewhat disappointing to
the review team that some of the data summaries could not be easily traced back
to certain key experimental characteristics.The 1 volt/meter/nanosecond slope appears to be based on Dr. AlbaneseÕstheoretical modeling and measurements in Òbiologically relevantÓ models that
have been declassified.The visit did not reveal any additional measurements of, or demonstration of,precursors in biological or model systems.The review team learned that the U.S. Navy has conducted studies of tran-sient microwave propagation in ocean media. The Navy was contacted and the
committee received an unclassified report from Naval Surface Weapons Center
(NSWC) (see Chapter 5 this report).1The 1979 report recommended: ÒAdditional research is recommended to clarify further the pos-sible effects of long-term exposure to microwave radiation at low power densities. . . . In view of the
known sensitivity of the mammalian central nervous system to electromagnetic fields, especiallythose modulated at brainwave frequencies, the possibility cannot be ruled out that exposure to PAVEPAWS radiation may have some effects on exposed people. Because these effects are still hypotheti-
cal, it is not feasible to access their health implications. Such assessment will require additionalresearch and surveillance and must be addressed in future evaluations of the potential exposure effectsof PAVE PAWS and other high-power-output radar systems.ÓAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSREFERENCESNRC (National Research Council). 1979. Analysis of the Exposure Levels and Potential BiologicEffects of the PAVE PAWS Radar System. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.AFRL-HEX (Air Force Research LaboratoryÐHealth Effects Classification). 2002. Biological Effectsof Exposure to Ultra-wideband Electromagnetic Energy (U). AFRL-HEX classified report.Brooks Air Force Base, San Antonio, TX.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.313Physical Mechanisms for RF Effects on
Biological SystemsThere is a long chain of events that must be followed to go from fundamental
physical interactions between electromagnetic fields and molecules or ions to the
production of changes in biologic systems that could lead to adverse human health
effects. This chain of events has yet to be described in detail. This section willoutline a small portion of those events, beginning with the forces of electric andmagnetic fields on electrons, ions, atoms, and molecules, and changes in their
energy, configuration, or orientation. These changes in turn can lead to further
changes in chemical reaction rates and in the binding of molecules to membranes.
This progression can then lead to changes in cell activity that in turn can affect
the biology of the organism. A subset of these biologic changes can lead to ad-
verse health effects. The body has many feedback processes so that many bio-
logic deviations from the norm are corrected before they become adverse health
effects. This section of the report will focus on the physics involved in the initial
portion of this chain of events.The depth of RF penetration is dependent on the conductivity and dielectricconstant of the biological material; usually in the range of 3 to 4 cm at 433 MHz
for typical biological materials and ranges up to 16 cm in bone. Thus one can
expect a significant fraction of the field to penetrate into the body.MaxwellÕs equations, the Lorentz force law, and the electrical characteristicsof the material in question describe the basic interaction between electromagnetic
waves and that material. The electric field is defined so that the force on a charged
particle is given by the product of the charge, q, and the electric field, E. Similarly
the force exerted by the magnetic flux density, B, is given by the vector product
of the velocity, v, of a charged particle and the magnetic flux density. The vector
product means that this force is at right angles to both the velocity of the particleAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSand B or it is perpendicular to the plane formed by these vectors. Given the valueof the fields E and B, one can calculate the forces, F, being exerted on an electron,
an ion, or a charged molecule. These relations can be expressed by the following
formula:F= q(E + v x B).From these forces and the equations of motion, one can calculate changes inmotion and kinetic energy of the particles as a result of the application of the
fields as a function of time and space. It should be noted that at the PAVE PAWS
radar frequency of 420 MHz, the direction of the force reverses every half cycle
or every 1.2  10
Ð9 seconds. Therefore, the average displacement of these charged
particles in a uniform field is zero. Thus the dominant result of a uniform field is
heating. An average incident power density of 1 W/cm2 on a standing man would
lead to a specific absorption rate, SAR, of approximately 5  10
Ð5 W/kg. This isabout four orders of magnitude lower than the metabolic-energy generation rate
of a resting man.In a non-uniform field the gradient of these fields can induce a directionalforce in atoms and molecules. If for example, the electric field induces a dipole
moment that oscillates with the field, then the gradient of the field will exert a
force on the particle that is in a constant direction. Thus the gradient of the field
can lead to a drift current density, J, that is given by the formula:J = N  V(E 
¥ )E,where  is the polarizability, N is the density of the particles, V is the volume ofthe ion or molecule, and  is the mobility. For the fields under consideration, this
induced drift current density will be very small and is expected to be very small
with respect to the diffusion current and the drift currents associated with the
fields that occur naturally around cells associated with biological activity that are
on the order of microamps per centimeter squared.The applied fields can also change the state or energy of the bound electronsin an atom or molecule. For weak fields these changes are associated with the
absorption of a quantum of energy from the RF field. The amount of energy, W,
associated with a single quantum of the RF field is given by the formula:W = hf,where h is PlanckÕs constant and f is the frequency. The quantum of energy asso-ciated with a photon of microwave energy is about 10Ð5 times smaller than the
photon of energy associated with room temperature radiation. The thermal radia-
tion has its maximum energy in the infrared. This thermal background radiation
nearly equalizes the population of low energy states that are separated by ener-An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PHYSICAL MECHANISMS FOR RF EFFECTS ON BIOLOGICAL SYSTEMS33gies corresponding to a microwave photon at thermal equilibrium so that manyquantum effects are completely masked by the thermal background radiation.One area in which this may not be true is associated with excited states wheremost of the energy is supplied by another process such as a chemical reaction or
ultraviolet radiation. For these excited states, spin selection rules may control the
rate at which they decay or react with other materials and the population of mol-
ecules in these states may be changed by RF radiation. Examples where these
processes may be important are free radicals in which relatively low levels of RF
power have been shown to change the absorption spectra. In the 1-80 MHz region
of the spectra, and at field strengths of 0.1 to 0.5 mT, Stass and others (2000) have
shown a magnetic field effect on the photochemical reaction of anthracene-d10with 1,3-dicyano-benzene in a cyclohexanol/acetonitrile solution corresponding
to changes in the free radical life times. These transitions are associated with
hyperfine spectra of the molecules.In general, the fields are attenuated as they propagate through the tissue. It isa relatively complicated problem to estimate how strong the fields will be after
they go through the skin and other anatomy taking into account the geometry of
the body and the differing electrical properties of the skin, bone, fat, and other
tissues to find the field strengths at the site of interest for a given biological
effect. Tables for the electrical properties of many tissues, are given by Gabriel,
Lau, and Corthout as a function of frequency in three papers . Using this kind of
data, numerical models have been used to calculate the field distributions in the
head and the body in various positions (Hagmann and Gandhi 1979; Jensen and

Samii 1995; Iskander and others 2000). For a review of computational methods
for computing field distributions see the Handbook of Biological Effects of Elec-tromagnetic Fields, Chapter 9 (Lin and Gandhi 1996). In general, the fields willbe weaker the farther away the biological site of interest is from the surface fac-
ing the source. In brain tissue the attenuation coefficient is 31.1 mÐ1 and the depthof penetration is about 3.2 cm. The fields in membranes and other low water
content material will be larger than in the high water content material by the ratio
of the dielectric constants. This is about a factor of 20 at 420 MHz for membranes
in a fluid.The effect of the RF fields on the biological system may take place by chang-ing chemical reaction rates or the binding of molecules to a membrane surface.
This could occur in at least five ways (Barnes 1996). First, it may affect the
transport of ions or charged molecules and thus the probability of the two par-
ticles coming close enough to each other to react. Second, it may affect the en-
ergy with which they collide. Third, it may affect the orientation or configuration
of the colliding particles. Fourth, it may change the energy state of one of the
molecules. Fifth, it may affect the average temperature of the environment. Of
these effects, only those related to changes in the average temperature are well
studied and are generally accepted by the scientific community at large as de-
scribed in a review article by Adair (2003).An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSEffects that are currently being studied include changes in the molecularconfiguration of large biological molecules as a result of the application of RF
fields, dielectrophoresis or the effects of the gradients of the fields on the trans-
port of molecules in the vicinity of membranes, and the effects of RF fields on
free radical lifetimes. For dielectrophoresis to be important the resulting current
must be a significant fraction of the natural current of the same material. Initial
results of the studies of these mechanisms indicate that to be important, the field
strengths need to be sufficient so that the energy absorbed from the RF fields is a
reasonable fraction of the thermal energy, kT.Other physical changes that have been suggested include changes in the dif-fusion constants, (Seto and Hsieh 1976) and rectification of the electric field by
membranes (CRC 1996). For these to occur, the signals must be large enough for
non-linearities to become significant. Non-linearities are expected to be most
important in biological systems with gain. At low frequencies, one such system is
the cardiac pacemaker where cells were shown to have nonlinear effects on the
oscillation frequency on the order of a hundred microvolts (CRC 1996). How-
ever, at frequencies above 10 MHz the membrane capacity shorts out the applied
field and the field reverses direction so rapidly that ions cannot transit a mem-
brane. Measurements of RF field range applied to cell membranes have not shown

any rectification (Pickard and Barsoum 1981). An important problem is determining the minimum signal that a bio-
logical system can detect in the presence of noise. For reliable communications
signal-to-noise ratios of greater than one are usually required and typical values
are one hundred-to-one and one thousand-to-one. Sources of noise include ther-
mal noise, shot noise, 1/f noise, and the electrical signals generated by other parts
of the biological system. At low frequencies, the electrical signals from muscle
activity of the heart are usually the largest source of electrical noise. In biological
systems, repetitive pulses that have a pattern that can be distinguished from the
noise are usually required to initiate important changes or to put information into
memory. These signals often have both space and time coherence. For signals
that are coherent in space, the signal-to-noise ratio grows as the square root of the
number of events in parallel with respect to random noise. For signals that are
coherent in time one gets a similar increase in signal-to-noise ratio with the square
root of the length of time for which the signal is applied (Weaver and Astumian
1990).At 420 MHz, the thermal noise is expected to be the largest source of noise.The noise from this source leads to mean-squared average-voltage fluctuation
across a membrane that is given by<V2> = 4kTfR,where k is BoltzmannÕs constant, T is the absolute temperature, f is the band-width, and R is the resistance.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PHYSICAL MECHANISMS FOR RF EFFECTS ON BIOLOGICAL SYSTEMS35The value of the resistance and the effective bandwidth of cell membraneswill depend on the geometry of the cell. Additionally, because cells are electri-
cally coupled to each other, the effective values for the resistance and capacitance
of a cell will depend on its environment and thus the noise voltage will also be
dependent on the geometry of the cells. For an externally applied voltage, the
voltage across a particular cell is dependent on the geometry of the cell and the
structure of the surrounding tissue. Typical models for a cell membrane would
consist of resistor and capacitor in parallel. Another resistor and capacitor in par-
allel would model the fluid portion of the cell and the applied field would extend
across a large number of cells in series. At high frequencies, this would behave
like a capacitive voltage divider so that the applied voltage to a given membrane
would be roughly equal to the applied field divided by twice the number of cells
per unit distance.At low frequencies the currents through a cell membrane are nonlinear func-tions of the applied voltage. These nonlinearities are such that cell membranes in
nerve cells can behave as poor rectifiers with a typical efficiency of about 0.1%.
At radiofrequencies, this efficiency has typically not been measured and there is
at least one proposal that is outstanding to make measurements of this kind.A single molecular event can be amplified by a variety of means. Forexample, the binding of a single neural transmitter at a synaptic junction can lead
to the release of thousands of calcium ions that in turn become a part of the signal
that is used to excite the next synapse. It typically takes approximately 20 den-
dritic inputs to a summing junction to fire an axon. Repetitive stimulation can
lead to persistent changes that either increase or decrease the threshold for firing.
Stochastic resonance is another means of amplification that can lead to an in-
crease in the signal-to-noise ratio. In these processes a small periodic signal in a
nonlinear system can be amplified by extracting energy from the noise. Gains on
the order of 100 and similar improvements in the signal-to-noise ratios have been
shown for physical systems, and stochastic resonance has been shown to be one
method for improving the sensitivity of biological systems to weak signals
(Gammaitoni and others 1998).SUMMARYThere are a number of possible mechanisms and pathways by which electricand magnetic fields could lead to biological changes at high-power exposure lev-
els. However, at this time, the committee does not know of a physical mechanism
that has been shown to change biological processes at the field-strength levels
associated with exposures to the PAVE PAWS radar.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSREFERENCESAdair, R.K. 2003. Biophysical limits on athermal effects of RF and microwave radiation.Bioelectromagnetics 24:39-48.Barnes, F.S. 1996. Effect of electromagnetic fields on the rate of chemical reactions. Biophysics41:801-808.CRC. 1996. Interaction of DC and ELF electric fields with biological materials and systems. In: TheCRC Handbook on Biological Effects of Electromagnetic Fields, C. Polk and E. Postow, eds.Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.Gabriel, C.S., C. Gabriel, and E. Corthout. 1996a. The dielectric properties of biological tissues. I.Literature survey. Phys Med Biol 41:2231-2249.Gabriel, C.S., R.W. Lau, and C. Gabriel. 1996b. The dielectric properties of biological tissues. II.Measurements in the frequency range 10 Hz to 20 GHz. Phys Med Biol 41:2251-2269.Gabriel, S., R.W. Lau, and C. Gabriel. 1996c. The dielectric properties of biological tissues: III.Parametric models for the dielectric spectrum of tissues. Phys Med Biol 41:2271- 2293.Gammaitoni, L, P. H−nggi, P. Jung, and F. Marchesoni. 1998. Stochastic resonance. Rev Mod Phys70:223-287.Hagmann, M.J. and O.P. Gandhi. 1979. Numerical calculation of electromagnetic energy depositionin models of man with grounding and reflector effects. Radio Science 14:23-29.Iskander, M., Z. Yun, and R. Quintero-Illera. 2000. Polarization and human body effects on the mi-crowave absorption in a human head exposed to radiation from handheld devices. IEEE TransMTT 48(11):1979-1987.Jensen, M. and Y. Rahmat Samii. 1995. EM interaction and handset antennas and a human in personalcommunications. P IEEE 83:7-17.Lin, J. and O. Gandhi. 1996. Computer methods for predicting field intensity. In Handbook of Bio-logical Effects of Magnetic Fields, edited by Charles Polk and Elliot Postow. CRC Press.Pickard, W.F. and Y.H. Barsoum. 1981. Radio-frequency bioeffects at the membrane level: separa-tion of thermal and athermal contributions in Characeae. J Membrane Biol 61:39.Seto, Y.J. and S.T. Hsieh. 1976. Biotechnol Bioeng 18:813.Stass, D.V., J.R. Woodward, C.R. Timmel, P.J. Hore, and K.A. McLauchlan. 2000. Radio frequencymagnetic field effects on chemical reaction yields. Chem Phys Lett 320:15-22.Weaver, J.C. and R.D. Astumian. 1990. The response of living cells to very weak electric fields: Thethermal noise limit level. Science 247:459-461.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.374Exposure Levels
OVERVIEWThis chapter summarizes the current data on exposure levels produced byPAVE PAWS. It begins with an overview of the operating characteristics of theradar and then discusses the existing exposure data measured in terms of peak andaverage power density (in W/cm2). Recent measurements of PAVE PAWSpower density recorded by census tract obtained as part of the current initiative to
re-examine the potential health effects of exposure to low-level phased-array RF
energy are included. Discussion also considers exposure levels of the general
population to other broadcast radiation sources of comparable spectral content.PAVE PAWS OPERATIONThe environmental impact and safety questions related to human health forradar installations (and other broadcast sources) have traditionally been charac-
terized in terms of the power density produced as a function of time and location
within the surrounding population (often neglecting details of the local terrain).
Power density remains an important metric for safe operation of a radar in a
populated area. As such, the primary physical characteristics of PAVE PAWS
that determine its power-density distribution (e.g., its beam attributes) are briefly
reviewed (detailed descriptions of the full operational behavior of PAVE PAWS
have appeared in prior reports [NRC 1979a, b]). Historically, power levels below
the limits known to cause thermal effects in tissue have been deemed acceptable.
Current safety standards, which have been in place in this country for a number of
years, continue to evolve and are periodically revised, but are essentially basedAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSon this threshold (e.g., IEEE Standard C95.1-1999). However, concerns have re-cently been raised regarding the safety of exposure to phased-array radiofrequency
energy. Specifically, two questions have been articulated. The first is whether or
not the human body responds differently (and detrimentally) to a radar beam
formed from a large number of individual antenna elements radiating waveforms
that are slightly shifted in time (to form a beam whose direction can be electroni-
cally scanned by controlling the phasing between elements) relative to a single
source generating an equivalent beam (in terms of radar function) that is me-
chanically redirected. The second is whether or not the transient characteristics of
the waveforms generated by PAVE PAWS are sufficient to produce so-called
precursorsÑspectral components of the composite signal created through inter-actions with the human body that have been hypothesized to propagate to dis-
tances into tissue extending beyond that expected from the primary (signal) fre-
quency comprising the PAVE PAWS emission. As a result, the summary of

PAVE PAWS operation presented here will focus on its beam-forming capabili-
ties. The characteristics of the time-domain signal measured from PAVE PAWS
and the conceptual and experimental basis for the existence/nonexistence of pre-
cursors generated in tissue by PAVE PAWS exposure will be developed more
fully in Chapter 5.THE BEAM CHARACTERISTICSPAVE PAWS consists of two planar arrays of active antenna elements (thecenters of each array face are pointed 20 above horizontal and 120
 apart in
azimuth) that are phased to radiate a directed narrow (main) beam (2 in width,
broadside) in short, high-energy bursts (pulses) containing approximately 90% of
the total transmitted power at the intended RF frequencies (any one of 24 discrete
frequencies between 420 to 450 MHz). The remaining energy is distributed in
sidelobes to the main beam which form clusters of surrounding auxiliary beams
that transmit significantly reduced intensities pointed in directions fanning out
from the orientation of the main beam with respect to the horizontal. For ex-
ample, the first and second sidelobes radiate powers that are no more than 1% and
0.1% of the main beam, respectively are directed approximately 4 (1st sidelobe)
and 6 (2nd sidelobe) off the central axis of the main beam (horizontally). Giventhe local topography of the Cape Cod PAVE PAWS installation (which slopes
away from the radar at 1 or more below horizontal), it is primarily the secondary
sidelobes that intersect the ground when the main beam is pointed at its lowest (3above horizontal) elevation.Transmitted PowerEach face of the PAVE PAWS radar consists of a regular grid of 2677 anten-nas of which 885 are inactive, leaving 1792 active that are directly connected toAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPOSURE LEVELS39individual solid-state transmitters radiating about 320 watts at peak power. Thepeak transmitted power of PAVE PAWS is rated at 580 kW (320 W  1792),
since typically only one of the two antenna faces radiates at a time. As described
in more detail below, the sequence of pulses radiated depends on the function that
the radar is performing at the time. Controls built into the system limit the rate at
which pulses are transmitted so that the fraction of total time during which power
is radiated does not exceed 25%, making the average transmitted power less than
145 kW (580 kW  0.25). Correspondingly, the average radiated power in the
first and second sidelobes is approximately 1.45 kW and 145 W, respectively.Waveform GenerationPAVE PAWS operates by transmitting pulses of radiated power interspersedwith periods of time dedicated to signal reception, the details of which depend on
the radarÕs immediate functional task (e.g., searching, tracking), making the typeof pulse or pulse burst that is emitted, and the timing between bursts, complex
and dynamic. Further, the variability in the pulse pattern is coupled to directional
changes and small pulse-to-pulse frequency shifts in the main-beam transmis-
sions that create sidelobe radiation patterns that are constantly changing at any
given location on the ground. It is, therefore, difficult to quantify precisely expo-
sure conditions over time because the patterns of pulses emitted by PAVE PAWS
depend on the scanning directions being searched by the main beam along with
the number and location of targets being tracked at a particular instant in time.The operation of PAVE PAWS is synchronized to a 54 msec cycle time inwhich one or more pulses may be transmitted in each of several directions at
slightly different frequencies. Seventeen (17) consecutive 54 msec cycles are de-
voted to radar function with an 18th used for self-testing. Within a cycle, pulse
widths ranging from 0.25 to 16 msec may be generated. Within some pulses, the
main transmission frequency is varied (modulated or ÒchirpedÓ) by 2 MHz or lessdepending on radar function. Hence, the maximum possible duty cycle (fraction
of time that power is transmitted) during a single pulse repetition interval is 30%
(16/54 msec) and 28% over 18 consecutive cycles (17/18  30%), although on
average the maximum duty cycle does not exceed 25%.Although the waveform modulation scheme is complicated by the multi-taskoperation of PAVE PAWS, the modulation of transmitted power experienced at a
fixed location on the ground has been estimated based on the assumption that the
radar is functioning in an enhanced search mode (where the main beam targets
120 different azimuthal locations at 3 above the horizon every 2.5 seconds) (NRC
1979b). In this analysis, the signal (assumed to be a nominal 435 MHz carrier)
was considered to be modulated both by the pulse pattern of the burst transmis-
sions and by the scanning of the sidelobes as the main beam is repositioned. The
power spectrum of the envelope of the enhanced search mode pulse train with a
repetitive period of 54 msec contains a small amount of energy at 18.5 Hz (1/54An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSmsec) and its harmonics. The periodic interruptions (once every 18 cycles forantenna self-testing) in transmissions create small sidebands about these frequen-
cies spaced approximately every 1 Hz (18  54 msec = 0.972 sec; 1/0.972 = 1.03
Hz). The 1979 NRC report (NRC 1979b) incorrectly states that 30% of the total
power is at zero frequency. This finding was based on the envelope of the pulses.
In reality, each pulse is filled with oscillations at the radar frequency (420-450
MHz); each pulse has a very small DC component. Because of this, the 18 msec
maintenance sequence used every 972 msec (one of 18) also has very small DC
components.As noted in NRC 1979b, continuous operation in enhanced search mode isnot probable in practice, meaning that the 18.5 Hz peak would be reduced with
more power distributed around its overtones (37 Hz, 74 Hz, 148 Hz) resulting
from the factors of two reduction in pulse widths that occur with the variation in
transmission bursts. Additional sidebands would be present as well due to the
quasi-periodic recurrence of the shorter interval pulses occurring within the 54
msec repetition rate. Further spectral spreading results from the pulse-to-pulse
sampling of the antenna pattern sidelobes experienced at the fixed location on the
ground as the direction of the main beam is changed. This net effect was esti-
mated to create a uniform loss (~6.6 dB) across the band with further spectral
spreading into the sidebands of the pulse-train envelop spectrum leading to a
distribution dominated by sidelobe power in the 0-3 Hz band with less than 1% of
the total in the 15-20 Hz range (NRC 1979b). The report describes a sample strip-
chart recording of power measurements in the field ,which showed a 2 Hz fluc-
tuation with a peak amplitude of approximately 0.4 W/cm2 on which spikes in
amplitude of about 1.4 W/cm2 were superposed with a regular period of 0.4 Hz.
These findings tend to confirm the estimate that the modulation of the sidelobe
power is a few hertz or less on the ground.PAVE PAWS POWER-DENSITY ESTIMATES AND MEASUREMENTS Exposure levels on the ground from PAVE PAWS have been estimated and
measured a number of times at various locations under several different assump-
tions and conditions. Six sources of such data are reviewed and summarized here:
(1) the 1979 NRC (National Research Council) Engineering Panel report on Ra-
diation Intensity of the PAVE PAWS Radar System (NRC 1979b); (2) the
1979 NRC report on Exposure Levels and Potential Biological Effects of the
PAVE PAWS Radar System (NRC 1979a); (3) the 1986 Engineering Report (#86-
33) issued by the 1839 Engineering Installation Group (EIG) from the Engineer-
ing Division at Keesler Air Force Base entitled ÒRadio Frequency Radiation Sur-veyÓ for the AN/FPS-115 PAVE PAWS Radar (EIG 1986); (4) the 2000 report
by Mitre Corporation on ÒRF Power Density Exposure at Ground Level for thePAVE PAWS Radar at Cape CodÑQuestions and AnswersÓ (MITRE 2000); (5)
the Broadcast Signal Laboratory (BSL) final test report ÒA Survey of Radio Fre-An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPOSURE LEVELS41quency Energy Field Emissions from the Cape Cod Air Force Station PAVEPAWS Radar FacilityÓ issued in April of 2004 (BSL 2004b); and (6) the power
density measurement data analysis from the Coalition to Operate PAVE PAWS
Safely (COPPS) provided in May 2004.1979 NRC Engineering Panel ReportThe 1979 National Research Council Engineering Panel reviewed measure-ment data obtained from June 1978 through August 1978 as well as other record-
ings presented to that committee in September 1978 (NRC 1979b). These mea-
surements were obtained with the radar operating in the enhanced search mode at
a fixed carrier frequency with 20% duty cycle and were corrected for equivalency
to measurements at 1 km distance from the radar with a 25% duty cycle (for
comparison purposes). Data from 4 station locations ranging from 1600 to 3900
feet from the radar (at 0 to 63
 in azimuth from boresight) resulted in average
power densities of 0.38 to 3.26 mW/cm2, which when converted to equivalent 1km, 25% duty cycle data, ranged from 0.64 to 0.98 mW/cm2 with an average
(from the 4 locations) of 0.82 mW/cm2.The Panel concluded that the measurement protocol and instrumentationused followed good engineering practice and that the variability in the measure-
ment data (nearly 2 dB) was acceptable given the calibration procedures em-
ployed and differences in line of sight to the various measurement locations.
Interestingly, in this same report (NRC 1979b), the panel made its own estima-
tion of nominal and worst-case estimates of average power density on the main
axis of a secondary sidelobe taking into account characteristics of the radar, and
reported numbers of 8.2 W/cm2 (nominal) and 11 mW/cm
2 (worst-case) at
1 km, which are approximately an order of magnitude larger than the actual
measurements but reassuring as conservative estimates. When factoring in more
of the pulse-train specifics associated with enhanced search mode, the panelÕsestimate reduced to 1.8 W/cm2 at a distance of 1 km, which is only about 6 dBgreater than the measurement data.1979 NRC Exposure Level ReportThis report (NRC 1979a) reviewed similar data measured by the Air Force in1978 (August and October) at various points within, and up to 5 miles beyond,
the restricted area, which is 1000 feet from the radar. It also considered analytical
results for PAVE PAWS produced by the Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) in 1977. The August 1978 data were the same as reviewed in the 1979
NRC Engineering Panel report, although much more information was included in
NRC 1979b. Specifically, at each of the 4 measurement sites, data from main-
beam elevations of 3, 6, and 10 were evaluated along with both peak and
average power-density recordings. The results showed a 344 W/cm2 peak power
An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSdensity at 3 elevation at the closest distance (1600 feet) dropping to a peak power
density of 179 W/cm2 at 10
 beam elevation with average power densities corre-
sponding to 3.26 to 2.90 W/cm2, respectively, for these two beam elevations. Atthe largest distance (3900 feet), the 3 peak power density reduced to 48 
W/cm2with an average of 0.38 mW/cm2, while at 6 beam elevation these numbers were
17 W/cm2 peak and 0.20 
W/cm2 on average (the 10
 beam elevation was not
reported).Measurements were also summarized for 21 sites in surrounding locations(Bourne, Sandwich, Mashpee, and Falmouth, MA ranging in distance from 1.0
to 22.2 km from the radar) on 2 days in October 1978 using both faces of the
radar with an 18% duty cycle and 3 beam elevation. The committee compared
these data to calculated values of electric field strength and average power den-
sity predicted to be emitted by the radar. It found that, in general, (1) exposures
decreased with distance from the radar (but not uniformly), (2) measured values
decreased more rapidly than calculated quantities farther from the source (likely
due to attenuation not modeled from terrain, atmosphere, etc.), and (3) the ratio
of peak to average power density varied significantly depending on beam eleva-
tion, azimuthal angle, and distance from the radar. More specifically, the com-
mittee concluded that average power density outside the Air Force base was not
likely to exceed 1 mW/cm2, the average power density at the exclusion fencesurrounding PAVE PAWS was approximately 5 W/cm2, while the averagemeasured intensity at locations where the public would most likely be exposed
was 0.06 mW/cm2 (Route 6, 1.0 km from the radar).
1839 EIG Engineering Report (#86-33)In the fall (September 18-30) of 1986, time-averaged power-density mea-surements were recorded to document the RF exposures in the lighting and secu-
rity camera areas within and around the security fence surrounding the PAVE
PAWS radar facility on Cape Cod (EIG 1986). These data were requested be-
cause installation contracts for new lighting and camera systems at all four PAVE

PAWS sites were being issued and construction workers would need access to
locations directly in front of the radar. At the same time, the State of Massachu-
setts Department of Public Health was investigating possible causes of larger
than normal cancer clusters on Cape Cod and the opportunity arose to also record
RF power density levels at locations within the local community around the
radar.On site, measurements were reported for 17 lighting pole locations and 7security camera positions immediately inside the security fence (approximately
120 feet from the radar face). Data were recorded at heights of 6 and 40 feet
(above ground level) for the light poles and 6 and 20 feet (above ground level) for
the security cameras. Additionally, ground-level (6 feet above) measurements
were recorded at 10 other locations: 4 of these were outside the security fence butAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPOSURE LEVELS43inside a secondary fence (between 120 and 200 feet from the radar face); 3 wereoutside the second fence (but within 250 feet of the radar); 2 were inside the
security fence (one at the access gate lateral to the north face of the radar and the
other directly in front of the north face 50-60 feet away); and 1 was not labeled on
the map of measurement sites contained in the report but was listed in the data
table of power-density recordings (presumably, it was associated with an 18th
lighting pole not explicitly shown in the diagram, although data were only re-
corded at the 6 foot height). Power-density data were acquired at the 20 and 40
foot elevations (above the ground) using a bucket-loader truck that raised the test
antenna and an operator to a height typically expected for maintenance personnel
servicing either the security cameras (20 feet) or the lighting system (40 feet). A
surveying transit was used to estimate the height of each measurement location
relative to the bottom edge of the radar face. Because of the sloping terrain around

the radar, these distances varied depending on the antenna test position. For the 6-
foot (above ground) measurements, the heights ranged from even with to 14 feet
below the bottom edge of the radar (at the greatest distance away, approximately
250 feet). The 20-foot elevations (at the security cameras) ranged from 5 to 14
feet above the bottom edge of the radar, while the 40-foot elevations (at the light-
ing poles) ranged from 31 to 45 feet above the radarÕs bottom edge.The equipment used during the recording sessions was calibrated and certi-fied by the Keesler Air Force Base Precision Measurement Equipment Labora-
tory based on specifications issued by the National Bureau of Standards. Results
showed that the time-averaged power-density recordings had an overall accu-
racy of  2.0 dB when measuring a pulsed RF signal. When measurements were
acquired, the PAVE PAWS radar was operating in its normal mode. The results
showed that the highest time-averaged power-density at 6 feet above ground
level was 1850 W/cm2 with a minimum of 38 
W/cm2. The average was 529W/cm2 at the 33 locations comprising the lighting poles, security cameras, and
selected positions in and around the security fence. Data at the elevation of the 7
security camera locations (20 feet above ground) had a maximum power density
of 745 W/cm2, a minimum of 100 W/cm2, and a mean of 273 W/cm2. Data atthe elevation of the 17 lighting poles (40 feet above ground) had a maximum
power density of 3716 W/cm2, a minimum of 127 W/cm2, and a mean of 1190W/cm2.The same equipment and procedures were used to measure power densitieswithin surrounding Cape Cod communities at a height of 6 feet above the ground
for all except two locations: (a) the Sandwich Fire Tower, which was 86 feet
above the ground and in direct line of sight of the radar, and (b) the Otis Central
Control Tower which was 106 feet above ground. Locations were selected by
the Massachusetts Department of Public Health to represent areas of dense popu-
lation and to augment data obtained from earlier measurement efforts (NRC
1979a, b). Once a location was selected, the test antenna was placed in direct
line of sight of the radar whenever possible or in an open area to record maxi-An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSmum signal intensities. Data were measured at 15 locations in the surroundingcommunities ranging in distance from 1.2 to 8.8 miles from the radar. At 10 of
the sites, power-density levels were below the measurable threshold of the equip-
ment (determined to be 0.001 W/cm2). At locations where levels above thisthreshold were received, the largest value, 0.139 W/cm2, was documented atthe Sandwich Fire Tower (3.2 miles away) at the 86-foot elevation, which was in
direct line of site of the radar. The minimum measurable value, 0.003 W/cm2,was recorded at the Otis Central Tower (5.9 miles away elevated 106 feet above
ground). Of the measurable levels at 5 sites, the average power density was
0.041 W/cm2. These locations averaged 3.2 miles away from the radar (rangingfrom 1.2 to 5.0 miles away).2000 MITRE ReportIn that report (MITRE 2000), two-dimensional peak and average power-density maps on the ground were presented for Cape Cod based on simulation
studies of PAVE PAWS. Areas with line of sight to the radar were considered
based on digital terrain elevation data for the Cape over a distance of 50 nautical
miles. At these locations, the power density was calculated by considering the
distance from the radar, the main beam elevation angle, and the time-averaging
factors associated with the pulse-transmission scheme. For the peak-power calcu-
lation, a peak radiated power (543 kW), antenna gain (38.4 dB), and antenna
pattern (beam at 3 elevation), along with a scan loss for off-broadside angles,
were used to construct the maps. Generally, the peak-power densities in the 1-5
mile range from the radar cluster in the 1-10 
W/cm2 level but fall off to 0.3-1.0
W/cm2 at distances 5-10 miles from the radar, although some variation with
azimuthal angle is evident.To estimate an average power-density map, the peak-power calculation wasmodified by the duty cycle, the scan revisiting time, and the azimuthal weighting
factor. A duty cycle of 25% was used, a scan revisit factor (fraction of time the
main beam is pointed in a particular direction given its beam width) of 0.066 was
assumed, and an azimuthal-weighting factor that increased the average power 4
times (far from broadside) was applied. The map shows that beyond the first
couple of miles from the radar, the average power density is within 0.01-0.1 mW/

cm2 and generally less than 1 mW/cm
2 within the first couple of miles (except
very close to the radar).To simplify the analysis, peak and average intensity maps that assume theterrain is flat at a height of either 0 or 100 feet above sea level (with the radar at a
height of 270 feet above sea level) are also included in this report. These results
show peak-power densities (assuming sea-level terrain) of 1.0-10.0 mW/cm
2 up
to 5 miles or more away from the radar and a similar distribution of peak intensity
at 100 feet above sea level with several isolated Òhot spotsÓ of 10-100 
W/cm2 at
distances up to 2 nautical miles from the radar. The average power-density mapsAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPOSURE LEVELS45at sea level yielded values between 0.01 and 0.1 W/cm2, with pockets havingexposures between 0.1 and 0.3 W/cm2 approximately 2 miles from the radar.
The 100-foot elevation map is similar but with more uniform exposure between
0.1 and 0.3 W/cm2 in a zone extending up to 4 miles from the radar with levels
between 0.01 and 0.1 W/cm2 existing beyond this zone.
The Broadcast Signal Lab ReportDuring the first quarter of 2004, the Broadcast Signal Lab, Medfield, MA(BSL 2004a, b), executed a survey of RF emissions from the PAVE PAWS radar
facility located at the Massachusetts Military Reservation on Cape Cod. The
final test plan was approved by the PAVE PAWS Public Health Steering Group
(PPPHSG) based on its solicitation for competitive proposals to complete the
work. It consisted of three distinct tasks: (1) measurement of radar emissions
during its normal operation at 50 open, publicly accessible locations throughout
Cape Cod; (2) measurement of ambient emissions from all other sources in the
VHF and UHF radiofrequency spectrum (30 MHz to 3 GHz) at 10 locations on
Cape Cod (these data are discussed in the subsection on other environmental
exposures); and (3) estimation of the radar exposure on Cape Cod based on
calculations from a mathematical description of the PAVE PAWS antenna used
in conjunction with propagation-modeling software provided by the MITRE
Corporation.All measurement methods and procedures were consistent with guidelinesand consensus standards for performing such work, and the 50 field locations for
assessing radar exposures were selected in consultation with the PPPHSG and the
International Epidemiology Institute (IEI). A number of factors including (1) dis-
tance, (2) elevation, (3) population density, and (4) beam sweep coverage were
considered in the site selection process. A detailed discussion of these parameters
and the 50 field measurement locations is available elsewhere (BSL 2004a). Table

4-1, reproduced from the Final Test Plan (BSL 2004a), is a useful summary of the
number of measurements fulfilling certain site criteria regarding height, interven-
ing terrain, distance, etc. Maps of the specifics of locations by town, county, and
approximate coordinates can be found in the test plan (BSL 2004a) and final
report (BSL 2004b). The actual measurement site locations were modified slightly

at the time of data acquisition to ensure safety, accommodate access issues, and
improve measurement quality as determined by the field crew. Measurements
were recorded for 90-minute periods (as six 15-minute routines where the detec-
tor was moved 3 feet after each acquisition sequence) in order to acquire realistic
estimates of the average and peak radar emissions at each location.Summary tables of power-density measurements at the 50 sites within thecommunities of Cape Cod show that the average values of the recordings at each
location are extremely small. The largest average value was 0.035 W/cm2, whichwas recorded in Shawme Crowell State Park (site #15) at a location close to theAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSradar (less than 1 mile) that was relatively high (167 feet above sea level). Thenext highest sets of recording levels were nearly an order of magnitude lower
(~0.002-0.005 W/cm2) and occurred at 4 other locations (site # 9, 21, 23, and40) that generally tended to be closer to the radar (within 3 miles) although at
variable heights (9-167 feet above sea level). One interesting exception was the
Scargo Hill site whose average power density was 0.0038 W/cm2 at some 18.5
miles from the radar (65 foot elevation). Direct line from the radar to this location
does cut across the coast line of the Cape, which may explain its relatively high
(compared to radar distance) values, although the direct paths to sites 1-5 and 9
cut across mostly water (at distances ranging from 24 to 31 miles from the radar)
and do not appear elevated compared to other locations. The 5 sites (# 9, 15, 21,
23, and 40) with the highest average values, not surprisingly, also shared the
highest peak-power recordings in the 14-15 W/cm2 range. These peaks were,
again, nearly an order of magnitude greater than peaks measured at the other 45
locations. The next cluster of peak values hovered in the range of 1.4-1.5 W/cm2and were found at 10 other sites (# 14, 16, 18-20, 22, 25-27, 47), which were allwithin 6 miles of the radar and averaged a distance of 2.6 miles away.Of the 5 sites with the highest average and peak power-density measure-ments, 4 were located in the sidelobe overlap zone (the 5th was in the northern
face sweep zone). The majority of the 10 sites with the next highest levels of peak
power density (all but one, #14) appeared in either the northern sweep (5 sites) or
sidelobe overlap (4 sites) zones. Although there is an overall decrease in detected
signal levels with distance, sites close to the radar (e.g., Route 6E Canal Over-
look, #29, 1.9 miles away) can have low levels (0.135 W/cm2 peak), while loca-
tions at much further distances (e.g., Rock Harbor Parking, #5, 27.5 miles away)
can exhibit relatively higher levels (0.153 W/cm2 peak), reflecting the impor-
tance of the intervening and local terrain in addition to the direct-line distance.Comparisons between the current measurements and those recorded withinTABLE 4-1Measurement Site CharacteristicNo. of Sites% of Sites
Measured with 30 ft-high antenna1530
Radio line of sight to radar3672
Terrain obstruction to radar1326
Man-made obstruction to radar 1 2

Beneath beam sweep4080
Beyond beam sweep (includes rear)1020
Less than 3 miles from radar1632

3 -10 miles away from radar1938
More than 10 miles away from radar1530
Barnstable County4488
Plymouth County 612
An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPOSURE LEVELS47the community in either 1978 (NRC 1979a,b) or 1986 (EIG 1986) show that thepresent equipment was significantly more sensitive and able to achieve record-
ings of weaker signals than was possible during the earlier efforts. At sites within
7 miles of the radar (previous studies did not measure responses at greater dis-
tances), the 2004 data are consistently lower than the prior recordings. Specifi-
cally, the average power-density readings for sites within 7 miles were below
0.01 W/cm2 in the 2004 data with many points below 0.0001 
W/cm2. The1978 and 1986 results showed average power densities between 0.1 and 0.01
W/cm2 for most sites within 3 miles of the radar with the largest value being
above 0.1 W/cm2 at 3-plus miles from the radar in the 1986 data set. About
one-half (4 locations) of the 1978 readings were between 0.01 and 0.001 W/cm2 and a third (2 sites) of the 1986 results were in this range (levels below
0.001 W/cm2 were not considered to be measurable with the instrumentation
used in the earlier power-density surveys).The modeling effort produced results from the propagation model combinedwith an antenna pattern to generate a matrix of public-exposure estimates to the
PAVE PAWS emissions. The propagation model was evaluated by comparing its
predictions to measurements obtained in 3849 latitude-longitude cells acquired
during a 250-mile drive test. The comparison between computed and measured
values indicates that the model is accurate to within the uncertainty of the mea-
surements. Specifically, the average variance between the propagation model pre-
diction and the drive-test recordings was Ð1.6 dB. A MITRE antenna model wasused to create an antenna pattern for the propagation software. This led to the
creation of the exposure matrix for Cape Cod, indexed by latitude and longitude,
containing values for each position in terms of dBW/cm2. To validate the resultswhen combining the antenna and propagation models, measurements at 35 sites
were compared with the corresponding calculations. Departure between the model
estimates and the measured data was 6.5 dB on average over all sites with a
standard deviation of 8.5 dB. Excluding 4 sites behind the radar reduced the aver-
age departure to 5.9 dB. Overall, the model estimates slightly over-predicted the
levels measured in the field.COPPS DataThe Coalition to Operate PAVE PAWS Safely (COPPS) performed powerdensity measurements on Cape Cod at 26 sites (23 firehouses, 2 commuter park-
ing lots, and 1 lighthouse) spanning 311 days beginning in May of 2003. Analysis
of existing data as of April 2004 was made available to the committee through
website postings (see COOPS 2004). Specifically, a town-by-town map of mea-
surement sites, a color-coded rank ordering by measured (http://www.pavepaws.
com/measured_sites.pdf) peak-power density (in W/cm2) of the towns wheredata were recorded (http://www.pavepaws.com/peak_measurements.pdf), and
plots of peak-power versus various parameters of interest (e.g. elevation, dis-An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWStance, obstruction, bearing, weather, season) (http://www.pavepaws.com/additional_findings.pdf) were provided. The results are generally consistent with
the Broadcast Signal Lab (BSL) report (BSL 2004b) in a number of important
respects, although the details of specific measurements may be different (and are
not easily compared given information presently available). The COPPS data
show peak-power densities of less than 1 W/cm2 regardless of location, withmore than 75% of the 40 peak values reported (http://www.pavepaws.com/
additional_findings.pdf) being near or below 0.1  W/cm2. These levels are lowerthan the highest peak values recorded by BSL but consistent with the second and
third tiers of peak values into which the majority of the BSL measurement sites
also fall. Both the BSL and the COPPS data sets reveal that the locations with
higher peak power-density recordings are preferentially distributed in the north-
ern sector of the radar. Both data sets also indicate that some of the highest peak
power-densities occur at locations having the greater distances from the radar,
especially when the straight-line distance from the radar to the measurement site
cuts across the coastal waters of Cape Cod Bay. Other findings in the COPPS
data are consistent with expectations (and the BSL results) that the degree of
topological obstruction between the measurement location and the radar facility
is a critical determinant of the measured power-density exposure. Positive corre-
lations between power-density levels and clear weather and the fall/winter sea-
sons were reported in the COPPS analysis. Again, these results are reasonably
anticipated from the perspective that inclement weather, increased foliage, and
other factors are expected forms of obstruction to radiowave propagation at PAVE
PAWS frequencies.POPULATION EXPOSURE TO OTHER RF SOURCESIt is informative to consider general and specific population exposures toother RF sources that have some similarities to PAVE PAWS for gaining a per-
spective on the power-density levels described in this chapter. Interestingly, the
1979 engineering report (NRC 1979b) compared the transmitter characteristics of
PAVE PAWS with two other radar installations that radiate much higher peak
powers (megawatts) and higher (for one) and lower (for the other) average pow-
ers but no power-density measurements on the ground were reported. In NRC
(1979a), data obtained by the EPA in the 1970s (EPA 1978a) from population
exposures in 12 large U.S. cities over the FM and TV broadcast bands (54-900
MHz) were summarized. These studies estimated that the median exposure in
urban areas was 0.005 W/cm2 and that 95% of the urban population is exposed
to less than 0.1 mW/cm2. These numbers are generally consistent with the PAVEPAWS data in terms of power-density exposure. The EPA has also reported
power-density measurements in tall buildings that either house, or are near, broad-
cast antennas (EPA 1978b). These studies show that, depending on the location
within the building and/or the degree of shielding from the antenna site, valuesAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPOSURE LEVELS49can range from less than 1 W/cm2 to 97 
W/cm2 on the inside to as much as 230
W/cm2 outside (and near) the source.
The Broadcast Signal Laboratory study (BSL 2004b) selected 10 sites forassessing the ambient RF exposure that were chosen in consultation with the
PPPHSG and IEI, and a detailed discussion of the rationale for their selection
appears in BSL 2004a. A bracketing strategy was adopted because, as with the
PAVE PAWS radar, itself, the levels of ambient VHF and UHF radiation mea-
sured at a given location depend on distance from the source, the intervening
terrain, and local topological environment. At least a dozen FM radio stations (a
number of which operate with radiated powers of 45 kW or more) and a couple of
TV stations (including one UHF station licensed to operate at 1150 kW) are
present in the area. Numerous (more than 5000) land-mobile facilities, typically
licensed for 100 to 1000 watts per channel emissions (e.g. police, fire, business
systems) were also identified. The final 10 sites selected attempted to represent
high, low, and middle-level exposure conditions to these sources as a means of
providing a representative sampling of the ambient RF exposures on Cape Cod.
The propagation model was used to define the power levels and associated loca-
tions that would be expected to bracket exposure conditions given the relevant
sources of radiation identified. Descriptions of the final site selections are re-
ported (BSL 2004b). Four pre-measurement bracketing level estimates spanning
10Ð1-10Ð5 (i.e., 10
Ð1, 10Ð2, 10Ð4, 10Ð5) W/cm2 were used to categorize the 10
sites.Measurements at the 10 sites selected to bracket the levels of ambient RFexposure across the VHF and UHF signal bands were reported in terms of the
maximum permissible exposure (MPE) for low (30-320 MHz), mid (320-950
MHz), and high (950-3050 MHz) bands that were combined into a final figure of
merit that could be compared to the MPE for PAVE PAWS. These findings were
tabulated as dB below MPE. For example, the MPE for PAVE PAWS (deter-
mined by applying the IEEE weighting for the 420-450 MHz band) is 290 W/cm2 thus the maximum and minimum measured power densities from PAVE
PAWS (at the 50 measurement sites) convert to Ð48 dB (below MPE) and Ð103dB, respectively, whereas the equivalent values for the ambient signals from the
10 sites resulted in maximum and minimum measured values of Ð19 dB and Ð50dB (relative to MPE). These results indicate that the ambient exposure level at the
most energetic site (near the FM tower at the Exit 6 commuter parking lot on
Route 6) was 100 times less that the MPE for the general population. The other
sites were an additional 10 to 1000 times less exposed to VHF and UHF emis-
sions. Overall, the highest average PAVE PAWS exposure at any of the 50 mea-
surement sites was comparable to the lowest ambient levels observed at the 10
locations sampled. Further, the variation between ambient sites was no more than
a factor of 1000 (30 dB), while the lowest observed PAVE PAWS signal was
about a million (60 dB) times weaker than the highest.Cell-phone exposure has generated considerable interest, and there have beenAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSa number of efforts to quantify exposure. Two issues are relevant: first, the expo-sure level to the cell-phone user due to the radiated power during a call, and
second, the exposure of the general population to cell-phone relay stations. The
former issue has been studied in some depth. The power radiated for a typical cell
phone is generally less that 0.6 W and it has been shown that approximately half
of this power is absorbed in the hand and head of the user, leading to specific
absorption rates on the order of 1 W/kg (Jensen and Rahmat-Samii 1995).The committee is not aware of extensive studies of power-density levels nearrelay stations (base stations) in the United States, but there are 3 informative
evaluations from Canada, the United Kingdom, and Australia.1 In Vancouver,
Canada, Thansandote and others (1999) measured RF levels in 3 schools with
base stations on or near their campuses and 2 schools with no antennas nearby
that served as controls. Maximum measured exposures in the 3 schools with adja-
cency ranged from 0.16 W/cm2 to 2.6 W/cm2 depending on the location of thestation (2.6 mW/cm2 resulted from a base station on the roof of a school). The 2schools without base stations in their vicinity had a maximum power density of
0.01 W/cm2.The U.K. National Radiological Protection Board measured RF power-den-sity levels at 118 sites around 17 base stations in 2000 (NRPB 2000). Typical
levels were less than 0.1 W/cm2, while the highest recorded power density atany location was 0.83 W/cm2. The measured upper bound on power density as afunction of distance from the base of a building or tower with an antenna showed
an increase (from just below 0.01 W/cm2) for approximately the first 60 meters(to a level approaching 0.1 W/cm2) followed by a more gradual decrease (backto 0.01 W/cm2) up to 200 meters away. The power-density auditing program inthe U.K. has continued with data available from recording in 2001-2004. Results
are summarized in terms of a percentage of the ICNIRP (International Commis-
sion for Non-ionizing Radiation Protection) power-density guidelines for a band
exposure equivalent that factors in the changing safety standard as a function of
frequency from 400 MHz to 2 GHz, which for the PAVE PAWS emissions would
represent an upper limit of 200 mW/cm
2 (at 400 MHz). The highest values re-
ported at any location for each year would represent PAVE PAWS-like expo-
sures (i.e., band equivalent exposure extrapolated to 400 MHz) of 0.72 W/cm2,0.27 W/cm2, 0.32 W/cm2, and 0.26 W/cm2 for the years 2001, 2002, 2003,
and 2004, respectively.The survey of GSM base stations by the Australian Radiation Protection andNuclear Safety Agency measured 13 sites that yielded an average power density1From the Website http://www.mcw.edu/gcrc/cop/cell-phone-health-FAQ/toc.html and http://www.ofcom.org.uk/consumer_guides/mob_phone_base_stat. Information available 10/25/04.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPOSURE LEVELS51of less than 0.1 W/cm2; the highest power density measured was less than 0.2cm2.SUMMARY OF PAVE PAWS EXPOSURE DATAWhile not extensive per se, the power-density measurements that do exist forthe PAVE PAWS radar on Cape Cod, which have been recorded by different
groups on a number of separate occasions over the radarÕs operational life, aregenerally consistent with expectations. The most extensive efforts in terms of the
number and distribution of measurement sites are the recently issued 2004 reports
(BSL 2004a, b; COPPS 2004), which have focused on assessments of exposure
levels within the surrounding communities on Cape Cod. These studies reveal
heterogeneity in the measured levels that demonstrate the strong influence of the
intervening terrain and local topological environment on the recorded power den-
sities and consequently the public exposure. While there is a general decrease in
the power-density levels measured with distance from the radar that is evident in
the various datasets that have been assembled, it is also clear that locations much
farther (10-plus miles) from the radar can be exposed to higher levels of radiation
than sites nearer (within 3 miles) the facility depending on topographical fea-
tures. Certainly, both the BSL and the COPPS data (BSL 2004a, b; COPPS 2004)
demonstrate this characteristic at selected locations. Nonetheless, the average
power densities have been consistently below 0.1 mW/cm2 and generally in the
0.001-0.01 mW/cm2 range at locations where the public would be expected to be
exposed. The simulation studies that have been reported estimate higher values
overall, but for the most part still suggest that the exposure of the public is less
than 1 W/cm2 in terms of average power density. Measured peak levels are
generally less than 1 W/cm2, although values as high as 15 W/cm2 have been
found at a few elevated locations near the radar. These levels are well below the
widely accepted thresholds for the power absorption that would be required to
generate harmful thermal effects in tissue. The degree to which they may causeother biological effects in cells and animals is discussed in Chapters 6 and 7,
respectively, and the implications for human health are developed in Chapters 8
and 9. The degree to which emissions from PAVE PAWS may contain special
characteristics pertaining to its time-domain waveform is described in the follow-
ing chapter (Chapter 5).REFERENCESARPANSA (Australian Radiation Protection and Nuclear Safety Agency). 2000. Line, P., W.A.Cornelius, M.J. Bangay and M. Grollo. Levels of Radiofrequency Radiation from GSM Mobile
Telephone Base Stations (Tech Rep 129). Available from http://www.arpansa.gov.au/pubs/eme_comitee/rfrep129.pdf as of 10/25/04.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSBSL (Broadcast Signal Lab). 2004a. Survey of RF Energy Field Emissions from the PAVE PAWSRadar Located at Cape Cod Air Force Station, Massachusetts: Final Test Plan, prepared in
consultation with International Epidemiology Institute, Rockville, MD, by Broadcast SignalLab, Medfield MA.BSL. 2004b. A Survey of Radio Frequency Energy Field Emissions from the Cape Cod Air ForceStation PAVE PAWS Radar Facility: Final Test Report, prepared for PAVE PAWS PublicHealth Steering Group by Broadcast Signal Lab, Medfield MA.COPPS (Coalition to Operate PAVE PAWS Safely). 2004. Available from http://www.pavepaws.com/measured_sites.pdf; http://www.pavepaws.com/peak_measurements.pdf; http://www.pavepaws.com/additional_findings.pdf.EIG (Engineering Installation Group). 1986. Radio Frequency Radiation Survey for the AN/FPS-115PAVE PAWS Radar Cape Cod MA, 18-30 Sep 86, Report #86-33, 1839 Engineering Installa-tion Group, Keesler Air Force Base, Biloxi, MS.EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). 1978a. Population Exposure to VHF and UHF BroadcastRadiation in the United States, R.A. Tell and E.D. Mantiply, EPA Technical Report ORP/EAD78-5.EPA. 1978b. Measurements of Radiofrequency Field Intensities in Buildings with Close Proximity toBroadcast Stations, R.A. Tell and N.N. Hankin, EPA Technical Report ORP/EAD 78-3, March1978.Jensen, M. and Y. Rahmat-Samii. 1995. Interaction of handset antennas and a human in personalcommunications. P IEEE 83:7-17.MITRE. 2000. RF Power Density Exposure at Ground Level for the PAVE PAWS Radar at CapeCodÑQuestions and Answers. MITRE Technical Report, MITRE Corporation, Bedford, MA.NRC (National Research Council). 1979a. Analysis of the Exposure Levels and Potential BiologicEffects of the PAVE PAWS Radar System. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.NRC. 1979b. Radiation Intensity of the PAVE PAWS Radar System, Engineering Panel on the PAVEPAWS Radar System, National Research Council, Final Report. Washington, DC: NationalAcademy Press.NRPB (National Radiological Protection Board). June 2000. Mann, S.M., T.G. Cooper, S.G. Allen,R.P. Blackwell, and A.J. Lowe. Exposure to Radio Waves near Mobile Phone Base Stations.Chilton, U.K.: National Radiological Protection Board.Thansandote, A., G.B. Gajda, and D.W. Lecuyer. 1999. Radiofrequency radiation in five Vancouverschools: exposure standards not exceeded. Can Med Assoc J 160:1311-1312.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.535PAVE PAWS Exposure Conditions
EXPOSURE CHARACTERISTICSThe Radar and Its SignalTo briefly review the radar description provided in Chapter 4, the PAVEPAWS radar is pulsed; it transmits a pulse sequence, and then is quiescent whilethe radar echoes return. Then another pulse sequence is transmitted and the pro-
cess is repeated. Pulse widths vary from 250 microseconds to 16 milliseconds,
and the listening period is at least 38 milliseconds. Some pulses vary in carrier
frequency during the pulse, using a technique called ÒchirpingÓ to improve range
resolution. The carrier frequency varies from 420 MHz to 450 MHz. Signal band-
widths at the input to the final amplifiers range from 8 kHz for the narrowest
pulse to 125 Hz for the widest pulse. The ÒchirpÓ bandwidth is 2 MHz.The antenna is comprised of two phased arrays, each located on a planarface, tilted back 20 degrees from vertical. The elements are located on a regular
hexagonal lattice, and there are 1792 active elements per face and 885 passive
elements. The elements are deployed in quadrantal symmetry to allow precise
monopulse tracking of targets. The diameter of each array is approximately 72.5
ft. Each array face will support many more elements, but that expansion has not
occurred, and the committee has been informed that there are no plans to expand
the number of elements on the array. The elements are bent dipoles, each sup-
ported by a two-post balun. Bending down the arms avoids blind angles produced
by dipole-balun mode interference. Crossed dipoles are used, thus providing both
vertical and horizontal polarization. Both arms are hot; the two conductors sup-
porting the dipole arms constitute a balun, which transforms the balanced dipole
arm connection to an unbalanced coax; the latter connects to the module contain-An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSing the amplifier. This is a well known and widely used technology. Each quad-rant has 14 subarrays, and each subarray has 32 transmit-receive (TR) modules
and 32 active elements. The array main beam is steered by applying phase shift to
each TR module. All modules are excited simultaneously; beam scan is provided
by phase shift. Sidelobe levels are held 20 dB below the main beam by tapering:
the inner subarrays have all active elements, while middle subarrays have some
passive elements, and outer subarrays have more passive elements. Thus an am-
plitude taper is produced over the array (see Figure 5-4). Each TR module in-
cludes a bandpass filter to minimize interference caused by the radar. Filter band-
width is 115 MHz at 10 dB points; the measured filter response is shown in
Figure 5-1. Note that the filter skirts around 420 and 450 MHz are quite steep.
This filter affects the pulse buildup and decay.FIGURE 5-1Measured module filter response.  The filter minimizes the interference of
PAVE PAWS to services such as cell phones, GPS, and other communications systems.Filter bandwidth is 115 MHz at 10 dB points.  This figure shows the pass band  (low
attenuation for the radar frequencies [425-450 MHz], and high attenuation for harmonics;attenuation of 70 dB for second harmonic at 850 MHz; 68 dB for third harmonic at 1350MHz; 31 dB for 4th harmonic at 1800 MHz; and 59 dB for fifth harmonic at 2100 MHz).
This filter insures that the PAVE PAWS signal has very small harmonic content.  Figure isreproduced with permission from Raytheon Company.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAVE PAWS EXPOSURE CONDITIONS55Measurements of the exciter output RF waveform are shown in Figures 5-2a,5-2b, and 5-2c. Note that these appear inverted, due to the measuring equipmentusing negative detection. In Figure 5-2b the rise time is approximately 1 micro-
second, with a gradual rise and gradual leveling off. Finally Figure 5-2c shows
fall time, which is much slower, roughly 12 microseconds, and therefore no abrupt
changes are evident. Note that the rise-time bandwidth is narrow (roughly 2 MHz).WAVEFORM DECAYEach PAVE PAWS dual polarized element is driven by a Class C (highlynon-linear) amplifier; a second Class C amplifier drives all 64 element amplifiers
in a sub-array; a third Class C amplifier drives all 56 sub-arrays. All of these
amplifiers are ÒonÓ all the time; the radar exciter unit applies the waveform (pulse)to the amplifier driving the sub-arrays. Beam steering is provided by a phaser at

each element module. Class C amplifiers tend to sharpen up transients, so the
exciter buildup and decay times of roughly 1 and 12 microsec (Figures 5.2b and
5.2c) become typically 200 and 1000 nsec for the radiated signal.An examination of Phase IV buildup and decay pairs shows that these timesare roughly equal, about 200 nsec (see Figures 5-6 and 5-11, which are expan-
sions of Figures 3-48e and 3-53e in the AFRL (2003) Phase IV Time-Domain
Waveform Characterization report. In a number of cases, a trailing-edge spike is
larger than the main waveform. All of these are at wide angles from the main
beam, where the sidelobe envelope is much lower. These spikes are probably due
to two factors working together. First, the individual Class C amplifiers do not
turn off alike, due to different resonant circuit Q (ratio of stored energy to dissi-
pated energy), different gain, and other factors. Second, when all element contri-
butions add in phase, the main beam is produced. Sidelobes and nulls are pro-
duced when the element contributions partly cancel, producing sidelobe levels
away from the main beam 30-40 dB down (in power down to 0.001-0.0001 from
1). If amplifiers have typical gain variation of 1 dB or even more, field-strengthlevels well above the steady-state sidelobe level are possible as the elements vari-
ously shut down. This is substantiated by calculations made by Tomlin for the
PPPHSG.1 It should be noted that the discrete delay is not a possible cause here.Signal PropagationThe radar signal power decays as 1/R2 in free space, but multipath signals areusually a problem at UHF. Multipath is caused by diffraction and reflection. For
example, if a hill or slope blocks the direct radar signal, the signal can be re-1Jim Tomlin, Charts and Notes prepared for the PPPHSG, January 6, 2004.  Jim Tomlin is atechnical advisor to the PPPHSG.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSFIGURE 5-2cExciter output pulse fall time (negative direction) taken from RF monitor
example in T.O. 31P6-2FPS115-51, Chapter 6.FIGURE 5-2aEntire exciter waveform pulse (negative direction) taken from RF monitor

example in T.O. 31P6-2FPS115-51, Chapter 6.FIGURE 5-2bExciter output pulse (negative direction) rise time taken from RF monitor

example in T.O. 31P6-2FPS115-51, Chapter 6.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAVE PAWS EXPOSURE CONDITIONS57flected or diffracted by towers, buildings, power lines, or other obstacles and canreach areas that are not line-of-sight from the radar. These multipath signals need
not be in the direction of the observer; they may arrive sideways. Reflected
multipath is provided by many types of metallic structures: metal lighting poles;
fence poles and wire; rebars in concrete; and telephone cable and power wires, to
mention a few. These multipath signals are well known, and can easily disrupt the
1/R2 energy falloff. Almost certainly the anomalous Phase IV measurements aredue to multipath.The question of surface waves has been raised by concerned Cape Cod citi-zens. However, it has been accepted for 50 years that the longitudinal field com-
ponent that may exist at HF, VHF, and UHF is not a surface wave. Sommerfeld in
his classic 1909 work (Sommerfeld 1914) made a sign error, according to Norton
(1937) and others in several papers. There is recent evidence by Collin (2004)
that the original sign was correct, but in either case the earth does not support a
surface wave. The waves are now called Òground wavesÓ; the vertical electricfield tilts just enough to satisfy the lossy boundary conditions in the ground. The
term Òsurface waveÓ has for at least 40 years referred to slow waves, waves withvelocity less than that of light, and usually supported by reactive surfaces. At 435
MHz, ground waves attenuate rapidly. Using sandy soil (epsilon = 10,  = .002 S/m), the radiation is attenuated 40 dB (0.0001 in power, 0.01 in field) over a dis-
tance of 120 m (400 ft) . Outside the safety fence, the ground wave should be too
small to measure. Use of the formulas of BaŒos, as suggested, is not recom-mended. They are excellent for dipoles in earth, or dipoles very close to earth, but
are error prone for separations of a wavelength or more.Although it has been implied that the measured radial fields (radial waves)represent a new and unexpected phenomenon, they are just the result of multipath
and simple geometry. As sketched in Figure 5-3a, the line of sight during the
Phase IV measurements was not horizontal, but was inclined down about 2 de-
grees. Since the electric field at the measurement point is perpendicular to the line
of sight, it can be resolved into a large vertical component and a small horizontal
or longitudinal component. For many points on Cape Cod, the line of sight angle
is larger, leading to a larger longitudinal component. At UHF frequencies
multipath is a well known and serious problem. Metallic structures including
towers, power lines, and rebars in concrete, that are inclined or curved, will con-
vert vertically polarized fields into horizontally polarized fields. Even curved
earth hills can produce polarization conversion. It is difficult if not impossible to
compute the combined multipath effects in a given environment. The multipath
contributions and the horizontal field due to line of sight tilt combine to produce
a longitudinal E field. (See Figure 5-3b taken from 3-92c, and Figure 5-3c taken
from 3-96c of the Phase IV report.) Because this field is parallel to ground, and
the sensor is roughly two wavelengths above it, there are also ground reflection
effects. The derivative sensors used in the measurements have very broad pat-An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSFIGURE 5-3cRadial field amplitude (from 3-96.c of the waveform report).
FIGURE 5-3aVector resolution of PP electric field into vertical and longitudinal
component. NOTE: This figure has been changed since the original prepublication versionto correct an error.FIGURE 5-3bVertical field amplitude (from 3-92.c of the waveform report).
verticalcomponentPP
electric
fieldlongitudinalcomponentarrayAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAVE PAWS EXPOSURE CONDITIONS59terns, and pickup signals from many directions. It would be better physics to callthe field a Òlongitudinal component.ÓTime Delay in Large AntennasIt was suggested by Dr. Albanese2that phased-array radars are different fromother radars due to their discrete time delay. This is one of the key issues relating
to PAVE PAWS effects and it is examined thoroughly here. In the far-field of a
large phased array or reflector antenna, the contributions from all parts of the
antenna arrive at the main beam peak simultaneously (broadside beam for a
phased array). At other angles, there is a differential delay as the energy from the
closest part of the array or reflector arrives first, while that from the farthest part
arrives last. Of course this applies primarily to pulsed signals. For the reflector,
the pattern buildup starts at 90 degrees from the axis due to the currents on the
reflector edge (see Hansen 1987; Hansen and Kramer 1992) and the pattern builds
up slowly and continuously. With a phased array, the pattern builds up slowly but
in a discrete stair-step fashion. Due to the large number of elements, the stair has
many very small steps. As expected, the effect of those small steps does not
appear in the waveform measurement (see Figure 5-6).In the near-field region (distance generally less than 2000 ft), there are de-lays also in forming the main beam. For the phased array, the near-field stair-step
buildup of the waveform is expected to be very close to a continuous buildup. For
a reflector antenna, the near-field buildup is more complex.At angles away from the normal to the face of the array, there is a time delaybetween energy arriving from the closest element and that arriving from the far-
thest element, since all elements are turned on simultaneously. This delay, in
amplitude and phase, has been computed for the PAVE PAWS radar. The active
array is 72.5 feet wide. A worst case scenario is postulated: the beam is scanned
to the farthest left position of 60 degrees azimuth, and to the lowest elevation
position Ð17 degrees (3 degrees above the horizon). The observation point is 60degrees right azimuth, and Ð20 degrees elevation (on the horizon). A computerprogram was written to calculate the waveform buildup. The x-y coordinates of
the 1792 excited elements were provided on a disk by Mitre. Figure 5-4 shows thepositions of the active elements. They are closely spaced around the center but
space tapering is used in the outer portion, to control the sidelobe level.
2 Dr. Albanese presented his theories to the committee in open sessions of committee meetings onseveral occasions and by letter.  A number of causal hypotheses were also presented in a letter to thePPPHSG dated July 30, 2001, and the committee has also evaluated responses to these hypothesesmade by Dr. Robert Adair in a journal commentary (Adair, R. K. 2003.  Environmental Objections tothe PAVE PAWS Radar System: A Scientific Review.  Radiat Res 159:128-134).An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSFIGURE 5-4Positions of the active PAVE PAWS elements.
Using the observation direction, the projected distance from each element tothe first element (center row, right side) is calculated for the 1792 elements. Theprojected distances are calculated using direction cosines, where the polar angle is measured from the normal to the array face, and the azimuth angle  is mea-sured in a horizontal plane from normal to the surface. Since those with the small-
est projected separation contribute first, the array of projected separations is or-
dered in ascending order by a well-known subroutine called HEAPSORT.
Because the excitation phases associated with the main beam position affect the
phase of the buildup, the x and y coordinates are sorted in consonance with the
projected separations. The delay time across the array is roughly 74 nanoseconds;
the delay for the worst case mentioned above is 60 nanoseconds. In order to get a
fine-grain picture of how the elements contribute, the time line is divided into
12,000 steps of roughly 5 picoseconds each. The time stepping starts at 0 at the
right-most reference element and proceeds on. When it has encompassed the next
closest element, the contribution of that element with the appropriate scan phaseAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAVE PAWS EXPOSURE CONDITIONS61and unity amplitude is added in. As the time step proceeds, more and more ele-ments are added until the opposite side of the array is reached. Since the phase
and amplitude are both a result of stair-step contributions, no smoothing or inter-
polation has been used in the plots. Figure 5-5a shows the amplitude buildup for
the extreme case mentioned above.This curve is made of 1790 stair steps, although they are not visible due tothe scale. But a portion of the delay time is expanded in Figure 5-5b, where the
steps are clearly visible.The delays range from 5 psec (or less, as this is the least count) to roughly100 psec. Note that the height of the large steps is roughly 4  10Ð3 times the finalheight, and that is the level of a far-out sidelobe, perhaps 1  10Ð4 times the mainbeam power. So a typical step represents a power step of the order of 4  10Ð7times the main beam power. Figure 5-5c gives the phase buildup; the first step is
an artifact due to the plotting program starting at zero phase. Note that the calcu-
lations were made along one of the four directions (axes) of symmetry, which is a
worst case. If a slightly different azimuth angle had been used, the distance steps
would be less regular, and the buildup would be even smoother. These incremen-
tal delays, as radiation from antenna elements appear, are very much smaller by
comparison to the rise times (less than a factor of a thousand) produced by the TR
modules, as discussed below.Total phase change during buildup is very modest. Thus the phased-arraydelay is expected to produce a negligible effect; the waveform rise time is very
gradual. Buildup is similar to that of a large parabolic dish antenna system.The PAVE PAWS Phase IV measurement program produced data that arerelevant to the effects of time delay, both in arrays, and in reflectors. All of the
graphs presented below are excerpts of the digital data provided to the committee
by AFRL. First, the PP waveform buildup at 60 degrees from the array normal
(from Figure 3-48e of the waveform report) (AFRL 2003) is shown in Figure 5-6.The PP waveform buildup near normal (from Figure 3-46b in the waveformreport) is shown in Figure 5-7. At center frequency of 435 MHz the maximum
delay in Figure 5-6 is 63.8 nsec, or 28 carrier cycles. The time-delay period ex-
tends over roughly one-third of the rise time in Figure 5-6. As expected from the
buildup calculations just discussed, there is no apparent indication in Figure 5-6
that the discrete delay has any effect. Figure 5-7, near normal, incurs negligible
delay; the slight irregularities in amplitude occur equally in both. Before buildup
starts, the data show noise and interference; this probably accounts for the later
small irregularities.The committee notes that the Air Force Phase IV report revisions incorrectlyassume time-delay beam steering, instead of phase beam steering.For comparison Figure 5-8 shows buildup for a single PP element. The enve-lope is smoother, but the pre-buildup noise is smaller than in Figures 5-6 and 5-7.
Similarly, the Phase IV measurements on two PP elements, with an introduced 50
nsec delay, are indistinguishable from those of a single element.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSFIGURE 5-5bPAVE PAWS waveform buildup, expanded scale.
FIGURE 5-5a PAVE PAWS waveform buildup, az = 60 degrees, el = 0 degrees.FIGURE 5-5cPAVE PAWS waveform buildup.  az = 60 degrees, el = 0 degrees.
An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAVE PAWS EXPOSURE CONDITIONS63FIGURE 5-7 Array buildup; near normal to array face.FIGURE 5-6 Array buildup; 60 degrees off normal.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSFrom these data, several conclusions may be drawn. First, none of the buildupor decay plots show anything that can be related to the time delay. Second, thebuildup time is very much longer than the maximum delay time, for both array
and reflector. Third, noise and interference were much worse for the D-dot mea-
surements; all measurements discussed here were made with the TEM horn.
Fourth, these results agree with the buildup calculations of Figures 5-7a and 5-7c,
of the Air Force Phase IV waveform report; the discrete nature of the buildup can
only be glimpsed at the very beginning, when the waveform has very small am-
plitude, and is heavily corrupted by noise and interference.Next, delay in reflector antennas will be examined. Delay occurs in a reflec-tor as a transmitted pulse appears first at the center of the reflector, then spreads
out. The delay period continues until the farthest edge is excited, and the wave
has reached a given angle off-axis (Hansen 1987; Hansen 1992) This delay for
angle  off-axis is:
tDFfD
/cos
/sin.
28Here D is reflector diameter,  is wavelength, F is frequency, and f is focal length.For the SRI dish, D = 150 ft and f/D = 0.42. At center frequency of 435 MHz, andat an angle off-axis of 46 degrees, the maximum time delay is 70 nsec. ThisFIGURE 5-8Single element buildup.
An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAVE PAWS EXPOSURE CONDITIONS65represents roughly 31 carrier cycles. Two transmitters were available for the SRImeasurements. The wideband source had a rise time of 100 nsec; the narrow-
band source had a rise time of 500 nsec. Figure 5-9, wideband data, is extracted
from Figure 3-73c of the waveform report; only a small part of the buildup is
shown.Note the significant noise and interference before start of buildup, and itseffect after buildup. Although the delay is 71 nsec, its effects are not discernable.
Figure 5-10, from Figure 3-63e in the waveform report, shows buildup for the
narrow-band dish.Note that both interference and its effect on the rising waveform are reducedfrom Figure 5-9. It was stated by the measurement team that the interference at
the SRI site was appreciable, and these graphs show this. In comparing Figure
5-6, PAVE PAWS buildup off-axis, with SRI buildup off-axis, the clear conclu-
sion is that in neither can the delay effects be observed.Turning now to the waveform decay, Figure 5-11 (from Figure 3-56b in theAir Force Phase IV wave form report) shows the array at wide angle.Figure 5-12 (from Figure 3-53e in the Air Force Phase IV wave form report)shows the array near normal, where there are negligible time delays. Both show
erratic decay; that at normal to the array face is probably less well behaved. In
both cases the effects of interference are visible. Nothing in Figure 5-10 can be
traced to an array discrete time delay.For the reflector antenna, Figure 5-13 (from Figure 3-76c in the Air ForceFIGURE 5-9Dish buildup; 46 degrees off normal wide band.
An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSFIGURE 5-11Array fall-off; 60 degrees off normal.
FIGURE 5-10Dish buildup; 46 degrees off normal 
Ñ narrow-band.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAVE PAWS EXPOSURE CONDITIONS67FIGURE 5-12Array fall-off; near normal to array face.
FIGURE 5-13 Dish fall-off; 46 degrees off normal.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSPhase IV wave form report) shows the wideband decay. Again the effects ofinterference are apparent during the decay, and after. Note that for this case, the
source rise time is 100 nsec. Again no effects of the reflector delay are visible.
The narrow-band source decay graph is not shown; it decays much more slowly,
due to the 0.5 sec rise time, and the interference is correspondingly reduced.PRECURSORSRadar ElectromagneticsAnother key argument by Dr. Albanese regarding PAVE PAWS was thatprecursors might be formed. If so, their deeper penetration into cellular material
might be a factor to consider in the evaluation of possible health effects. In com-
munications with the committee, Dr. Albanese recommended that the PAVE
PAWS committee take advantage of the extensive technical literature on mea-
surement and calculation of precursors. Accordingly, all available measurements
are discussed; several Annexes are devoted to calculations.The committee has identified the following questions regarding PAVEPAWS, biological tissues, and precursors. These questions are (1) does the radar
radiation produce precursors in biological tissue or equivalent media; (2) does
precursor formation depend upon signal bandwidth; (3) if precursors are pro-
duced, how do they decay with penetration distance? Definitive and reasonable
answers to these questions have been developed, and are discussed below.Central to all of these questions is bandwidth, which is critical here, as it is inall electronic and computer systems. Signal bandwidth is affected by both wave-
form rise time and pulse width. For PAVE PAWS the pulses are long (shortest
pulse is 250 sec); the bandwidth is primarily due to rise time. A continuous-wave (CW) signal may have a rapid rise time (roughly 1/4 of a cycle), but the CW
signal has zero bandwidth. Conversely, phase-modulated signals such as QPSK
may have wide bandwidth, but the signal is always on. It is wide bandwidth that
is of concern for precursor formation.Central to all of these questions are the electrical properties of the materialthe radar signal is traveling through. Precursors occur in anomalous dispersive
media, that is, where there is a decrease in the permittivity (dielectric constant)
with increasing frequency and where one or more absorption bands exist in the
frequency range of the signal. See Annex 5-1 for data on dispersion in biological
tissues.A precursor is a modification of the incident waveform that arrives at a givendepth in the dispersive medium before or during the incident waveform.
Sommerfeld precursors arrive before, and tend to contain frequencies higher than
the signal carrier frequency. Brillouin precursors arrive next, and tend to contain
lower frequencies. In the medium, the incident waveform travels with the group
velocity. The wave front of the Sommerfeld precursor travels with the speed of
light in a vacuum; but this wave front is extremely small. The signal velocity,An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAVE PAWS EXPOSURE CONDITIONS69based on energy transport, is slower. However this signal velocity is larger thanthe group velocity, which is that of the incident waveform, accounting for the
early apperance. In contrast, the Brillouin precursor has a signal velocity below
the group velocity. Phase velocity has no meaning except for a monochromatic
(single frequency) signal (Oughstun and Sherman, 1994).Precursors may exist in a dispersive medium (dielectric constant/permittiv-ity) and/or loss varying with frequency. Whether they are excited depends also
upon the bandwidth of the incident signal. Wideband signals can produce precur-
sors in highly dispersive media. But the variation in material parameters with
frequency over a narrow-band signal does not allow observable precursors to
form. This is substantiated by the Sandia National Laboratory calculations (see
Annex 5-3).The PAVE PAWS instantaneous bandwidth is never more than 5 MHz, al-though the carrier frequency changes as the beam moves between 420 MHz and
450 MHz. Thus this narrow bandwidth will not produce measurable precursors.When precursors are created, the decay is a function of bandwidth of theapplied waveform. Roberts (see Annex 5-3) has shown that a wideband signal
will have significant spectral energy below the frequency of the carrier. Each of
these spectral components decays exponentially in a linear lossy medium; if the
wideband applied waveform has sufficient lower frequency energy, the resulting
precursor will decay more slowly than the exponential decay of the carrier. Be-
cause the spectral components of lower frequencies decay more slowly with pen-
etration distance, the mix (spectrum) changes with distance, resulting in a decay
rate for the Brillouin precursor of approximately 1/R(papers by Oughstun andby Roberts; see Annex 5-3). Note that all examples computed by Oughstun and
colleagues utilize very wideband waveforms, typically bandwidths of 10 to 20
GHz or more, at optical (laser) frequencies. For PAVE PAWS with its very nar-
row bandwidth, the carrier frequency predominates, and all decay in a lossy me-
dia will be exponential at this frequency.Waveform SlopesSlope is the rate at which electric field is changing. Thus it may be measuredin volts/meter per nanosecond. This is not to be confused with rise time, in nano-
seconds, which is independent of field strength. At the September 16, 2003, PAVE
PAWS committee meeting, Dr. Albanese presented charts on phase and slope
estimation. The zero crossings of waveforms were examined to determine slopes.
The slope between adjacent zero crossings changes at rates greater than 1 volt per
meter per nanosecond have been postulated to be biologically significant by some
individuals. However at the zero crossings, the PP signal is approaching zero; Jim
Tomlin has shown in detail3 that noise and interference, although small, can sig-3Jim Tomlin, ÒInterior Delta Slopes and Noise,Ó charts, notes, and attachment prepared for thePPPHSG.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSnificantly change the slopes because in the vicinity of a zero crossing the PPsignal is smaller than the noise. As a result, the slopes and slope changes (delta
slopes) calculated by Dr. Albanese are corrupted by interference. The spatial
variation in Figure 5-14 matches almost exactly the leading edge of the related
Phase IV waveform in Figure 5-15; Figure 5-14 should be volts/meter, as in Fig-
ure 5-15.FIGURE 5-14PAVE PAWS spatial variation at 500 meters.  Used with permission from
Richard Albanese.FIGURE 5-15Leading edge 540 meters from PAVE PAWS.
A similar match occurs in FIGURE 5-16 (vpdd 11173.ed1) and FIGURE 5-17 (Figure 3-106h from the waveform report).An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAVE PAWS EXPOSURE CONDITIONS71FIGURE 5-17Leading edge, 540 meters from PAVE PAWS.
FIGURE 5-16 PAVE PAWS Spatial variation at 500 meters.
An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSThe ÒwigglesÓ in the Phase IV waveform envelopes are caused by interfer-ence, and these same wiggles are added to the PP carrier slope of 2.7 V/m/nsec(for a 1 V/m signal at 425 MHz). Slopes in Figure 5-18 (provided by Dr. Albanese
as figure parl11090.ed1) are shown over a 400 nsec time, representing about 170
carrier cycles. The granularity maximum delay is 60 nsec; the waveform buildup
is completely covered by Figure 5-18 but nothing attributable to the discrete de-
lay is visible.Jim Tomlin, for the PPHSG, has smoothed the waveform data, and has calcu-lated and plotted delta slopes (see Figure 5-19). The upper curve, with right scale,
shows the smoothed (two-point running average) of the noise and interference
derivative for a record segment just prior to the arrival of the indicated PAVE
PAWS pulse. The lower curve, with left scale, shows the delta slopes that would
have been recorded due to this noise and interference had a pure 434.8 MHz non-
phased sine wave signal been present. It is clear that the variations in delta slope
are due to interference. All high-power radiating systems (TV, FM, radars) haveFIGURE 5-18Slope differentials at adjacent zero points.  Used by permission from Rich-
ard Albanese.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAVE PAWS EXPOSURE CONDITIONS73slopes of several V/m/nsec, plus delta slopes induced by interferers. There is noreason to believe that PAVE PAWS effects are different. Tomlin has suggested
additional measurements; the committee concludes the variations are due to in-
terference and that further measurements are not needed.Relation of Waveform Slopes to PrecursersAs part of the committeeÕs information-gathering effort, Dr. Albanese wasasked by the committee what, in his opinion, the relationship was between slope
(V/m/nsec) and precursor formation. He responded that the association was indi-
cated in the paper by Albanese, Penn, and Medina (see Annex 5-3). A careful
reading of this paper shows that Brillouin precursors occur when the medium is
sufficiently dispersive, and when the bandwidth is wide. Their calculations used a
convenient applied field of 1 V/m, and the precursor levels were related to this.
The system is linear; it is clear that a hypothetical applied field of 1 mV/m would
produce a precursor with amplitude 1/1000 of the precursor in the paper. This
paper shows indirectly the association between signal rise time (in nsec) and
precursor formation. Slope (V/m/nsec) is not associated therein. It is important to
distinguish between rise time, in nsec, and slope, in V/m/nsec.Discussion of Extant MeasurementsThe committee has located only three measurements that showed precursors.First, circa 1967, as thesis work at NYU-Bronx; second, circa 1986, at Physics
International; third, calculations and measurements made at the Naval Surface
Warfare Center in the 1990s, but published in 2001. In addition, circa 1990, cal-FIGURE 5-19Smoothed waveform data and delta slope magnitudes vs time.  Used with
permission from Jim Tomlin.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSculations and measurements were made at the University of Michigan but notpublished, and later briefly extracted. Further measurements were made by AFRL-
DED contractors on water, sand, and concrete. The Michigan and AFRL mea-
surements did not show precursors.Pleshko (see Annex 5-2)
Graduate student Peter Pleshko, under the supervision of Professor IstvanPalocz, designed experiments to produce precursors in the microwave region,and took measurements accordingly, all as a Ph.D. project at New York Univer-
sity-Bronx. Their paper describes and discusses the three experiments they de-
signed to demonstrate precursors.Precursors were observed, but in all three experiments the bandwidths werewide: the smallest bandwidth was roughly 500 MHz. Thus, there is minimal rel-
evance to PAVE PAWS.Physics International Report ÒDispersive Pulse PropagationÓ(see Annex 5-2)Physics International (PI) experiments replicated one of the Pleshko experi-ments, using a coaxial test fixture for additional measurements and also open-
tank measurements. Measuring and test equipment for short-pulse wideband were
somewhat primitive (circa 1987) compared with current capabilities. The source
signals were of poor quality: the source pulse had high pre- and post-pulses. The
coaxial test cell was designed for a 50 ohm match with air; the water, salt, and
sugar solutions produced major mismatches resulting in quite apparent ringing.
All of the measurements were wideband, and had frequency spectra centered
above 1000 MHz, where dielectric constant  and conductivity  changes withfrequency are significant. Precursors were observed only in those few wideband
experiments that were designed to create strong dispersion (waveguide and
Goubau line). No discernable precursors were observed in test cell and liquid
tank experiments, even though bandwidths were wide and frequency spectra were
in the region of changing dielectric properties.Stoudt, Peterkin, and Hankla, NSWC report ÒTransient RF and MicrowavePulse Propagation in a Debye Medium (Water)Ó (see Annex 5-2)The measurements utilized a coaxial line test cell filled with re-circulatingdeionized water. Waveforms were wideband; low-frequency precursors were
measured. Agreement with calculated data was excellent. These measurements
used well-designed equipment with realistic media, and were of high quality.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAVE PAWS EXPOSURE CONDITIONS75Mourou and Williamson (see Barrett in Annex 5-2)The paper by Barrett reproduces a small set of the measurements made at theUniversity of Michigan by Mourou and Williamson. The Mourou and Williamsonwork has not been published. Measurements were made using microwave stripline
with beta-alumina dielectric. A wideband waveform at 8 GHz was used, but the
apparatus introduced significant reflections. Nonetheless, no signals that could be
identified as precursors were observed.Farr and Frost, Measurement Notes 49 and 52, AFRL-DED (see Annex 5-2)The purpose of the measurements was determination of dielectric propertiesof water, sand, and concrete. A coaxial transmission line was used, with an im-pulse waveform with spectral content from DC to over 20 GHz. Significant pulse
broadening and attenuation were observed, but no overt precursors appeared.Discussion of CalculationsExtensive calculations have been published by Oughstun and colleagues, in abook and numerous papers (see Annexes 5-3 and 5-5). All of these use wideband
waveforms, typically at laser (infrared) frequencies. Classic precursor waveforms
are produced, but the vital contribution of bandwidth is not discussed.Sandia Report ÒCalculations of Precursor Propagation in DispersiveDielectriesÓ (see Annex 5-3)Bacon calculated propagation of waveforms into pure water at 435 MHz, fortwo bandwidths: 200 MHz, and 10 MHz. The 200 MHz bandwidth waveformsshowed precursors, while the 10 MHz bandwidth waveforms did not. The nar-
row-band signal also showed a slow buildup (and presumably decay). The
wideband waveforms decay at the carrier rate for several meters, then more
slowly. However the band-limited signal decays at the carrier rate at all penetra-
tion distances. PAVE PAWS has band-limiting filters in the exciter units, so these
10 MHz results are expected to represent the radar (see annex 3).
These calculations were buttressed by Roberts, who showed that decayslower than carrier exponential requires significant spectral energy below the car-
rier frequency, i.e., wideband. As mentioned in Radar Electromagnetics, the
spread of spectral energy allows the precursors to decay as 1/Rat distanceswhere the main signal is negligible.Moten and Others (see Annex 5-3)Moten and colleagues calculated that a wideband waveform produces pre-An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWScursors, but stated that narrow band systems would not generate precursors (seeAnnex 5-3).In several papers, Albanese and colleagues calculated precursors, but all forwideband signals. No attempt was made to correlate precursor generation with
either bandwidth, or dispersive characteristics of the medium with frequency.Mokole and Samaddar (see Annex 5-3)Mokole and Samaddar calculated the behavior of a laser pulse (verywideband) propagating into a semi-infinite medium. Strong precursors were pre-dicted.Dvorak (see Annex 5-3)Dvorak, using exotic functions, calculated propagation in a waveguide, thusverifying the prior experimental work of Pleshko.Discussion of AnnexesThe annexes contain a citation and review of each journal paper that appearsrelevant. They are grouped into precursor measurements, precursor calculations,related papers on precursors, pulse propagation in lossy media, and publications
by Professors Oughstun and others.SUMMARYThe PAVE PAWS phased array contains a large number of elements per face(1792), all of which are turned on simultaneously. Bandwidth is very narrow, 5
MHz at most; the signal is heavily filtered to reduce interference. Waveform
buildup is slow (about 200 nsec) due to the signal bandwidth and to the amplifier
characteristics. Waveform slopes, in V/m/nsec, are as expected, except in thevicinity of zero crossings; there, noise and interfering signals control slopes, and
the PAVE PAWS signals are negligible. Radial fields as such are not present; the
longitudinal field components observed were produced by the dipole 20 degree
tilt, and multipath fields.At angles away from the array axis, time delay exists between the signalfrom the closest dipole and the farthest dipole. It is a maximum of about 60 nsec.
Reflector (dish) antennas have a similar delay at wide angles; the same-size array
and reflector have roughly the same delay. For PAVE PAWS the peak delay is
roughly 1/3 of the buildup time. Due to the large number of active elements per
face, and due to the pseudo-random distances from each element to an observer,
the signal buildup is smooth as shown by detailed calculations. In none of the
Phase IV measured data is it possible to discern the delay effects. The committeeÕsAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAVE PAWS EXPOSURE CONDITIONS77conclusion is that narrow-band phased-array radiation is just like narrow-bandreflector radiation.At wide angles from the array axis and from the radar beam, the sidelobelevel is extremely low. This low sidelobe level results from the destructive sum-
mation of 1792 contributions. Turnoff and decay of the Class C amplifiers is
somewhat irregular, which sometimes results in decay transients above the nor-
mal low sidelobe level. Amplitude of these spikes is still much below the allow-
able power density; this, with their short duration, indicates a negligible effect.Precursors are transient signals that may appear before, during, and after thesignal, in a dispersive medium such as water or cells. None propagate faster than
light. Those that have been considered as possibly important have significant
low-frequency spectral energy, that is, important frequency components below
the carrier frequency. There are extensive calculations, and several measurements,
that show that wideband signals produce observable precursors. Typical precur-
sor wide bandwidth is 10,000 MHz, a factor of 2000 times the PAVE PAWS
bandwidth. Each frequency component of the wideband waveform decays expo-
nentially in the medium. After the signal has experienced a large attenuation, the
precursor waveform may decay algebraically. Precursor formation is related to
signal bandwidth (buildup time) but not to signal level (V/m). The criterion of 1
V/m/nsec has no meaning for precursor formation. As discussed under Precur-
sors: Radar Electromagnetics, rise time and bandwidth are independent of field
strength in V/m.For the PAVE PAWS bandwidth no measurable precursors were found in theseveral experiments. All calculations and measurements conclude that narrow-
band phased-array radiation effects are not distinguishable from those of reflector
antennas. This may also be true for wideband phased arrays, but no relevant data
are available.REFERENCESAFRL (Air Force Research Laboratory). 2003. Phase IVÑTime-Domain Waveform CharacterizationMeasurements of the PAVE PAWS Radar. Kirtland Air Force Base, Albuquerque, NM.BaŒos, A. 1966. Dipole Radiation in the Presence of a Conducting Halfspace. New York: PergamonPress.Brillouin, L. 1962. Wave Propagation and Group Velocity. St. Louis, MO: Academic Press.Collin, R.E. 2004. Hertzian dipole radiating over a lossy or sea: Some early and late 20th centurycontroversies. IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine 46:64-79.Hansen, R.C. 1987. Short pulse excitation of reflector antennas. P IEEE 134: 557-559.
Hansen, R.C. and E. Kramer. 1992. Correction to short-pulse excitation of reflector antennas. P IEEE139:119-120.Norton, K.A. 1937. Space and surface waves in radio propagation. Phys Rev 132-133.
Jordan, E.C. and Balmain, K.G. 1968. Electromagnetic Waves and Radiating Systems. Prentice Hall.Oughstun, K.E. and G.C. Sherman. 1994. Electromagnetic Pulse Propagation in Causal Dielectrics,Springer Series on Wave Phenomena, vol. 16. Berlin-Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag.Somerfeld, A. 1914. Above the propagation of light in dispersive media. Ann Physik 44:177-202.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSANNEX 5-1: DISPERSION IN BIOLOGICAL TISSUESIn biological tissues, three distinct dispersion regimes have been defined.The lowest frequency dispersion, referred to as the  dispersion, is very large,and occurs near 10 Hz to 100 Hz, and is believed to be associated with largebiological structures such as cell bodies. The second dispersion (referred to as the
 dispersion) occurs over the range of approximately 100 kHz to 100 MHz. Itreflects the dipolar characteristics of the molecular constituents of the tissue, and
terminates at the permittivity of water (approximately 80 farads/meter). The third
dispersion (), is associated with the relaxation time of water and occurs in thelow GHz range. Correspondingly, in the frequency range of the PAVE PAWS
signal, the dielectric permittivity of biological tissue is very near to that of water,
and the dispersion is very low. While the dispersion (/f) depends on both thespecific tissue and frequency range, dispersions in biological tissues near 500
MHz are in the range of only 1 to 10 farad/meter per 100 MHz. This is a very
small dispersion. Nonetheless, whenever the frequency spectrum of an applied
waveform encompasses a region of anomalous dispersion, precursors may be
formed. If the bandwidth is narrow, and the material parameters change little if at
all over the frequency range of interest, precursors will have negligible ampli-
tude. An examination of the dielectric properties of the white matter of brain
tissue, for example, shows that the permittivity changes at a relatively constant
rate of 0.5 decade of permittivity/decade of frequency, from a value of 10,000 at
10 KHz, to a value of 30 at 1 GHz. The PAVE PAWS instantaneous bandwidth is
never more than 5 MHz, although the carrier frequency changes as the beam
moves between 420 MHz and 450 MHz. Thus this narrow bandwidth signal is not
expected to produce measurable precursors.ANNEX 5-2: PAPERS ON PRECURSOR MEASUREMENTS1.P. Pleshko and I. Palocz, ÒExperimental Observations of Sommerfeld

and Brillouin Precursors in the Microwave Domain,Ó Phys. Rev. Letters, Vol.22, 2 June 1967, 1201-1204Graduate student Peter Pleshko, under the supervision of Professor IstvanPalocz, designed experiments to produce precursors in the microwave region,
and took measurements accordingly, all as a Ph.D. project at New York Univer-
sity-Bronx. This paper describes and discusses the experiments they designed to
demonstrate precursors.The first experiment utilized a coaxial transmission line filled with ferritematerial, which was magnetized by an applied external magnetic field. This simu-
lated the first branch of the dispersion curve. A pulse of sine waves at a carrier
frequency of 625 MHz was applied at one end of a long coax, and the waveform
was observed at the other end. With an applied magnetic field of 100 gauss (earth
field 0.3 to 0.6 gauss), the Brillouin precursor was visible but the main signal wasAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAVE PAWS EXPOSURE CONDITIONS79not. With a 200 gauss field the Brillouin precursor, which looks like one cyclewith a slightly lower frequency than the carrier, was followed by the pulse train.
The precursor amplitude was nearly twice that of the pulse train.The second experiment was aimed at simulating the second branch of thedispersion curve. A waveguide with a cutoff frequency of 4290 MHz was used;
the guide length was 6 ft. A pulser source producing a 100 picosecond single
pulse with fast rise time was used. A Sommerfeld precursor with a frequency of
roughly 15,000 MHz was observed, but the amplitude was small compared to the
main signal; these precursors are of higher frequency.The third experiment was also second branch, and used a Goubau surface-wave transmission line consisting of RG-8 coaxial cable with the outer braid
removed. It was then a wire with a dielectric sheath. Horn feeds were used. Again
the 100 picosecond pulser with 30 picosecond rise time was the source. The
Brillouin (low frequency) precursor was observed; the pulse was not shown.In all three experiments described above the bandwidths were large: in ex-periment one, 350 Mhz or 315%; experiments two and three, 350 MHz. These
large bandwidth[s] are critical, as signals occupying large bandwidth can experi-
ence significant dispersion (dispersion is a change of parameters with frequency),
and have major energy at low frequencies. In spite of the deliberately introduced
large dispersion, the high frequency (Sommerfeld) precursor was very small. The
amplitude of the low frequency (Brillouin) precursor was not compared to the
pulse amplitude. The large precursors calculated for the optical region by
Oughstun did not develop, but the optical bandwidth and dispersion are much
larger, and the wavelength is very much shorter than at microwave frequencies.2.R.R. Smith, Dispersive Pulse Propagation, report PITR 3341, Physics
International Co., prepared for USAFSAM/RZM, Dec. 1988The principal investigator performed three experiments to determine if pre-cursors could be generated by microwave frequencies.The first PI experiment replicated the Goubau surface-wave transmission-line experiment of Pleshko and Palocz. A step-input function was used, with a
rise time of roughly 300 picoseconds. The Brillouin precursor was observed as an
overshoot of roughly 100% with rapid decay. Signal bandwidth was approxi-
mately 6700 MHz.The next experiment simulated muscle tissue in a coaxial test fixture filledwith distilled water. A single-step function with a rise time of roughly 500 pico-
seconds was the applied signal. For the frequency spectrum of the waveform,
roughly 4000 MHz wide, distilled water, if sufficiently pure, has dielectric con-
stant and conductivity similar to those of muscle tissue. The results showed se-
vere waveform distortion and ringing (steps) as illustrated in trace 906D of Fig-
ure 8 of the report. Unfortunately the coaxial line was designed for 50 ohms
impedance (industry standard for test equipment) when air filled. When water orAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSionic solution fills the test cell, the impedance is badly mismatched, resulting inthe serious ringing observed.Another experiment used a pulse generator that supplied a bipolar pulse (apositive pulse followed by a negative pulse), again into distilled water. This pulse
was of poor quality, having itself a small precursor and a small postcursor, along
with a negative pulse much lower in amplitude and wider in time, than the posi-
tive pulse. Results from the test cell showed considerable ringing, no doubt due to
the impedance mismatch, but no evidence of Sommerfeld or Brillouin precursors.
Measurements next used water with 1.4% salt, with the step-function signal
source. Results showed severe waveform distortion but no evidence of precur-
sors. With the bipolar-pulse signal, again results were distorted but no precursors
were present. Use of a sugar/salt mixture with water produced essentially the
same results: distortion but no precursors. Coaxial test fixture measurements were
contaminated by ringing due to impedance mismatch, and by poor quality source
signals. No Sommerfeld or Brillouin precursors were observed.Open-tank measurements used a waveguide as an illuminator, with Set Onewith cut-off at 910 MHz and Set Two with cutoff at 1320 MHz. The signal was
tripolar (Ð,+,Ð) but was of poor quality with ringing. Results did not show anyprecursors for several salt and sugar solutions. Finally, as the signal propagates
into the lossy solution, the higher frequency components are attenuated more, as
expected. The source signal was of very poor quality, and there were internal and
external reflections, resulting in extraneous signals (ringing). No precursors were
observed.Short-pulse, wideband measuring and test equipment was somewhat primi-tive (circa 1987) compared with current capabilities. The source signals were of
poor quality. The coaxial test cell was designed for a 50 ohm match with air; the
water, salt, and sugar solutions produced major mismatches with resulting quite
apparent ringing. These reflections tended to mask the changes in waveform pro-
duced by the medium. All of the measurements were wideband and had frequency
spectra centered above 1000 MHz, where dielectric constant and conductivity ?
changes with frequency are significant. Precursors were observed only in those
few experiments that used wide bandwidth and deliberately created strong dis-
persion (waveguide and Goubau line). No discernible precursors were observed
in test-cell and liquid-tank experiments, even though bandwidths were wide and
frequency spectra were in the area of changing dielectric properties.3.T.W. Barrett, 
ÒEnergy Transfer and Propagation and the Dielectrics ofMaterials: Transient Versus Steady State Effects,Ó Proc. Ultra-wideband Ra-dar Symp., Los Alamos, CRC Press, 1990, 1-20In this paper, the author gives a brief review of the saddle-point approxima-tions used in calculating transient response of dispersive materials. A much morethorough account is given by Oughstun and Sherman. The paper reproduces someAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAVE PAWS EXPOSURE CONDITIONS81of the unpublished measurements made circa 1990 at the Ultrafast Science Labo-ratory of the University of Michigan by Professor Mourou and Dr. Williamson. A
more extensive set of the raw measured data has been made available by Dr.
Whittaker of the University of Michigan. The relevant measurements utilized
strip line with either air or beta-alumina as the dielectric. The frequency was 8
GHz, and waveforms of one to eight cycles were used. Unfortunately, the wave-
form generator and the detector/receiver together produced several significant
reflections (echoes) in the reference air line results. Reflected waveforms ap-
peared at roughly four and eight cycles. Using a length of dielectric of 1 inch,
both single-cycle and eight-cycle incident waveforms showed a distorted wave-
form due to the echoes, but no precursors. With a dielectric length of 4 inches, the
carrier waveform was absent due to attenuation, but the transmitted waveform
did not look like any calculated precursors. In all of these experiments, the band-
widths were large, and extended to frequencies well below the carrier frequency.4.D.C. Stoudt, F.E. Peterkin, and B.J. Hankla, 
ÒTransient RF and Micro-wave Pulse Propagation in a Debye Medium (Water),Ó NSWC reportJPOSTC-CRF-005-03, Dahlgreen, VA, Sept. 2001The test cell was a 1.4 m-long coaxial transmission line with recirculateddeionized water. A tapered dielectric plug matched the 33 ohm line (when filled)to the 50 ohm test equipment. A short was placed at the far end of the line, so that
the signal would be reflected. At the feed end, a tee junction separated out the
return signal. Round trip delay was 82 nanoseconds. Equipment included a
Gigatronics 7100 signal generator and an HP 54720A Digitizing Oscilloscope.A 10-cycle pulse at 1 GHz was the test signal. This signal showed two smallamplitude residual cycles at the end of the signal, but the input signal quality was
good. The output signal, after 2.76 m of water travel, showed only two precur-
sors, no main signal. The fore and aft precursors were of opposite polarity, and
closely matched the calculated values. A 10.5-cycle 1 GHz waveform showed
similar results, and again agreed with calculations. In this case, because of the
half cycle, both precursors are of the same polarity.Two 6-cycle 400 MHz waveforms were used as exciters. The square-wavemodulated pulse, after 2.76  m of water, showed precursor amplitude roughly
twice the main signal amplitude. Again, calculations and measurements agree
very closely. It is worth noting that the calculations for this waveform after 1.5 m
of water showed only very slight precursor effects. Trapezoidal modulations of
the 10 cycles of carrier were also tested. Only small precursor effects appeared
after 2.76 m of water.These measurements were carefully designed and conducted, with attentionpaid to impedance matching, use of time delays to separate input and output sig-
nals, and data recording. Thus these are the definitive measurements utilizing
representative media.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWS5. E.G. Farr and C.A. Frost, ÒTime Domain Measurement of the DielectricProperties of Water in a Coaxial Test Fixture,Ó Measurement Notes 49, Dec.1996; ÒImpulse Propagation Measurements of the Dielectric Properties ofWater, Dry Sand, Moist Sand and Concrete, ÒMeasurement Notes 52, AFRLDirected Energy Directorate, Albuquerque, NM.An oversized coaxial transmission line, with the sample occupying part ofthe line length, was used. The signal was a wideband impulse (short pulse), withmajor spectral energy from DC to over 10 GHz. The line was used in both the
transmission and the reflection modes. Unfortunately, the line was matched with
air for 50 ohms, which produced significant mismatch at the sample interfaces.
Thus, the results were contaminated with significant ringing. In passing through
the distilled water sample, the impulse waveform was significantly attenuated
and broadened. The resulting waveforms did not show any of the typical oscilla-
tions commonly seen in precursor waveforms. Although the time domain instru-
mentation was up to date and of high quality, the results were degraded by the
design of the coaxial test chamber.ANNEX 5-3: PAPERS ON PRECURSOR CALCULATIONS1.L. Brillouin, 
Wave Propagation and Group Velocity, Academic Press, 1960This most interesting, but hard to find, book is a retrospective of the work bySommerfeld and Brillouin on wave velocities and precursors. A translation (from
German) of the classic 1914 paper by Sommerfeld is included, along with a trans-
lation (from French) of the classic 1914 paper by Brillouin; both concern propa-
gation in dispersive media and saddle-point asymptotics. In the other chapters,
Brillouin discusses several waveform velocities: group velocity, signal velocity,
and energy-transfer velocity. His calculations of precursors are less useful, due to
errors, as observed by Oughstun and others. Both Sommerfeld and Brillouin used
the term ÒforerunnersÓ rather than precursors; use of ÒprecursorsÓ apparentlyfound favor relatively recently.2.K.E. Oughstun and G.C. Sherman, 
Electromagnetic Pulse Propagationin Causal Dielectric, Springer, 1997This treatise shows in detail the difficulties in obtaining approximate solu-tions to wave propagation in dispersive media. Crudely, the signal is representedin the complex phase plane by a pole, and the precursors by branch points. Elabo-
rate asymptotics are used to obtain the propagated waveforms. Unfortunately (for
PAVE PAWS relevancy), all calculations are at infrared wavelengths, where the
frequency is roughly 10,000,000 times higher than that of PAVE PAWS. All
waveforms are either single cycle or a few cycles. For these very wideband sig-
nals, precursor formation is calculated. Further, the work is mathematically ori-
ented, and has little physics interpretation. In particular, there is no discussion of
the crucial effect of bandwidth.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAVE PAWS EXPOSURE CONDITIONS83Oughstun and colleagues have published many informative papers; almostall concern laser (IR) waveforms. Even their papers in Radio Science are on opti-cal (IR) waveforms.3.T.M. Roberts, 
ÒRadiated Pulses Decay Exponentially in Materials in theFar Fields of Antennas,Ó Electronics Ltrs., Vol. 38, 4 July 2002, 679-680This salient paper shows that low-frequency spectral components of a wave-form can produce a decay rate in dispersive material that is lower than that of thecarrier frequency. In a linear medium, and at low power levels, tissue is linear and
all spectral components decay exponentially. See also:4.T.M. Roberts and P.G. Petropoulos, 
ÒAsymptotics and Energy Estimatesfor Electromagnetic Pulses in Dispersive Media,Ó J. Opt. Soc. Amer. A, Vol.13, June 1996, 1204-1217 and 
ÒAddendum,Ó J. Opt. Soc. Amer. A, Vol. 16,1999, 2799-2800
5.T.M. Roberts, 
ÒMeasured and Predicted Behavior of Pulses in Debye-and Lorenz-Type Materials.Ó Trans. IEEE AP-52 Jan. 2004. 310-314.Asymptotic calculations are shown to validate precursor measurements madeusing liquid-filled coax cables by AFRL contractors (see Annex 2). Results showalgebraic decay after significant attenuation has occurred. Signal bandwidth was
approximately 10 GHz; the widest PAVE PAWS bandwidth is 5 MHz, or 2000
times smaller. PAVE PAWS precursors will be too small to be measurable.6.L.D. Bacon, 
ÒCalculations of Precursor Propagation in DispersiveDielectries,Ó SAND 2003-3040, Aug. 2003, Sandia National LaboratoriesDr. Larry Bacon of Sandia National Laboratories has calculated waveformpropagation in lossy dispersive media. These cases utilized a carrier frequency of435 MHz, which is in the middle of the PAVE PAWS band. Pure water was the
medium. He used a narrow-band (1 microsecond) pulse train, and a wideband (10nanosecond) pulse train. Note that the narrow-band pulse has about the same
bandwidth as the widest PAVE PAWS waveform. Each pulse train was utilized
without, and with, a filter. The 1 microsecond waveform used a 10 MHz wide
filter, while the 10 nanosecond waveform used a 200 MHz wide filter. The two
filter bandwidths are shown in Figure 5-A3.1.The wideband unfiltered waveform displayed at 1meter depth in the mediuma precursor, small compared to the main signal; at 5-meter depth, the precursor
was larger than the signal but very small compared to the signal at 1 meter. When
the wideband filter was applied, no precursors were visible.The narrow-band unfiltered waveform displayed at 1-meter depth in the me-dium a very small precursor; at 5-meter depth the precursor was again larger than
the signal but very small compared to that at 1 meter. With the filter applied,An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSFIGURE 5-A3.110 MHz (dotted) and 200 MHz (solid) bandpass filter frequency re-
sponses.which represents the PAVE PAWS radar, a slow buildup was observed at alldepths, as seen in Figure 5-A3.2. No precursors were evident. However, at great
depth in the medium, a precursor is visible but its amplitude is below the incident
amplitude by a factor of roughly 100 million. Such small values are way below
the natural noise level, hence are not measurable. Because of the narrow band-
width of the 1 microsecond waveform, all spectral (Fourier) components decay
essentially exponentially, producing the classic Òskin depth.ÓFigure 5-A3.3 shows waveform decay over a 20-meter depth; this waveformdecays exponentially just like all narrow-band waveforms. Exponential decay is
linear on a logarithmic scale (decibels).In summary, wideband waveforms do produce observable precursors.Narrowband waveforms, such as those of PAVE PAWS, do not produce measur-
able precursors.7.D.C. Stoudt, F.E. Peterkin, and B.J. Hankla, 
ÒTransient RF and Micro-wave Pulse Propagation in a Debye Medium (Water),Ó NSWC report JPSTCCRF-005-03, Dahlgren, VA, Sept. 2001This work concerns frequencies below 2 GHz, where water shows a nearlyconstant permittivity but a varying conductivity with frequency. Accordingly,group and signal velocity dispersion can be neglected, and the Debye dispersion
model is adequate. The propagation of waveform is analyzed using Fourier Trans-An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAVE PAWS EXPOSURE CONDITIONS85FIGURE 5-A3.2Leading edge of 1 
sec signal at various depths; baselines are offset forclarity.FIGURE 5-A3.3  Energy decay of 1 sec signal, with 10 MHz filtering.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSforms; the resulting frequency spectra are propagated through the lossy media,then inverse transformed into a waveform. Waveforms used include an ideal 10-
cycle, 1 GHz pulse, a 6-cycle, 400 MHz pulse, and these two with a more practi-
cal trapezoidal envelope on the 1 GHz waveform. These calculations agree with
those of Albanese (see reference 13, this section).For the square-wave modulated 1 GHz signal, at a depth of 75 cm (2.5 ft.),the fore and aft precursors are much larger than the main 10-cycle waveform. At
the much shorter depths representative of humans, the waveform would be much
larger than the precursor. When the modulation is trapezoidal, the precursors are
only slightly larger than the main signal, at the same 75 cm depth. Bandwidth of
both signals is roughly 200 MHz. For depths so large that the main signal has
disappeared due to strong attenuation, the precursor decays approximately as1/R, thus validating the one-term series approximation of Oughstun.The 6-cycle, 400 MHz signal, with ideal square-wave modulation (instantturn on), shows only a precursor slightly larger than the main signal, at a depth of
1.5 m (4.9 ft). Bandwidth is roughly 130 MHz.These calculations show that for 400 MHz, even with the large bandwidthassociated with the 6-cycle waveform, precursors are negligible at the limited
tissue depth available in humans.8.K. Moten, C.H. Durney, and T.G. Stockham, 
ÒElectromagnetic PulsePropagation in Dispersive Planar Dielectrics,Ó Bioelectromagnetics, Vol. 10,1989, 35-49This paper investigates a plane-wave pulse-train incident on a lossy disper-sive slab, using Fast Fourier Transform techniques. Calculations show thatwideband pulses can produce significant precursors. However, Òthe narrower thebandwidth of the pulse train, the less the difference between the pulse response
and CW response.Ó And, Òonly very broadband pulsed systems could be expectedto produce results that differ significantly from those of CW systems.Ó Pulsepenetration depends on the dispersive nature of the dielectric medium and the
Fourier coefficients (bandwidth) of the waveform.9.R. Albanese, J. Penn, and R. Medina, 
ÒUltrashort Pulse Response inNonlinear Dispersive Media,Ó in Ultra-Wideband, Short-PulseElectromagnetics, H.L. Bertoni, L. Carin, and L.B. Felsen, Eds., Plenum,1993, 259-265
see also:
10.R. Albanese, J. Penn, and R. Medina, 
ÒShort-Rise-Time MicrowavePulse Propagation through Dispersive Biological Media,Ó J. Opt. Soc. Amer.A, Vol. 6, Sept. 1989, 1441-1446These papers use Fourier series (of the waveform) as an analysis tool. TheirAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAVE PAWS EXPOSURE CONDITIONS87calculations used a waveform with 10 carrier cycles with a carrier frequency of 1GHz. The waveform buildup was instantaneous; the envelope was a square wave.
At 1.5 m distance the rise time affected the precursor amplitude, with longer rise
time reducing the amplitude. However, at this distance the main signal is very
small and the precursors are also small.11.R. Albanese, J. Blaschak, R. Medina, and J. Penn, 
ÒUltrashort Electro-magnetic Signals: Biophysical Questions, Safety Issues, and Medical Oppor-tunities,Ó Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine, May 1994, A116-A120This paper shows a 1 nanosecond wideband pulse of 10 carrier cycles, carrierfrequency 10 GHz. Both Sommerfeld- and Brillouin-calculated precursors ap-
pear after propagating 1 cm in pure water. Also shows precursors produced by
laser (IR) radiation. Possible cellular effects of very high electric fields (hundreds
or thousands of kW/m) are discussed.12.R.A. Albanese, 
ÒAn Electromagnetic Inverse Problem in Medical Sci-ence,Ó Chapter 2 of Invariant Imbedding and Inverse Problems, SIAM, 1992.30-41Using a square-wave modulation containing 5 carrier cycles, with a 3 GHzcarrier frequency, a waveform with Brillouin precursors was calculated at 10 cm.depth. With no noise, partial results were obtained, but with very weak added
noise there were no results.13.R.A. Albanese, R.L. Medina, and J.W. Penn, 
ÒMathematics, Medicine,and Microwaves,Ó Inverse Problems, Vol. 10, 1994, 995-1007This paper shows a 1 nanosecond wideband pulse of 10 carrier cycles, carrierfrequency 10 GHz. Both Sommerfeld-and Brillouin-calculated precursors appearafter propagating 1 cm in pure water. Most of the paper concerns the inverse
problem: given the response, find the dielectric and loss properties of the mate-
rial.14.E.L. Mokole and S.N. Samaddar, 
ÒTransmission and Reflection of Nor-mally Incident, Pulsed Electromagnetic Plane Waves upon a Lorentz Half-Space,Ó J. Opt. Soc. Amer. B, Vol. 16, May 1999, 812-831Both reflected and transmitted fields are calculated for a semi-infinite me-dium; the incident waveform is a single laser pulse at IR (frequency ~2 THz). As
expected, this extremely wideband waveform produces strong Sommerfeld pre-
cursors.15.S.L. Dvorak, 
ÒExact, Closed-Form Expressions for Transient Fields inHomogeneously Filled Waveguides,Ó Trans. IEEE, Vol. MTT-42, Nov. 1984.2164-2170An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSsee also:16. S.L. Dvorak and D.G. Dudley, ÒPropagation of Ultra-Wide-Band Elec-tromagnetic Pulses through Dispersive Media,Ó Trans. IEEE, Vol. EMC-37,May 1995, 192-200Using the Incomplete Lipschitz-Hankel Integrals (ILHI), waveform propa-gation in a waveguide is studied. Waveguides provide dispersion. The waveformused is a single cycle of a sine wave. Calculations show significant precursors;
the waveform bandwidth is very wide. Prior experimental work of Pleshko is not
mentioned, but the precursor increases in frequency as it propagates, just as mea-
sured by Pleshko.ANNEX 5-4: RELATED PAPERS ON PRECURSORS1.Albanese, R.A. and E.L. Bell, 
Radiofrequency Radiation and Living Tis-sue: Theoretical Studies, report SAM-TR-79-41, Dec. 1979This interim report models possible interactions of RF energy and cells. Nodistinction is made between thermal effects and pulsed effects.2.Albanese, R.A. and E.L. Bell, 
ÒRadiofrequency Radiation and ChemicalReaction Dynamics,Ó in Nonlinear Electrodynamics in Biological Systems,W. R. Adey and A. F. Lawrence, Eds., Plenum, 1984, 277-285Treated in this paper are high field strengths (100 to 2000 V/m) where themedia are non-linear. There is no relevance to PAVE PAWS, where the fieldstrengths are low, and the media are linear.3.Albanese, R.A., R. Medina, and J. Penn, 
ÒMathematics and Electromag-netic Theory,Ó unpublished and undated paper, circa 2001The statement Òfrequency dependence in the frequency domain implies localtissue memory in the time domainÓ is too general to have meaning. Certainly,frequency spectrum and time waveform are related. But this does not necessarilyimply tissue memory. The entire paper is not concerned with pulses.4.Papazoglou, T.M., 
ÒTransmission of a Transient Electromagnetic PlaneWave into a Lossy Half-Space,Ó J. Appl. Phys., Vol. 46, Aug. 1975, 3333-3341see also:
5.Dudley, D.G., T.M. Papazoglou, and R.C. White, 
ÒOn the Interaction ofa Transient Electromagnetic Plane Wave and a Lossy Half-Space,Ó J. Appl.Phys., Vol. 45, March 1974, 1171-1175Propagation of a single Gaussian type pulse (slow rise time and fall time)into a lossy medium is considered. One case of interest uses a lossy and disper-An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAVE PAWS EXPOSURE CONDITIONS89sive medium (earth). Waveforms with and without dispersion are very much thesame, probably due to the narrow bandwidth of the incident pulse. No precursors
were evident.
6.Devaney, A.J., 
ÒLinearized Inverse Scattering in Attenuating Media,ÓInverse Problems, Vol. 3, 1987. 389-397Dr. Devaney has extended this work to dispersive media, but it has not beenpublished. The aim was to see if precursors could help in the inverse problem.
Note, the inverse problem is: given the response, find the details of the scatterer
or the details of the medium.Pulse Propagation in Lossy MediaResearchers from Harvard have published papers on pulse propagation in seawater, a highly lossy medium. Single pulses and a pulse of carrier oscillations
have been considered. These papers utilize a dipole as source, unlike the plane-
wave source of Oughstun and colleagues. The dipole near-field greatly compli-
cates the analysis. The papers show that the rise and fall times each produce a
transient, with the carrier oscillations in between. When the rise and fall times are
slow, two things occur. First, the lower frequencies in the transient allow them to
decay more slowly than does the carrier. So after some distance, the carrier may
be smaller than the transient waveform. These are probably not precursors in the
Brillouin sense. Second, the amplitude of the transient is reduced by f2rs/(f2 + f2rs),where f is the carrier frequency and frs is the principal frequency of the rise time.Thus, if the rise time equals 20 carrier cycles, the rise-time transient amplitude is
reduced by 0.0025, or 52 dB.1.King, R.W.P. and T.T. Wu, 
ÒThe Propagation of a Radar Pulse in SeaWater,Ó J. Appl. Phys., Vol. 73, 15 Feb. 1993, 1581-1590see also:
2.King, R.W.P. and T.T. Wu, Erratum: 
ÒThe Propagation of a RadarPulse in Sea Water,Ó J. Appl. Phys., Vol. 77, 1 April 1995, 3586-36873.King, R.W.P., 
ÒThe Propagation of a Gaussian Pulse in Sea Water andIts Application to Remote Sensing,Ó Trans. IEEE, Vol. GRS-31, May 1993,595-605
4.King, R.W.P., 
ÒPropagation of a Low-Frequency Rectangular Pulse inSeawater,Ó Radio Science, Vol. 28, May-June 1993, 299-3075.Margetis, D.,  
ÒPulse Propagation in Sea Water,Ó J. Appl. Phys., Vol. 77,1 April 1995, 2884-2888An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWS6.Margetis, D., 
ÒPulse Propagation in Sea Water: The Modulated Pulse,ÓProgress in Electromagnetics Research, Vol. 26, 2000, 89-110The prediction by Song and Chen that early arrival and late arrival parts of awaveform in lossy media decay algebraically (as 1/R3 or 1/R5) has been shown tobe incorrect by Margetis and King:7.Song, J. and K-M Chen, 
ÒPropagation of EM Pulses Excited by an Elec-tric Dipole in a Conducting Medium,Ó Trans. IEEE, Vol. AP-41, 1993, 1414-1421
8.Margetis, D. and R.W.P. King, 
ÒComments on ÔPropagation of EMPulses Excited by an Electric Dipole in a Conducting Medium,ÕÓ Trans.IEEE, Vol. AP-43, Jan 1995, 119-1209.Wait, J.R., 
ÒElectromagnetic Fields of Sources in Lossy Media,Ó Chap-ter 24 in Antenna Theory, Part II, R.E. Collin and F.J. Zucker, Eds., McGraw-Hill, 1969This paper treats single-pulse propagation in lossy (non-dispersive) media.Extensive references are provided.ANNEX 5-5:PAPERS BY PROFESSOR OUGHSTUN AND COLLEAGUESThese papers are concerned with wideband optical (laser) short pulses inmedia that are lossy and dispersive. No discussions of the effects of waveformbandwidth are given. These papers are listed because they are often cited for
PAVE PAWS. However the very narrow-band nature of the PAVE PAWS signal
makes all of these papers irrelevant to the PAVE PAWS problem. And the laser
frequency is roughly 10,000,000 times higher than that of PAVE PAWS.1.Oughstun, K.E. and G.C. Sherman, 
ÒPropagation of ElectromagneticPulses in a Linear Dispersive Medium with Absorption (the Lorentz Me-dium),Ó J. Opt. Soc. of Am. B, Vol. 5, April 1988, 817-8492.Oughstun, K.E. and S. Shen, 
ÒVelocity of Energy Transport for a TimeHarmonic Field in a Multiple-Resonance Lorentz Medium,Ó J. Opt. Soc. ofAm. B, Vol. 5, Nov. 1988, 2395-23983.Shen, S. and K.E. Oughstun, 
ÒDispersive Pulse Propagation in a Double-Resonance Lorentz Medium,Ó J. Opt. Soc. of Am. B, Vol. 6, May 1989, 948-963An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAVE PAWS EXPOSURE CONDITIONS914.Wyns, P., D.P. Foty, and K.E. Oughstun, 
ÒNumerical Analysis of thePrecursor Fields in Linear Dispersive Pulse Propagation,Ó J. Opt. Soc. ofAm. A, Vol. 6, Sept. 1989, 1421-14295.Oughstun, K.E. and J.E.K. Laurens, 
ÒAsymptotic Description of Ul-trashort Electromagnetic Pulse Propagation in a Linear, Causally Disper-sive Medium,Ó Radio Science, Vol. 26, Jan.-Feb. 1991, 245-2586.Oughstun, K.E., 
ÒPulse Propagation in a Linear, Causally DispersiveMedium,Ó Proc. IEEE, Vol. 79, Oct. 1991, 1379-13907.Oughstun, K.E. and J.E.K. Laurens, 
ÒAsymptotic Description of Elec-tromagnetic Pulse Propagation in a Linear Dispersive Medium,Ó in Ultra-Wideband, Short-Pulse Electromagnetics, H. Bertoni et al,. Eds., PlenumPress, 1993, 223-2408.Balictsis, C.M. and K.E. Oughstun, 
ÒUniform Asymptotic Description ofUltrashort Gaussian Pulse Propagation in a Causal, Dispersive Dielectric,ÓPhys. Rev. E, Vol. 47, 1993, 3645-36699.Balictsis, C.M. and K.E. Oughstun, 
ÒUniform Asymptotic Description ofGaussian Pulse Propagation of Arbitrary Initial Pulse Width in a Linear,Causally Dispersive Medium,Ó in Ultra-Wideband, Short-PulseElectromagnetics 2, L. Carin and L.B. Felsen, Eds., Plenum Press, 1994, 273-28310.Smith, P.D. and K.E. Oughstun, 
ÒElectromagnetic Energy Dissipationof Ultrawideband Plane Wave Pulses, in a Causal, Dispersive Dielectric,Ó inUltra-Wideband, Short-Pulse Electromagnetics 2, L. Carin and L.B. Felsen,Eds., Plenum Press, 1994, 285-295
11.Oughstun, K.E., 
ÒTransient in Chiral Media with Single Resonance Dis-persion: Comments, Jour. Opt. Soc. of Am. A, Vol. 12, 1995, 626-62812.Sherman, G.C. and K.E. Oughstun, 
ÒEnergy-Velocity Description ofPulse Propagation in Absorbing, Dispersive Dielectrics,Ó J. Opt. Soc. of Am.B, Vol. 12 Feb. 1995, 229-24713.Oughstun, K.E., 
ÒDynamical Structure of the Precursor Fields in LinearDispersive Pulse Propagation in Lossy Dielectrics,Ó in Ultra-Wideband, Short-Pulse Electromagnetics 2, L. Carin and L.B. Felsen, Eds., Plenum Press, 1995,257-272An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWS14.Oughstun, K.E., 
ÒNoninstantaneous, Finite Rise-Time Effects on the Pre-cursor Field Formation in Linear Dispersive Pulse Propagation,Ó J. Opt. Soc.of Am. A, Vol. 12, Aug. 1995, 1715-172915.Marozas, J.A. and K.E. Oughstun, 
ÒElectromagnetic Pulse PropagationAcross a Planar Interface Separating Two Lossy, Dispersive Dielectrics,Ó inUltra-Wideband, Short-Pulse Electromagnetics 3, C. Baum, L. Carin, and A.P. Stone, Eds., Plenum Press, 1996, 217-23016.Oughstun, K.E. and C.M. Balictsis, 
ÒGaussian Pulse Propagation in aDispersive, Absorbing Dielectric, ÒPhys. Rev Ltrs., Vol. 77, 9 Sept. 1996, 2210-2213
17.Oughstun, K.E. and Hong Xiao, 
ÒFailure of the QuasimonochromaticApproximation for Ultrashort Pulse Propagation in a Dispersive, AttenuativeMedium,Ó Phys. Rev. Ltrs., Vol. 78, 27 Jan. 1997, 642-64518.Balictsis, C.M. and K.E. Oughstun, 
ÒGeneralized Asymptotic Descrip-tion of the Propagated Field Dynamics in Gaussian Pulse Propagation in a
Linear, Causally Dispersive Medium,Ó Phys. Rev. Ltrs. E, Vol. 55, Feb 1997,1910-192119.Xiao, H. and K.E. Oughstun, 
ÒHybrid Numerical-Asymptotic Code forDispersive Pulse Propagation Calculations, Jour. Optical Society of AmericaA, Vol. 15, 1998, 1256-126720.Solhaug, J.A., K.E. Oughstun, J.J. Stamnes, and P.D. Smith, 
ÒUniformAsymptotic Description of the Brillouin Precursor in a Lorentz Model Di-electric,Ó Jour. European Opt. Soc. A., Pure and Applied Optics, Vol. 7, 1998,575-60221.Oughstun, K.E., 
ÒThe Angular Spectrum Representation and theSherman Expansion of Pulsed Electromagnetic Beam Fields in Dispersive,Attenuative Media,
Ó Jour. European Opt. Soc. A., Pure and Applied Optics,Vol. 7, 1998, 1059-107822.Solhau, J.A., J.J. Stamnes, and K.E. Oughstun, 
ÒDiffraction of Electro-magnetic Pulses in a Single-Resonance Lorentz Model Dielectric,Ó Jour. Eu-ropean Optical Soc. A., Pure and Applied Optics, Vol. 7, 1998, 1079-1101
23.Smith, P.D. and K.E. Oughstun, 
ÒElectromagnetic Energy Dissipationand Propagation of an Ultrawideband Plane Wave Pulse in a Causally Dis-persive Dielectric,Ó Radio Science, Vol. 33, 1998, 1489-1504An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAVE PAWS EXPOSURE CONDITIONS9324.Xiao, H. and K.E. Oughstun, 
ÒFailure of the Group-Velocity Descrip-tion for Ultrawideband Pulse Propagation in a Causally Dispersive, Absorp-tive Dielectric,Ó J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, Vol. 16, Oct. 1999, 1773-178525.Laurens, J.E.K. and K.E. Oughstun, 
ÒElectromagnetic ImpulseResponse of Triply-Distilled Water,Ó Ultra-Wideband, Short-PulseElectromagnetics 4,Ó Heyman et al,. Eds., Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publ.,1999, 243-26426.Smith, P.D. and K.E. Oughstun, 
ÒUltrawideband Electromagnetic PulsePropagation in Triply Distilled Water,Ó Ultra-Wideband, Short-PulseElectromagnetics 4,Ó Heyman et al, Eds., Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publ.,1999, 265-276
27.Oughstun, K.E. and H. Xiao, 
ÒInfluence of Precursor Fields on Ul-trashort Pulse Autocorrelation Measurements and Pulse Width Evolution,ÓOptics Express, Vol. 8, 9 April 2001, 481-49128.Oughstun, K.E. and H. Xiao, 
ÒInfluence of the Precursor Fields onUltrashort Pulse Measurements,Ó in Ultra-Wideband, Short-PulseElectromagnetics 5, P.D. Smith and S.R. Cloude, Eds., Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publ., 2002, 569-576
29.Oughstun, K.E. 
ÒAsymptotic Description of Ultrawideband, UltrashortPulsed Electromagnetic Beam Field Propagation in a Dispersive, AttenuativeMedium,Ó in Ultra-Wideband, Short-Pulse Electromagnetics 5, P.D. Smith andS.R. Cloude, Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publi, 2002, 687-696An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.946Evidence of Biological Effects of
RF Exposure Relevant to
PAVE PAWS Radar System
INTRODUCTIONBiological studies to determine the plausibility of an environmental exposurehaving either detrimental or beneficial consequences take many forms. However,the primary goal in most of these studies is to establish a reproducible biologicaleffect from the exposure under well-controlled conditions. Such studies utilize
animal cell cultures and embryo cultures, as well as plant-growth cultures and
field studies. Exposure conditions for these studies may represent those that hu-
man populations might be exposed to, or alternatively those that are expected to
produce an observable biological effect in a reasonable period of time. For ex-
ample, it is common research practice to use exposure levels that are much higher
than those encountered in the environment to obtain a rapid and robust experi-
mental effect. Such studies may lead to subsequent investigations of possible
human health effects in animal systems or epidemiological studies. Cell-culture
experiments are easy to reproduce, but the behavior of cells in culture is never
exactly the same as within an organism due to the fact that cells have been iso-
lated from their usual environment, which includes contact with a variety of other
cell types, exposure to intercellular factors, and a tissue architecture. In vitroexperiments, therefore, can be, in comparison to whole organism in vivo experi-ments, sometimes more and sometimes less likely to demonstrate a response to an
environmental exposure. Cell-culture experiments are also of limited value if one
wants to undertake very long-term exposure experiments (months to years). Em-
bryonic development studies can provide greater insight into potential health ef-
fects; however, there are a limited number of established embryo models that
provide well-accepted, quantifiable endpoints for study. Plant growth studies per-An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF RF EXPOSURE RELEVANT TO PAVE PAWS95mit very long-term exposures to be studied under well-controlled conditions, butare only remotely connected to potential human health issues.Tremendous advances in our understanding of biological systems have oc-curred over the 25 years since the previous review of in vitro studies of RF expo-sure effects, which was a part of the 1979 NRC review of the PAVE PAWS
installation (NRC 1979). Those advances have had profound effects on our un-
derstanding of biology, greatly enabling the scientific community in its efforts to
determine if and how the RF radiation generated by the PAVE PAWS system
could influence biological systems. Our ability to design experiments and collect
data from culture studies has been enhanced as a result of numerous technical
advances, as well as significant advances in modeling the inherent complexity of
biological systems, which provides a theoretical foundation for interpreting data
from such experiments.At the time of the initial NRC PAVE PAWS report (1979), cell/tissue-cul-ture techniques were well-developed approaches but their analysis involved pre-
dominantly simple biochemical assays and single-molecule detection approaches.
Protein biochemistry was also a developed field, but few specific signal-trans-
duction pathways had been identified in cells. The techniques of molecular biol-
ogy were only in the early stages of development. Today, three-dimensional tis-
sue-culture systems are being developed to permit the study of differentiating cell
systems in a native tissue architecture, and polymerase chain reaction technology
permits DNA amplification from samples as small as a single cell. Differential
display techniques and cDNA microarray approaches permit studies of gene ex-
pression of large numbers of genes at one time, and high performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC), mass spectroscopy of Òprotein chips,Ó and yeast two-
hybrid systems permit studies of protein distributions, protein dynamics, and pro-
tein-protein interactions. Similarly, developments in microscopic techniques
(such as atomic force, confocal fluorescent, real-time fluorescent, and microman-
ipulation techniques [laser capture microscopy] have significantly advanced our
abilities to undertake studies of processes such as cell dynamics and intra- and
inter-cellular interactions.Of equal importance has been the development of computational approachesfor modeling biological systems and responses based on concepts from complex-
ity theory. Fuzzy logic, neural-network analysis, genetic algorithms, and cluster-
ing techniques are modern bioinformatic tools that permit the large datasets ob-
tained by molecular biological techniques to be analyzed. These new approaches
are tools that allow scientists to understand how complex systems (i.e. systems
with many highly interactive components) are influenced by alterations to their
environment. The computational modeling of biological processes, therefore, may
help us to predict under which situations perturbations in the environment may
influence biological systems. Whereas all complex systems are robustly stable to
acute environmental insult, even slight perturbations in the environment can in-
fluence the self-organization of such systems if imposed for a sufficient period ofAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWStime. All cells and organisms are potentially sensitive to fluctuations in the envi-ronment; however, the influence of a specific environmental perturbation on cells
and organisms may not necessarily be observed in studies of a single model, but
could require that a class of models be used to capture the potential set of out-
comes of a given environmental perturbation. Application of these concepts to
the review of biological studies of RF exposure suggests that studies that focus on
the self-organization in a system (e.g., differentiation and development) and in-
volve long-term exposures may eventually be best positioned to identify the in-
fluence of an environmental perturbation.In order to provide a maximal representation of different cells, tissues, andÒgeneralÓ experimental conditions, and still remain in the realm of experimentalconditions relevant to the PAVE PAWS system, this review emphasizes experi-
mental designs from the following types of systems:¥A large ensemble of cells,¥An RF exposure similar to that generated by the PAVE PAWS system,and¥A long-term exposure to the radiation (similar to the circumstances as-sociated with the PAVE PAWS installation).We have also reviewed responses in cells based on stress responses that havebeen identified in the literature as being important for cellular recovery to acute
toxicity and injury. Life on earth has evolved in an environment associated with a
variety of stressors including radiation, heat, chemicals, and other toxic insults.
As a consequence, cells and animals have evolved defense mechanisms to cope
with these acute stresses including anti-oxidants, apoptosis (cell death to avoid
replication of damaged cells), DNA repair, refolding of damaged proteins, and
other mechanisms. These defense pathways work to prevent the continued expan-
sion and use of damaged biomolecules in the cell. Much acute cellular damage
can be compensated by these different damage-response pathways and so, corre-
spondingly, these pathways represent important targets to consider in the context
of detrimental biological responses to an environmental exposure. The presence
of these pathways may also explain how biological responses may occur but not
result in adverse health effects.The effects of exposure to external stimuli can be categorized into:1.Direct molecular effects
¥DNA damage¥Membrane perturbations¥Protein function alterations2.Indirect molecular effects
¥Cell signal transductionAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF RF EXPOSURE RELEVANT TO PAVE PAWS97¥Gene expression3.Phenotypic effects
¥Cell apoptosis¥Cell cycle perturbation¥DNA repair¥Differentiation and development¥Carcinogenesis¥GrowthLITERATURE REVIEWDirect Molecular EffectsDNA DamageDNA damage is induced by a wide variety of different stimuli includingradiation, chemicals (such as chemotherapeutic drugs), and oxidative damage (in-cluding the damage that results as a normal consequence of cellular respiration).
Elaborate pathways exist within cells that serve to repair damage to DNA, thereby
maintaining genetic integrity and normal cellular function. Incomplete or faulty
repair can lead to the production of abnormal proteins or the dysregulation of
specific protein syntheses. While the overall resiliency of the cell may compen-
sate for this dysregulation, a disruption of certain specific DNA repair processes
can result in diseases such as cancer, immunodeficiency, and others. DNA dam-
age is a normal consequence of cellular function, and it is estimated that mamma-
lian cells encounter 104 DNA strand breaks/cell/day, which are usually repairedwithout adverse effects.Several studies have examined possible effects of exposures to radar andcell-phone RF energies on DNA damage in mammalian cells following acute
exposures (hours). The results have been contradictory and controversial (Lai and
Singh 1995; McNamee and others 2002; Tice and others 2002; Bisht and others
2002; Malyapa and others 1997; Lai and Singh 1996). While Lai and Singh have
detected strand breaks after RF exposures, several groups which have also usedvery sensitive alkaline comet assays detect no DNA break increase at pulsed RF
frequencies of 1.9 GHz, 835.62 MHz, or 847.74 MHz (cell-phone frequencies) at
0.6 W/kg SAR (McNamee and others 2002; Malyapa and others 1997). Addi-
tional recent studies from Roti-RotiÕs laboratory have demonstrated an absenceof DNA damage in brain cells, fibroblasts, and lymphoid cells following expo-
sure to pulsed-wave microwaves and radiofrequency (Lagroye and others 2004a;
Lagroye and others 2004b; Hook and others 2004). The validity of such studies
depends on the sensitivity of the assay system in any particular laboratory, the
types and times of exposures, and the possible sources of error. Recent studies by
Dimitroglou and others (2003) have shown using single-cell gel electrophoresisAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWShigher levels of DNA strand-breaks in people who have been psychologicallystressed, suggesting a role for hormonal and biochemical factors in the response,
a consideration that was not previously addressed in the above reports and may be
one source of error. For a review of controversial cytogenetic observations in
mammalian somatic cells see Vijayalaxmi and Obe (2004).It should be noted that the ability of an agent to cause single- or double-strand breaks (ssb or dsb) in DNA does not necessarily mean that the agent is
dangerous or even capable of inducing mutations. Chemicals such as hydrogen
peroxide are known to cause breaks in DNA but cause few adverse health effects.
Likewise, low doses of ionizing radiation or UV light well within the limits of the
permissible exposure also cause DNA strand breaks. Exposure to very low doses
of ionizing radiation (1 cGy) can be detected to cause DNA strand breaks (for
example, Buatti and others, 1992 find that the rate of strand breaks per cell is
1815/Gy). UV-radiation exposure, analogous to the exposure from sunlight,
causes 0.07 ssb/1010 Da/kJ/m2 for UVA; and 1.9 ssb/1010 Da/kJ/m2 for UVB(Wenczl and others 1997). Membrane PerturbationsDirect damage to cellular membranes has been associated with exposure to avariety of chemicals and to ionizing radiation. These stresses often lead to differ-ences in lipid and protein composition of cellular membranes, altering the mem-
brane fluidity, ion transport, and surface properties of the membrane.As in the studies with DNA damage, changes in membrane fluidity or iontransport are associated with a large variety of normal states, and these changes in
and of themselves are not necessarily associated with pathogenic states or with a
progression toward pathogenesis. For example, chemicals known as ionophores
cause a change in membrane permeability and permit ions that are usually outside
the cell to rapidly influx. Nevertheless, there are very few dangerous conse-
quences associated with exposure to ionophores, and in general they are used to
mimic natural ionophoric processes that occur in mammalian cells.Some isolated reports ofchanges in membranes and ion transport have been
reported to be associated with exposure of cells tomodulatedcell-phone and

radarradiation. Thereportedeffects in the literaturecome largely from one labo-

ratory, andinclude both changes in Ca
++ ion fluxin cells in monolayer culture
and efflux from ex vivo tissue slices (Dutta and others, 1989; Dutta and others,1984; Blackman and others 1985; Joines and Blackman, 1980). Sub-
sequentstudies(Cranfield and others 2001; Wolke and others 1996) have docu-

mented no or marginal effectsof RF exposure on Ca
++ flux in cell-culture sys-tems. Taken together, these experimentsprovidesome support for

thesuggestion thatmodulated RF exposures maybe more capable of causing

biological effects than unmodulated RF fields.Clustering of membrane proteins (called membrane capping) occurs on aAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF RF EXPOSURE RELEVANT TO PAVE PAWS99variety of cell types including lymphocytes and is usually a measure of mem-brane perturbations and membrane responses in mammalian cells. Sultan and
others (1983) performed studies to determine whether or not modulated RF expo-
sure caused changes in the ability of B-lymphocytes to cap following exposure to
antigen; these studies showed no difference in the capping responses of unex-
posed and exposed cells in culture.Protein Function (Folding, Protein-Protein Interactions, Translations)Proteins are responsible for carrying out most of the cellular maintenancefunctions within mammalian cells. Changes in DNA are considered dangerousprimarily because they lead to changes in the expression of proteins. However,
cellular stress-inducing agents have been shown to affect proteins in several dif-
ferent ways. Changes in the ways in which proteins fold have been found pre-
dominantly following exposure to heat-shock, while changes in protein-protein
interactions and in protein translation have been associated with almost all types
of cellular stress. Because of the resiliency of biological systems, such damage to
proteins is not usually sufficient to harm a cell unless it has occurred with a large
number of proteins resulting in protein aggregation and large-scale dysfunction
in a cell. In addition, cells have evolved complex systems for managing this type
of damage. Chaperone systems and proteosomes are proteins that function to
refold damaged proteins, clear unrepairable proteins from the cell, and disassoci-
ate aggregates created following exposure to heat-shock stress. This damage-
response pathway permits heat-damaged cells to repair their proteins and resume
normal function in the body. This pathway is generally induced whenever the
body is experiencing fever or thermal dysregulation, although there have been a
few reports in the literature of heat-like responses following exposure to ionizing
radiation, UV, or other forms of stress. Numerous studies have examined the
thermal effects of radar, and these effects have been well-characterized in the
literature. However, such thermal effects cannot occur at the radar power densi-
ties experienced by the Cape Cod population and are not considered here.Several recent reports have documented induction of chaperone-like heat-shock protein responses in mammalian cells following exposure to cell-phone
frequencies below the thermal range. In particular, DiCarlo and others (2002),
and studies by Kwee and others (1998, 2001), have documented induction of
several heat-shock proteins (hsp70) in mammalian cells, as well as increased bind-
ing of heat-shock elements to their DNA-binding sequence. Replication of those
findings have not been reported in the literature but are suggested by other studies
showing increases in hsp70 following RF exposure (cell-phone frequencies) of
fruit flys (Weisbrot and others 2003). Related studies by dePomerai and others
(2000a, 2000b, 2002) have demonstrated that non-thermal microwaves can in-
duce hsp70 in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Similar induction of hsp70
has been observed following exposure to very low doses of ionizing radiationAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWS(Calini and others 2003). The implications of this non-thermal induction of heat-shock proteins are not clear however they do suggest the induction of a cellular
mechanism to protect proteins from degradation/denaturation. Whether this is a
direct consequence of radar exposure is also not clear, but levels of induction are
very low, far below the threshold of a small fever response. On the other hand,
other studies have suggested that stress proteins are not induced following expo-
sure to radiofrequency or microwave radiation (Cleary and others 1997).INDIRECT MOLECULAR EFFECTSCell Signal TransductionExtracellular signals (for growth, differentiation, apoptosis) are transmittedto the cell via a cell signal-transduction cascade that usually involves stimulation
of a surface receptor, alterations in intracellular ionic concentrations, a variety of
phosphorylation events, amplification of the signal, transmission of the signal
into the nucleus, and alterations in gene expression. Transient changes in cell
signal-transduction cascades have been associated with most cellular stress-in-
ducing agents; these changes can lead to more permanent expressions of cellular
changes such as those reflected in terminally differentiated cells.Studies of changes in cell signal transduction following radiofrequency ex-posure have been limited to an examination of production of extracellular factors
following exposure to RF. The most significant changes that have been reported
in the literature are in the transient release of cellular growth factors and other cell
signal-inducing agents that might alter cellular functions temporarily (Mausset
and others 2001; George and others 2002). Other studies, however, have reported
no changes in levels of such extracellular modulators as melatonin or cortisol
(Radon and others 2001; Stark and others 1997). While there are numerous stud-
ies in the literature of the effects of other cell stressing agents on kinase activation
or intracellular phosphorylation events, Pacini and others (2002) is the only re-
port of changes in mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) phosphorylation
pathways affected by exposure to RF. Leszczynski and others (2002) reported
activation of MAPK stress pathway in human endothelial cells using mobile-
phone exposures.Time-series data provide an exceptional means for characterizing cell systemdynamics, and fluorescent microscopy provides a well-established technique for
monitoring the activity of cell ensembles. Specifically, calcium signaling has
played a major role in discussions of the influence of RF exposure on biological
systems, dating to the early calcium-efflux studies of Adey and others as reported
in the 1979 NRC report. Modern techniques permit the real-time monitoring of
calcium activity in cell ensembles. Cranfield and others (2001) monitored cal-
cium activity (using Fluo-3 dye) in monolayers of Jurkat E6-1 cells exposed to a
915 MHz RF waveform pulsed at 217 Hz and designed to simulate a GSM tele-An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF RF EXPOSURE RELEVANT TO PAVE PAWS101phone signal. SAR varied from 1 to 2.1 W/kg with a weighted average of 1.5 W/kg. Mean calcium levels and calcium spike height were not affected by the RF
exposure; however, a significant shift in calcium spike frequency was observed,
consistent with an affect on cell ensemble activity.Gene ExpressionChanges in gene expression encompass events from activation of genes (pro-moter activation), through the changes in mRNA availability, to changes in pro-
tein stability/quantity, all of them finally leading to the changes in quantity of the
protein product of the gene in question. Moderate changes in gene expression
have been associated with mild or moderate exposures to cellular stressing agents
including mild heat-shock or very low doses of ionizing radiation.Several groups have examined changes in gene expression following expo-sure to RF. For the majority of genes examined for changes in expression to date,
c-fos is the only transcription factor that has been shown, in multiple studies, to
be modulated in response to RF exposure (Goswami and others 1999). Pacini and
others (2002) reported induction of beta-transforming growth-factor and
apoptosis-factor (bax) gene expression following RF exposure. Several studies ofgene expression using comprehensive gene-chip arrays that can monitor the en-
tire genome of expressed genes in a single experiment are underway and hold
promise for resolving questions of gene expression changes associated with RF
exposure.PHENOTYPIC RESPONSESCell ApoptosisApoptosis is the process of programmed cell death induced either in naturalcircumstances of embryogenesis and differentiation or in states of stress follow-
ing exposure to cellular damaging agents such as heat or radiation. In cell-stress
responses, apoptosis can be protective because it prevents the induction of cancer
cells by causing the death of cells with damaged DNA that might otherwise allow
for cells bearing deleterious DNA mutations to survive.Few studies have examined induction of apoptosis following RF exposure.As noted above, Pacini and others (2002) reported the induction of the pro-
apoptotic gene bax following RF exposure.Cell-Cycle PerturbationsThe cell cycle not only marks the progression of a cell from single cellthrough its DNA replication and division into two daughter cells, but also can
include stages of cellular preparation for proliferation, differentiation, or cell-An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWScycle arrest. Cell-cycle perturbations are commonly observed following exposureto cellular stressing agents. Ionizing and UV radiations are both known to cause
delays in cell-cycle progression associated with an increase in DNA repair and
activation of other cell-survival functions. In addition, changes in cell-cycle time
are reflective of each particular cell type and its degree of differentiation.In studies on the effects of RF exposure, George and others (2002) demon-strated an increase in proliferative potential in exposed fibroblasts and epithelial
cells. Similarly, Velizarov and others (1999) demonstrated a change in cell-pro-
liferative capacity following RF exposure that was not related to thermal effects.
Pacini and others (2002) also documented an increased proliferation of normal
human skin fibroblasts in culture following exposure to RF. On the other hand,
Higashikubo and others (2001) observed no changes in cell-cycle progression in
two different cell lines exposed to RF (Higashikubo and others, 2001). Similarly,
Stagg and others, (1997) reported no effects of a modulated RF field on cell
proliferation in a glioma cell line or in primary glial cells.These differences in observations may be due to different cell systems used,different sensitivities of assays, and different experimental conditions.Differentiation and Development Cellular differentiation is a critical aspect of tissue and organismal develop-ment. The process of differentiation is complex and poorly understood, yet it is
known to involve changes in gene expression, protein production, cell surface-
marker expression, and cell signal-transduction pathways. An undermining of
this process is associated with some types of tumor progression in which normal
differentiated cells are replaced by de-differentiated continuously dividing tumor
cells. This process is perhaps best understood in vitro when differentiating agentsare added to cells in culture to induce particular phenotypic changes associated
with end-stage cells. A few studies have examined the effects of RF exposure on
cellular differentiation.Koldayev and Shchepin (1997) reported a study of RF effects on early em-bryogenesis of sea urchins. In two studies involving 450 MHz radiation for a
period of 5-20 minutes, the protocol investigated fertility associated with combi-
nations of exposed sperm and unexposed eggs, and unexposed sperm with ex-
posed eggs. Exposure of sea urchin eggs to 100 mW/cm2 caused a 1.2- to 1.9-folddecrease in cell fertilization. Irradiation of eggs at 200 mW/cm2 caused a 1.8- to2.6-fold decrease in fertilization rate, with 7-11 times the control number of ab-
normal zygotes. Sperm irradiation had no effect on fertilization rates. However,
Saito and others (1991), in a study involving 20-day exposures of chick embryos
to a 428 MHz, 5.5 mW/cm2 incident field, showed severely delayed developmentaccording to the Hamburger-Hamilton staging. Ten replications using 10 eggs
were completed, with developmental anomalies observed at SARs in the range of
8.6 mW/kg to 47.1 mW/kg.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF RF EXPOSURE RELEVANT TO PAVE PAWS103Numerous studies have been undertaken to address the potential influence ofRF exposure on teratogenesis (the production of non-heritable birth defects). In1987, Lary and Conover (1987) completed a literature review of all teratogenesis
studies extant to that date, including all studies with exposures from 300 to 3000
MHz, and below the ANSI exposure limit of 0.4 W/kg. They found no reports of
teratogenic effects in the absence of organismal heating.More recently, Heynick and Merritt (2003) reviewed work (and subsequenterrata, including Saito and others 1991) on teratologic effects and developmental
abnormalities from exposure to radiofrequency electromagnetic fields (RFEMF)
in the range 3 kHz-300 GHz. A series of studies was conducted on beetles, birds,
rodents, and nonhuman primates indicating that teratologic effects occur only
from exposure levels that cause biologically detrimental increases in body tem-
perature.Effects of RF exposures on development in whole-animal mammalian sys-tems are discussed in detail in Chapter 7.DNA RepairNormal cells have the capacity to repair damage to their genetic material as apart of their evolutionary heritage. DNA-repair pathways in mammalian cells are
complex, with multiple proteins regulating the reactions. Different types of repair
are associated with repair of different types of DNA damage. Faulty repair of
DNA damage is associated with some human hereditary diseases such as ataxia
telangiectasia or xeroderma pigmentosum. In addition, abnormalities of specific
DNA-repair proteins are associated with a higher incidence of particular cancers.
For example, abnormalities of the Brca1 gene, part of a DNA-repair complex, are
associated with a higher incidence of breast cancer among women. Abnormalities
of DNA repair would be evident in several different ways including increased
accumulation of DNA damage, changes in the accumulation of particular DNA-
repair proteins, and alterations in other pathways controlled by DNA-repair pro-
teins (such as cell-cycle progression and cellular transformation). To date, there
have been no direct measures of DNA-repair capacity in cells exposed to RF
fields. Nevertheless, the moderate to undetectable changes observed in DNA dam-
age, cell-cycle progression, and carcinogenesis that occur following RF exposure
suggest that direct effects on DNA-repair pathways are unlikely.Carcinogenesis is a process whereby changes in the genome of a cell lead tothe progression of a normal cell into a cancerous cell. This process leads to the
clonal expansion of a single cell that has uncontrolled growth and progresses to a
full malignancy. Genes that have been found to be mutated in cancer cells include
many of those discussed aboveÑgenes that regulate gene expression, cell-signaltransduction, apoptosis, DNA repair, cellular differentiation and development,
and cell-cycle progression. Neoplastic transformation is tightly associated with
DNA damage and mutagenesis except in a very few cases. Reports discussedAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSabove regarding effects of RF on DNA damage relate to this issue since mostDNA-damaging agents are mutagenic and also carcinogenic.One of the most important endpoints that has been examined after RF expo-sures is that related to cellular transformation in vitro and induction of cancer inanimals following exposure. Several types of in vitro and in vivo assays havebeen applied to the problem in an effort to discern whether or not RF exposure
leads to an increased risk of carcinogenic transformation. Studying cells in cul-
ture, Roti Roti and others (2001) demonstrated that CDMA1 radiations cause noeffect on neoplastic transformation following a seven-day exposure. In related
work, Cain and others (1997) reported, in a chemical tumor-promoter study using
the same cell system, that modulated RF field exposure for 28 days does not lead
to increased tumor promotion or progression over that of the chemical promoter
alone. Detailed discussion on the effects of RF field exposure in mammals is
presented in Chapter 7.Growth in Plant SystemsA remarkable consistency has developed in a small number of studies ad-dressing the influence of RF radiation on tree growth and fecundity, most notably
in three plant studies out of the former Soviet Union in the republic of Latvia (all
conducted in the vicinity of Skrunda Radio Location Station).In the initial study, Balodis, and others (1996) reported on the growth of treesin an exposed region for the 11 years before 1971, when the radar became active,
and for the 16 years following the continuous radiation exposure. Trunk samples
were obtained from 50-90-year-old Pinus sylvestris L. trees (Balodis and others1996) growing in 29 sampling plots and the tree heights and diameters were also
measured. Radial annual increments in growth were measured to a precision of

0.01 mm. Exposure was at 156-162 MHz, with a pulse duration of 0.8 msec,
interpulse interval of 41 msec, and pulse power densities as high as 375 W/cm2.Growth was significantly (p = 0.001) inhibited by exposure, with a direct linear
correlation with distance from the station. Electric-field exposure levels appear to
have ranged from 0.4 mV/m to 250 mV/m. Several possible sources of pollution
that might have affected the ring widths were shown not to have caused the de-
crease in ring widths that coincided with the startup of the Skrunda radio-location
system.In a companion paper, Selga and Selga (1996) reported on Skrunda RadioLocation Station EMF-induced modification of Golgi apparatus in pine needles
and a switch from synthesis of predecessors of cell walls (lignins) to formation
and export of resin predecessors.1CPMA= Code Division Multiple Access (cellular telephone technology originally know as IS-95).An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF RF EXPOSURE RELEVANT TO PAVE PAWS105In the paper by Magone (1996), effects of Skrunda Radio Location StationEMF on the duckweed Spirodela polyrhiza was observed. After 55-day exposure,various morphological and developmental abnormalities were observed in 6-10daughter plants from 10 exposed mother plants, while only 0.1 plant with abnor-
malities per 10 mother plants were observed in the control condition. The same
daughter fronds had a shorter life-span (67 days compared to 87 days in the con-
trol) and fewer subsequent daughters (total eight compared to 10 in the control
group).In a more recent, sham-controlled study of the effect of RF exposure on treegrowth, Lerchl and others (2000) obtained a similar observation. In this study,
seedlings of three conifer species (Abies alba, Abies grandis, Pinus pumila) wereexposed in a radial waveguide, in a blinded fashion, and seedling height was
measured each week for a six-month period. Exposure was at 383 MHz, with a
20% duty cycle Hz, at a field intensity of 131 V/m. A significant inhibition of
growth was observed.It should be noted, however, that long-term exposures in plants can be influ-enced by a variety of different factors including micro-environmental changes.SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONSThe biological studies that most closely reflect a PAVE PAWS type of radia-tion exposure are the tree-growth studies. In those studies, a significant dose-
dependent response was observed. In addition, some embryo development stud-
ies and a few in vitro studies have also suggested the possibility of ELF-modulatedmicrowave-frequency RF exposures producing significant biological effects.The consideration that the modulation frequency of the PAVE PAWS mayplay a significant role in understanding the potential for this radar to influence
biological systems was also raised by the first NAS review committee in 1979.
PAVE PAWS has an ELF-modulation envelope thatgives rise to spectral charac-

teristics in the 10-100 Hz frequency range. This is due to diagnostic and calibra-
tion sequences, where a pulse is removed, but many other radar systems use these
sequences. Substantial research has been undertaken in this area over the last
decade, with the specific intent of establishing field-intensity thresholds under
well-controlled conditions. As a result of those efforts, reproducible biological
effects of electric-field exposures in the ELF-frequency range have been demon-
strated for induced electric-field intensities of less than 1 /centimeter (e.g., seethe work of Rosenspire and others 2001; McLeod and Collazo 2000). Indeed, the
NIEHS has concluded in a recent report that ELF electric fields below 10 /cmcan produce reproducible biological effects (NIEHS 1998).Responses at the cell level that are traditionally associated with carcinogen-esis, such as DNA damage and mutation induction, have been observed in only
one study, while several studies have documented no DNA damage associated
with RF exposure. While further studies are required to clarify this issue, theAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSevidence supporting DNA damaging events following RF exposures is weak.Other biological events that would contribute to non-DNA damage responses,
and whole-organism responses, are better reported in the literature.To clarify these conclusions, additional studies would be required. Specifi-cally, long-term studies of complex biological responses following exposure to
PAVE PAWS type radiation, as described in the U.S. Air Force Phase IV time-
domain studies, would be capable of directly confirming previous reports of cell-
level effects, particularly those that utilize modern large-scale data generation
and analysis techniques (i.e., protein- and genomic-array-based studies). In addi-
tion, studies addressing the rectification properties of living tissue in the micro-
wave region, most importantly, living skin, which is the predominant human or-
gan exposed to the pulsed radiation associated with PAVE PAWS, would provide
a firm foundation on which to calculate the magnitude of any induced-ELF field
in the body due to exposure to ELF-modulated microwave radiation. If signifi-

cant demodulation in living tissue were to be demonstrated, much of the literature
regarding ELF-field interactions with tissue would be relevant to understanding
the potential of PAVE PAWS exposure to influence biological systems. Simi-
larly, due to the fact that long-term studies have demonstrated effects on plant
growth from radar exposure, consideration should be given to examining plant
growth around the PAVE PAWS facility.REFERENCESBalodis, V., G. Brumelis, K. Kalviskis, O. Nikodemus, D. Tjarve, and V. Znotina. 1996. Does theSkrunda radio location station diminish the radial growth of pine trees? Sci Total Environ180:57-64.Bisht, K.S., E.G. Moros, W.L. Straube, J.D. Baty, and J.L. Roti Roti. 2002. The effect of 835.62 MHzFDMA or 847.74 MHz CDMA modulated radiofrequency radiation on the induction of micro-
nuclei in C3H 10T(1/2) cells. Radiat Res 157:506-515.Blackman, C.F., S.G. Benane, D.E. House, and W.T. Joines. 1985. Effects of ELF (1-120 Hz) andmodulated (50 Hz) RF fields on the efflux of calcium ions from brain tissue in vitro.
Bioelectromagnetics 6:1-11.Buatti, J.M., L.R. Rivero, and T.J. Jorgensen. 1992. Radiation-induced DNA single-strand breaks infreshly isolated human leukocytes. Radiat Res 132:200-206.Cain, C.D., D.L. Thomas, and W.R. Adey. 1997. Focus formation of C3H/10T1/2 cells and exposureto a 836.55 MHz modulated radiofrequency field. Bioelectromagnetics 18:237-243.Calini, V., C. Urani, and M. Camatini. 2003. Overexpression of HSP70 is induced by ionizing radia-tion in C3H 10T1/2 cells and protects from DNA damage. Toxicol In Vitro 17:561-566.Cleary, S.F., G. Cao, L.M. Liu, P.M. Egle, and K.R. Shelton. 1997. Stress proteins are not induced inmammalian cells exposed to radiofrequency or microwave radiation. Bioelectromagnetics
18:499-505.Cranfield, C.G., A.W. Wood, V. Anderson, and K.G. Menezes. 2001. Effects of mobile phone typesignals on calcium levels within human leukaemic T-cells (Jurkat cells). Int J Radiat Biol
77:1207-1217.de Pomerai, D., C. Daniells, H. David, J. Allan, I. Duce, M. Mutwakil, D. Thomas, P. Sewell, J.Tattersall, D. Jones, and P. Candido. 2000a. Non-thermal heat-shock response to microwaves.
Nature 405:417-418.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF RF EXPOSURE RELEVANT TO PAVE PAWS107de Pomerai, D., C. Daniells, H. David, J. Allan, I. Duce, M. Mutwakil, D. Thomas, P. Sewell, J.Tattersall, D. Jones, and P. Candido. 2000b. Microwave radiation induces a heat-shock responseand enhances growth in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. IEEE T Microw Theory 48:2076-2081.de Pomerai, D.I., A. Dawe, L. Djerdid, J. Allan, G. Brunt and C. Daniells. 2002. Growth and matura-tion of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans following exposure to weak microwave fields.
Enzyme Microb Tech 30:73-79.Di Carlo, A., N. White, F. Guo, P. Garrett, and T. Litovitz. 2002. Chronic electromagnetic fieldexposure decreases HSP70 levels and lowers cytoprotection. J Cell Biochem 84:447-454.Dimitroglou, E., M. Zafiropoulou, N. Messini-Nikolaki, S. Doudounakis, S. Tsilimigaki, and S.M.Piperakis. 2003. DNA damage in a human population affected by chronic psychogenic stress.Int J Hyg Envir Health 206:39-44.Dutta, S.K., A. Subramoniam, B. Ghosh, and R. Parshad. 1984. Microwave radiation-induced cal-cium ion efflux from human neuroblastoma cells in culture. Bioelectromagnetics 5:71-78.Dutta, S.K., B. Ghosh, and C.F. Blackman. 1989. Radiofrequency radiation-induced calcium ionefflux enhancement from human and other neuroblastoma cells in culture. Bioelectromagnetics
10:197-202.George, F.R., R.J. Lukas, J. Moffett, and M.C. Ritz. 2002. In-vitro mechanisms of cell proliferationinduction: a novel bioactive treatment for accelerating wound healing Wounds 14:107-115.Goswami, P.C., L.D. Albee, A.J. Parsian, J.D. Baty, E.G. Moros, W.F. Pickard, J.L. Roti Roti, andC.R. Hunt. 1999. Proto-oncogene mRNA levels and activities of multiple transcription factorsin C3H 10T 1/2 murine embryonic fibroblasts exposed to 835.62 and 847.74 MHz cellularphone communication frequency radiation. Radiat Res 151:300-309.Heynick, L.N. and J.H. Merritt. 2003. Radiofrequency fields and teratogenesis. BioelectromagneticsSuppl 6:S174-S186.Higashikubo, R., M. Ragouzis, E.G. Moros, W.L. Straube, and J.L. Roti Roti. 2001. Radiofrequencyelectromagnetic fields do not alter the cell cycle progression of C3H 10T and U87MG cells.Radiat Res 156:786-795.Hook, G.J., P. Zhang, I. Lagroye, L. Li, R. Higashikubo, E.G. Moros, W.L. Straube, W.F. Pickard,J.D. Baty, and J.L. Roti Roti. 2004. Measurement of DNA damage and apoptosis in Molt-4 cells
after in vitro exposure to radiofrequency radiation. Radiat Res 161:193-200.Joines, W.T. and C.F. Blackman. 1980. Power density, field intensity, and carrier frequency determi-nants of RF-energy-induced calcium-ion efflux from brain tissue. Bioelectromagnetics 1:271-
275.Koldayev, V.M. and Y.V. Shchepin. 1997. Effects of electromagnetic radiation on embryos of sea-urchins. Bioelectrochem Bioenerg 43:161-164.Kwee, S. and P. Raskmark. 1998. Changes in cell proliferation due to environmental non-ionizingradiation. 2. Microwave radiation. Bioelectrochem Bioenerg 44:251-255.Kwee, S., P. Raskmark and S. Velizarov. 2001. Changes in cellular proteins due to environmentalnon-ionizing radiation. 1. Heat shock proteins. Electro Magnetobiol 20:165-176.Lagroye, I., R. Anane, B.A. Wettring, E.G. Moros, W.L. Straube, M. Laregina, M. Niehoff, W.F.Pickard, J. Baty, and J.L. Roti Roti. 2004a. Measurement of DNA damage after acute exposure
to pulsed-wave 2450 MHz microwaves in rat brain cells by two alkaline comet assay methods.Int J Radiat Biol 80:11-20.Lagroye, I., G.J. Hook, B.A. Wettring, J.D. Baty, E.G. Moros, W.L. Straube, and J.L. Roti Roti.2004b. Measurements of alkali-labile DNA damage and protein-DNA crosslinks after 2450
MHz microwave and low-dose gamma irradiation in vitro. Radiat Res 161:201-214.Lai, H. and N.P. Singh. 1995. Acute low-intensity microwave exposure increases DNA single-strandbreaks in rat brain cells. Bioelectromagnetics 16:207-210.Lai, H. and N.P. Singh. 1996. Single- and double-strand DNA breaks in rat brain cells after acuteexposure to radiofrequency electromagnetic radiation. Int J Radiat Biol 69:513-521.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSLary, J.M. and D.L. Conover. 1987. Teratogenic effects of radiofrequency radiation. IEEE Eng MedBiol Mag. march 1987, 42.Lerchl, D., A. Lerchl, P. Hantsch, A. Bitz, J. Streckert, V. Hansen. 2000. Studies on the effects ofradio-frequency fields on conifers. Trans Bioelectromagnetics Soc 22:160.Leszczynski, D., S. Joenvaara, J. Reivinen, and R. Kuokka. 2002. Non-thermal activation of thehsp27/p38MAPK stress pathway by mobile phone radiation in human endothelial cells: molecu-lar mechanism for cancer- and blood-brain barrier-related effects. Differentiation 70:120-129.Magone, I. 1996. The effect of electromagnetic radiation from the Skrunda Radio Location Station onSpirodela polyrhiza (L) Schleiden cultures. Sci Total Environ 180:75-80.Malyapa, R.S., E.W. Ahern, W.L. Straube, E.G. Moros, W.F. Pickard, and J.L. Roti Roti. 1997.Measurement of DNA damage after exposure to 2450 MHz electromagnetic radiation. RadiatRes 148:608-617.Mausset, A.L., R. de Seze, F. Montpeyroux, and A. Privat. 2001. Effects of radiofrequency exposureon the GABAergic system in the rat cerebellum: clues from semi-quantitative immunohis-
tochemistry. Brain Res 912:33-46.McLeod, K.J. and L. Collazo. 2000. Suppression of a differentiation response in MC-3T3-E1 osteo-blast-like cells by sustained, low-level, 30 Hz magnetic field exposure. Radiat Res 153:706-714.McNamee, J.P., P.V. Bellier, G.B. Gajda, B.F. Lavallee, E.P. Lemay, L. Marro, and A. Thansandote.2002. DNA damage in human leukocytes after acute in vitro exposure to a 1.9 GHz pulse-
modulated radiofrequency field. Radiat Res 158:534-537.NIEHS (National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences). 1998. Portier, C.J. and M.S. Wolfe(eds). Assessment of health effects from exposure to power-line frequency electric and mag-
netic fields. Working Group Report. NIH Publication 98-3981.NRC (National Research Council). 1979. Analysis of the Exposure Levels and Potential BiologicEffects of the PAVE PAWS Radar System. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.Pacini, S., M. Ruggiero, I. Sardi, S. Aterini, F. Gulisano, and M. Gulisano. 2002. Exposure to globalsystem for mobile communication (GSM) cellular phone radiofrequency alters gene expression,proliferation, and morphology of human skin fibroblasts. Oncol Res 13:19-24.Radon, K., D. Parera, D.M. Rose, D. Jung, and L. Vollrath. 2001. No effects of pulsed radio frequencyelectromagnetic fields on melatonin, cortisol, and selected markers of the immune system in
man. Bioelectromagnetics 22:280-287.Rosenspire, A.J., A.L. Kindzelskii, and H.R. Petty. 2001. Pulsed DC electric fields couple to naturalNAD(P)H oscillations in HT-1080 fibrosarcoma cells. J Cell Sci 114:1515-1520.Roti Roti, J.L., R.S. Malyapa, K.S. Bisht, E.W. Ahern, E.G. Moros, W.F. Pickard, and W.L. Straube.2001. Neoplastic transformation in C3H 10T(1/2) cells after exposure to 835.62 MHz FDMAand 847.74 MHz CDMA radiations. Radiat Res 155:239-247.Saito, K., K. Suzuki, and S. Motoyoshi. 1991. Lethal and teratogenic effects of long-term low-inten-sity radio frequency radiation at 428 MHz on developing chick embryo. Teratology 43:609-614.Salford, L.G., A.E. Brun, J.L. Eberhardt, L. Malmgren, and B.R. Persson. 2003. Nerve cell damage inmammalian brain after exposure to microwaves from GSM mobile phones. Environ Health
Persp 111:881-883; discussion A408.Selga, T. and M. Selga. 1996. Response of Pinus sylvestris L needles to electromagnetic fields. Cyto-logical and ultrastructual aspects. Sci Total Environ 180:65-73.Stagg, R.B., W.J. Thomas, R.A. Jones, and W.R. Adey. 1997. DNA synthesis and cell proliferation inC6 glioma and primary glial cells exposed to a 836.55 MHz modulated radiofrequency field.Bioelectromagnetics 18:230-236.Stark, K.D., T. Krebs, E. Altpeter, B. Manz, C. Griot, and T. Abelin. 1997. Absence of chronic effectof exposure to short-wave radio broadcast signal on salivary melatonin concentrations in dairy
cattle. J Pineal Res 22:171-176.Sultan, M.F., C.A. Cain, and W.A. Tompkins. 1983. Immunological effects of amplitude-modulatedradio frequency radiation: B lymphocyte capping. Bioelectromagnetics 4:157-165.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF RF EXPOSURE RELEVANT TO PAVE PAWS109Tice, R.R., G.G. Hook, M. Donner, D.I. McRee, and A.W. Guy. 2002. Genotoxicity of radiofrequencysignals. I. Investigation of DNA damage and micronuclei induction in cultured human bloodcells. Bioelectromagnetics 23:113-126.Velizarov, S., P. Raskmark, and S. Kwee. 1999. The effects of radiofrequency fields on cell prolifera-tion are non-thermal. Bioelectrochem Bioenerg 48:177-180.Vijayalaxmi, Obe. G. 2004. Controversial cytogenetic observations in mammalian somatic cells ex-posed to radiofrequency radiation. Radiat Res 162:481-496.Weisbrot, D., H. Lin, L. Ye, M. Blank, and R. Goodman. 2003. Effects of mobile phone radiation onreproduction and development in Drosophila melanogaster. J Cell Biochem 89:48-55.Wenczl, E., S. Pool, A.J. Timmerman, G.P. van der Schans, L. Roza, and A.A. Schothorst. 1997.Physiological doses of ultraviolet irradiation induce DNA strand breaks in cultured human mel-
anocytes, as detected by means of an immunochemical assay. Photochem Photobiol 66:826-830.Wolke, S., U. Neibig, R. Elsner, F. Gollnick, and R. Meyer. 1996. Calcium homeostasis of isolatedheart muscle cells exposed to pulsed high-frequency electromagnetic fields. Bioelectromagnetics
17:144-153.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1107Animal and Human StudiesAddressing Health Effects
INTRODUCTIONStudies to evaluate the potential of RF fields to impact biological systemshave been conducted in both humans and animals. Although the interaction of RFfields with humans is of prime importance and concern, the number of humanlaboratory studies is quite small compared to the literature available on animal
studies. Moreover, many areas of biologic investigation are more efficiently and
appropriately conducted using various animal species. Animal studies provide an
integrated system that can be used in studies where experimental variables can be
controlled, specific hypotheses can be explored, and exposure can be precisely
assessed. Given the uncertainty and the relatively low power of RF epidemio-
logic studies to ascertain the relationship between RF exposure and possible ad-
verse health effects, and the small number of human laboratory studies, investiga-
tions in animals are especially important in the evaluation of RF for potential
adverse effects.There are, however, limitations to animal studies for risk-assessment pur-poses that one must bear in mind. Extrapolation of experimental results from
laboratory animals to humans remains somewhat tentative, both because of im-
portant biologic differences between humans and animals and because the mecha-
nisms (and hence the biologically relevant exposure parameters) by which the
effects may arise are often unknown. Furthermore, studies using laboratory ani-
mals are typically carried out at exposure levels much higher than found in the
environment. There are questions as to the applicability of these laboratory study
conditions to the low RF levels experienced by humans exposed to the PAVE
PAWS signal.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ANIMAL AND HUMAN STUDIES ADDRESSING HEALTH EFFECTS111It should be noted that there is a considerable literature investigating thethermal effects of RF exposure in animals. Much of this literature is focused on2450 MHz experimentation (outside the frequency range of interest for the PAVE
PAWS radar) although other frequencies are also occasionally investigated. Be-
cause thermal responses are clearly outside the range of expected biologic re-
sponses to the PAVE PAWS exposures, this report does not consider in detail
work performed at exposure levels that are designed to produce elevated tem-
peratures in exposed animals. Reference to exposures at 2450 MHz is made occa-
sionally where studies at the more relevant frequencies are lacking; however, the
2450 MHz work is not reviewed comprehensively.CANCERÑHUMAN STUDIESThere are no laboratory studies in humans with exposures to RF energy andcancer as the direct endpoint of investigation. Such studies would clearly cross
ethical boundaries and would not be acceptible. Futhermore, RF fields lack suffi-
cient energy to disrupt chemical bonds so there is little theoretical basis for sus-
pecting that such fields would cause mutations or other genotoxic effects. There
are a few human studies investigating possible indirect and nongenotoxic effects
relevant to cancer that will be discussed in the section on immunological and
endocrine function studies.CANCERÑSTUDIES IN ANIMAL MODELSSeveral different approaches and animal models have been used in labora-tory animal cancer studies. The selection of a specific model depends largely
upon the hypothesis chosen to evaluate a particular underlying mechanism. For
example, if one desires to test RF for its potential to be a complete carcinogen (an
agent that by its application alone can cause cancer), animals are exposed to RF
over a long period of time, usually 1 1/2 to 2 years. The extended period of
exposure is necessary to ensure adequate time for slowly developing cancers to
be manifest. During the exposure period, whatever the length, it is important to
keep exposures to other possibly confounding agents to a minimum. In this regi-
men, the animals are usually observed during the major portion of their lifetime
and the occurrence of tumors, in number, type, and time of development, are the
critical endpoints. This type of study should include several dose groups and
requires a relatively large number of animals, particularly if the natural incidence
of a tumor type is low. As one would surmise, studies evaluating complete carci-
nogenicity are expensive due to both the length of time and the number of ani-
mals involved.Because carcinogenesis is a multi-step process, another experimental ap-proach is to assume the agent of interest (RF) acts as either an initiator or a
promoter where a two-phase protocol is required for testing. ÒInitiationÓ is de-An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSfined as a genotoxic event where the carcinogen interacts with the DNA andintroduces genetic changes that may later result in malignancy. ÒPromotionÓ isoperationally defined, where the promoting agent is applied subsequent to initia-
tion and generally over a protracted period of time. Promotion is associated with
a number of subcellular events that are generally non-genotoxic and is respon-
sible for the conversion of initiated cells to cancerous cells. To evaluate RF as an
initiator, one high dose of RF would be given, followed by repeated exposure to a
known promoter (e.g., 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate, TPA) over a long
term. If RF were to be investigated for possible promotional effects, the animals
would be treated with a known initiator (e.g., 7,12-dimethyl benz[a]anthracene,
DMBA), and subsequently exposed to RF over a long term (months). These ini-
tiation/promotion approaches have the advantage of using fewer animals over a
shorter period of time resulting in less cost. However, a given model is usually
limited to evaluating a specific type of cancer. Because current knowledge on
possible biological mechanisms of the RF exposures is limited, other than ther-
mal effects of high doses, the applicability of these studies to cancer development
in humans exposed to RF may also be limited.Long-Term Animal BioassaysLong-term animal bioassays, often conducted in two species (usually ratsand mice), and in both male and female animals for two years, provide a reason-
able surrogate for human-lifetime exposure. A relatively small number of long-
term animal bioassays have been performed exposing rats and mice to RF signals
between 10 and 2000 MHz. Almost all of the studies performed at non-thermal
levels have indicated no pathological or carcinogenic effects. This includes stud-
ies with a focus on brain cancer at 836 and 860 MHz (1.1 to 1.6 W/kg, Adey and
others 1999, 2000; ~1 W/kg, Zook and Simmens 2001, respectively), as well as
complete histopathology in lifespan and hematology studies at 835/847, 800, and
2450 MHz (1.3 W/kg, LaRegina and others 2003; up to 12.9 W/kg, Spalding and
others 1971; 0.3 W/kg, Frei and others 1998; respectively). Although some patho-
logical effects have been reported at thermal levels (Roberts and Michaelson
1983; Prausnitz and Susskind 1962), the only report of an increased tumor inci-
dence with long-term RF exposure at non-thermal levels was by Chou and others
(1992). They reported a small increase in overall tumor occurrence in rats ex-
posed for 24 months to 2450 MHz (SAR of 0.15-0.4 W/kg). There was no effect
in the Chou and others study on a number of other parameters including metabo-
lism, immune function, hematology, serum chemistry, thyroxin levels, protein
parameters, growth, or open-field behavior. It should be noted that the one bioas-
say cancer study investigating a frequency (435 MHz) most closely related to the
PAVE PAWS frequency also found no overall increase in cancer in exposed ani-
mals (1.0 mW/cm2; Toler and others 1997). Some organs (specifically the adrenalAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ANIMAL AND HUMAN STUDIES ADDRESSING HEALTH EFFECTS113glands) did show slight trends toward increased cancer in RF exposed animals;however, the number of tumors was small and no statistically significant differ-
ences could be determined between the exposed and control groups.Radiation- or Chemically Initiated and Transgenic Animal StudiesSimilar to long-term animal bioassays, studies in which tumors have beeninitiated by means other than RF have been mostly negative. Many different ini-
tiation models have been used in these studies in which rodents have been ex-
posed to radiofrequencies between 800 and 1500 MHz. The experimental models
used include: brain tumors initiated in rats with ethyl nitrosourea (836 and 860
MHz, approximately 1 W/kg) (Adey and others 1999, 2000; Zook and others
2001, respectively); benz(a)pyrene initiated sarcomas in rats (900 MHz, 0.075
and 0.27 W/kg) (Chagnaud and others 1999); dimethyl-benzanthracine-initiated
rat mammary tumors (900 MHz, SARs from 0.017 to 0.07 W/Kg) (Bartsch and
others 2002; Anane and others 2003); diethyl nitrosamine-induced hepatomas in
rats (929 and 1500 MHz) (Imaida and others 1998); and radiation-induced mouse
lymphomas (902 MHz, 0.35 W/kg) (Heikkinen and others 2001). In all of these
cited cancer studies, no adverse effects of RF exposure were noted. In addition to chemicals and radiation, genetically initiated animal models(transgenic mice) have also been studied in RF carcinogenicity testing. No effects
of RF exposure on mutagenicity or tumor development were found using pKZ-1
transgenic mice (900 MHz, 4 W/kg) (Sykes and others 2001). Another study by
Repacholi and others (1997) in Pim-1 mice reported an association between long-
term RF exposure [900 MHz, 0.13-1.4 W/kg] and mortality from a certain sub-
type of lymphoma. A subsequent study performed at multiple dose levels with
more uniform and more fully characterized exposure (900 MHz, multiple levels
to 4.0 W/Kg) did not confirm the positive effects reported in the original study
(Utteridge and others 2002).Tumor-Cell Injection StudiesA few studies of tumor progression, using non-thermal RF exposure levels,have been conducted by injecting tumor cells into mice and determining growth
rate, survival, and metastatic progression. Although increased survival of the host,
as well as inconsistent evidence of either augmentation or suppression of immune
function has been reported in response to thermal levels of RF exposure, no such
effects were observed in studies using lower levels of exposure (Salford and oth-
ers 1993, 915 MHz, up to 8.3 W/kg; Higashikubo and others 1999, 836 and 847
MHz, 0.75 W/kg).An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSSummary of Animal Cancer StudiesMost animal bioassay studies have not demonstrated increased cancer riskresulting from long- or short-term RF exposure at non-thermal levels. In the veryfew studies at thermal levels within the frequency range of interest (10-2000
MHz), only inconsistent evidence of exposure effects have been reported, and
those have not been confirmed in similar or replicate studies.HUMAN BEHAVIORAL STUDIESMost of the RF behavioral studies in humans have focused on frequenciesassociated with cellular telephony (800/900 to 1800 MHz). Areas of investigation
have included hypersensitivity to exposure, sleep, memory, attention behaviors,
or other cognitive functions.A wide range of subjective health responses have been attributed to RF expo-sures (see review, Sandstrom and others 2001), including headaches, fatigue, diz-
ziness, and nausea. The number of reports, however, from studies actually con-
ducted under controlled research conditions, is quite small. In those blind studies
(where exposure or non-exposure status was not known by the researchers or
subjects during experimentation), Koivisto and others (2001, Hietanen and others
(2002), Zwamborn and others (2003), found no effects of RF exposure.The studies examining sleep patterns in people exposed to RF fields havepresented mixed results with some effects reported, although the positive re-
sponses remain relatively ill-defined. An initial report by Mann and Roschke
(1996) suggested that RF exposure (900 MHz) resulted in decreased latency to
sleep onset and a reduction in rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. These observa-
tions were not replicated in further studies (Wagner and others 1998, 2000).
Borbely and others (1999) and Huber and others (2003) reported changes in the
spectral power in non-REM sleep but REM sleep and onset latency were unaf-
fected. A reduction in the percentage of slow-wave sleep was observed by
Lebedeva and others (2001) when subjects were exposed throughout the night.
In humans exposed to a 900 MHz at 1 W/kg SAR, Huber and others (2000,
2002) observed changes in the spectral power of EEG patterns in the initial
phases of sleep, but when the exposure was to a continuous-wave signal, no
significant effects occurred. Two other recent studies (Mann and Roschke, 2004)
found no changes in sleep patterns and no evidence of sleep disturbances due to
RF exposure.Cognitive function has been the focus of a number of recent studies evaluat-ing performance and RF exposure. Preece and others (1999) observed decreased
choice reaction time in people exposed to analog 902 MHz fields. However, digi-
tal signals did not produce such changes. Nor were there effects from exposure in
simple reaction times or in spatial memory. The choice reaction time changes
were ascribed to possible thermal impacts of the signal. In another study at 902An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ANIMAL AND HUMAN STUDIES ADDRESSING HEALTH EFFECTS115MHz, Kovisto and others (2000) reported decreased response times in simplereaction and vigilance tasks with localized heating in the brain as the possible
explanation for the effects. Using an improved experimental design, the same
research group was unable to confirm the inital findings and reported no changes
in the reaction times or error rates with exposure (Haarala and others 2003). There
have been a few additional studies examining different cognitive functions and
memory. Many of these studies show improved performance on recognition
memory task (Lass and others 2002), improvement on cognitive tasks (Edelstyn
and Oldershaw 2002), a field-dependent improvement in memory (males only) at
1800 MHz (Smythe and Costall 2003), and a facilitating effect on attention in
mobile phone users (Lee and others, 2001).ANIMAL BEHAVIORAlteration of behavior in animals has provided the foundation for human RF-exposure guidelines for the past two decades (ANSI C95.1-1982; NCRP, 1986;
IEEE/ANSI C95.1-1992). However, nearly all of the reported studies, including
those showing behavioral responses in exposed animals, have been conducted in
an RF-intensity range that would be expected to produce thermal sensations and/
or heating of tissue (e.g., Brown and others 1994; Akyel and others 1991;
DÕAndrea and others 2003).Acute thermal responses in animals can include perception, aversion, workperturbation or work stoppage, decreased endurance, and even convulsions and
death. Behavioral effects of RF in the non-thermal range, however, are more
difficult to identify. Studies usually conducted in mice or rats and using non-
thermal levels of RF exposure (and even some using thermal levels of exposure),
have generally reported no effects on various aspects of behavior, including oper-
ant behavior (1.25 GHz at less than 7.6 W/kg, Akyel and others 1991; 1.3 GHz at
less than 3 W/kg, Lebovitz 1981 and Lebovitz and Seaman 1983; 900 MHz at
17.5 to 75 mW/kg, Bornhausen and Scheingraber 2000); cognitive behavior (900
and 1800 MHz at 0.5 W/kg, Sienkowicz and others 2000); and performance and
activity changes in rats exposed in utero (915 MHZ at 3.6 W/kg, Jensh and others
1982a,b). An additional study examined chick behavior (450 MHz at 5 mW/cm2,Sagan and Medici 1979). One report does suggest behavioral changes with appar-
ent non-thermal acute RF exposures, including reduced aggressive behavior in
rats (1.3 GHz at 0.65 mW/cm2, Frey and Spector 1986). Additionally, perfor-mance in spatial-navigation tests has been examined in a number of studies using
radial-arm or water mazes (at 900 and 1800 MHz, 0.5 W/kg, Sienkiewicz and
others 2000, and at 900 MHz, up to 3.5 W/kg, Dubreuil and others 2002), with no
indication of adverse effects. There has been a report of reduced performance in a
radial-arm maze at 2450 MHz by Lai and others (1994); however, Cobb and
others (2004) were unable to demonstrate similar results in rats, also exposed at
2450 MHz,and other studies have also been unable to confirm Lai
Õs resultsAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWS(Cosquer and others 2004; Cobb and others 2004; Cassel and others 2004).Yamaguchi and others (2003) reported no effects in a T-maze performance study
at 1.4 GHz until the exposure reached clearly thermal levels (25 W/kg).With chronic low-level RF exposures, reports on behavioral effects have beengenerally negative (DÕAndrea and others 1980), although positive reports at near-thermal levels (2.7 W/kg whole-body average) have been reported (Mitchell and
others 1977, 1981, 1988) at 2450 MHz.Summary of Behavioral StudiesResults from laboratory studies in humans have indicated subtle and tran-sient effects; however, the health implications remain unclear. There is some
evidence that acute exposure may result in minor facilitation effects on attention
functions and decreases in some specific reaction times to stimuli. Effects on
sleep have been reported but remain mixed and ill-defined. The available data are
too sparse to determine if subjective responses can be caused by RF exposure,
although the strongest studies indicate no effects on a range of endpoints.Disruption of complex behavioral performance in several animal species,under diverse exposure conditions, has been used as a basis for setting human
exposure guidelines since 1982. The threshold SAR selected to establish the stan-
dard was chosen at 4 W/kg, a level based upon thermal effects and often (but not
always) accompanied by an increase in core body temperature of ~1.0oC. Alter-ation of an assortment of other behaviors, both learned and unlearned, can also
occur in animals at SARs between 1and 4 W/kg, subject to the frequency of the
signal and the size of the animal. It appears that the behavioral changes due to RF
exposure at these levels are reversible, and no consistent evidence exists for long-
term, permanent effects. Extrapolation of animal data to humans has been useful
in setting exposure standards. However, human ability to discriminate and
cognitively act upon perception of intense RF fields is generally superior to that
ability in animals and therefore animal data may tend to underestimate threshold
levels for safety.OTHER PHYSIOLOGICAL STUDIESEEG and Brain Electrical ActivityHumans exposed to mobile-phone RF fields have generally not shown ef-fects of exposure on the spontaneous, awake electroencephalogram (EEG)
(Hietanen and others 2000; Roschke and Mann 1997). However, possible
changes have been observed when exposure was given during the performance
of memory tasks or under other more demanding paradigms (Freude and others
1998, 2000; Eulitz and others 1998. Krause and others reported changes in EEGs
of humans exposed to 902 MHz for both auditory tasks (Krause and othersAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ANIMAL AND HUMAN STUDIES ADDRESSING HEALTH EFFECTS1172000a) and visual memory tasks (Krause and others 2000b). Additionally, Croftand others (2002) determined the resting EEG parameters to be changed during
an auditory discrimination task. Several studies evaluating sleep parameters have
examined EEG in human subjects as a way to assess RF impacts on sleep. These
studies have been discussed above in the section on behavior and RF exposure in
humans.Studies in a variety of animals, including rats, rabbits, cats, and monkeyshave shown various changes in EEG measurements from the brain (rabbits at 30
MHz, 0.5-2 kV/m, Takashima and others 1979; cats at 147 MHz, unspecified
SAR, Bawin and others 1973; rats at 945 MHz, unspecified SAR, Vorbyov and
others 1997; rats at 900 MHz, 1.3 W/kg, Thuroczy and others 1994); however the
types of changes are not consistent across studies nor have they generally been
independently and systematically confirmed.Effects on Blood Pressure/Heart RateA stimulation study in humans by Braune and others (1998) initially reportedincreases in heart rate (HR) and blood pressure (BP). However, these effects were
not replicated in the same laboratory (Braune and others 2002), and were also not
confirmed by an additional independent human study (Tahvanainen and others
2004). Animal studies have reported effects of RF exposure on BP and HR and
other cardiac functions (e.g., Lu and others 1992); however, these have all been
conducted at exposure levels in which thermal increases would be expected in the
tissue.Blood Brain Barrier StudiesUsing RF exposures of 2450 MHz, Frey and others (1975) initially reportedthat at approximately 1 W/kg an increase in blood brain barrier (BBB) permeabil-
ity was observed in rats. Using a 1.3 GHz RF signal, Oscar and Hawkins (1977)
reported increased BBB permeability at 0.4 W/kg (CW) and 0.1 W/kg (PW).
Preston and others (1979) suggested that the changes observed by Oscar and

Hawkins may have been due to variations in blood flow, so Oscar and others
(1981) subsequently determined that increased local brain blood flow did occur
following RF exposure. In following up this finding, Oscar and co-workers used
a technique to measure BBB permeability that is insensitive to blood-flow change,
and reported no effect of RF radiation on BBB (Gruenau and others 1982). Thus
the effect originally reported by Oscar and Hawkins (1977) was probably an arti-
fact. Using techniques similar to those of Oscar and Hawkins, at 2450 MHz,
Preston and others (1979) and Preston and Prefontaine (1980) reported no effect
of RF exposure on BBB permeability at whole body SARs (0.02-6 W/kg) or at
SARs in the head (0.08-1.8 W/kg). Additional efforts to establish the occurrence
of the BBB effects observed by Oscar and Hawkins (1977) and Frey and othersAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWS(1975) have been unsuccessful (Ward and others 1982; Ward and Ali 1985;Merritt and others 1978).Pigs have been exposed repeatedly to 452 MHz fields intermittently for 8 h/d for 90 days. The BBB showed no leakage in exposed animals, nor did
neurohistological and enzyme-histochemical preparations show any evidence of
damage to nervous tissue in the brain (Sutton and others 1982). Further animal
studies in mice also have demonstrated no BBB permeability changes with either
a one-hour exposure at 4 W/kg (whole body) or after a lifetime of exposure at
SARs ranging from 0.25, 0.5, 1.0, and 4.0 W/kg (whole body) (Finnie and others
2001, 2002).At 2450 MHz, Sutton and Carroll (1979) observed that BBB permeabilitywas increased in rats when the temperature in the brain was 40o C or more. Fur-thermore, when the core body temperature of the rat was kept at 30o C duringexposure of the head, the exposure time had to be lengthened to produce any
disruptive effects on the BBB. These observations suggest that RF-induced hy-
perthermia may indeed be the cause of BBB disruption during exposure. Merritt
and others (1978) also showed that BBB permeation in rats was impacted by
providing either hot air or RF radiation to heat the animals to 40oC and concludedthat hyperthermia was the causative factor, not RF energy per se. Williams and
colleagues (1984a-d) report on a series of experiments in which they conclude
that RF exposure (at 2450 MHz) produced BBB effects that result from tempera-
ture-dependent changes and not as a direct result of the RF energy. Fritze and
others (1997) also found BBB permeability changes in rats consistent with ther-
mal effects. A number of other papers have also demonstrated changes in BBB
permeability resulting from thermal effects of RF exposure (Lin and Lin 1980,
1982; Goldman and others 1984; Neilly and Lin 1986; Moriyama and others
1991; Ohmoto and others 1996).There are a few papers that report BBB-permeation effects in animals ex-posed to RF fields below those considered to be Òthermal.Ó Persson and others(1997) observed an increase in BBB permeability by about three-fold in animals
exposed to CW 915 MHz radiation. However, the changes did not vary with SAR
from 0.02 to 8.3 W/kg. Results using modulated RF exposure were not SAR
dependent either, with the lowest SARs (0.0004-0.008 W/kg) demonstrating the
greatest permeability changes, and at the highest SARs (1.7-8.3 W/kg) no modu-
lated frequency was effective in increasing BBB permeation. The 1997 paper by
Persson and others appears to include data from previous studies in their labora-
tory (Salford and others 1993, 1994; Persson and others 1992) and a recent paper
(Salford and others 2003) from this research laboratory describes effects of 915
MHz RF on the BBB in rats exposed to very low SARs (< 0.2 W/kg). No expo-
sure-response relationship was found in work performed in another laboratory
(Chang and others 1982) in which only one of six RF exposure levels (at 1 GHz)
affected BBB permeability in dogs.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ANIMAL AND HUMAN STUDIES ADDRESSING HEALTH EFFECTS119IMMUNE- AND ENDOCRINE-FUNCTION STUDIESThere are very few studies in humans examining endocrine status during orfollowing exposure to RF fields. Mann and others (1998) observed no changes inserum melatonin, growth hormone, or luteinizing hormone levels during expo-
sure of volunteers to 900 MHz, although cortisol production showed a small tran-
sient increase. No effect on urinary levels of 6-hydroxymelatonin sulfate was
reported in humans exposed to 900 MHz fields (Bortkiewicz and others 2002). In
addition, Radon and others (2001) observed no changes in melatonin, cortisol, or
markers of immune function when humans were exposed for 4 hours to 900 MHz
fields.In animals, most of the studies investigating immune and endocrine functionhave been performed at 2450 MHz, with only a few in the 10 MHz to 2000 MHz
range. A few of those laboratory studies report alterations in various hormones
(Abhold and others 1981) and neurotransmitters (Inaba and others 1992; Mausset
and others 2001) at 900 MHz in animals exposed to low intensities (non-thermal
levels) of RF. There are reported increases as well as decreases in immune-cell
subpopulations, exposed at 900 MHz (Dasdag 2000), and decreased levels of
immunoglobin titer and cellular-immunity function depending upon modulation
frequency of the RF signal used for exposure (450 MHz, Lyle and others 1983).Most of the low-level exposure studies indicate no significant changes inhormone levels or activity (900 MHz, Vollrath and others 1997, and Heikkanen
and Juutilainen 1999). In addition, a number of studies have been reported in
which RF exposure, at levels insufficient to cause increased temperatures in tis-
sue, does not produce observable changes in immune cell function, differentia-
tion, mitogenic activity, or other hematological parameters (Djordjevich and oth-
ers 1977; 100 MHz, Smialowicz and others, 1981a,b; 900 MHz, Chagnaud and
Veyret 1999).A notable exception to these studies is the work of Toler and others (1988)who studied the changes in blood-borne factors during six months of exposure to
a 435 MHz radiation at 0.3 W/kg. While most factors were not observed to un-
dergo significant change, dopamine levels were found to drop almost immedi-
ately at the start of the exposure period, and remained depressed throughout the
six-month exposure period. Dopamine levels at the end of the study period were
only one-half those in the sham-exposed animals. Although not yet replicated, the
results of thisstudyareimportant to consider due to its size, the magnitude and

duration of altered dopamine response, and because the exposure frequency(435

MHz) is the center frequency of the PAVE PAWS radar.Those studies in which effects have been observed in immune-system pa-rameters or endocrine function are predominantly at exposure levels at 2450 MHz
that are clearly in the thermal RF range (Gildersleeve and others 1988; Lu and
others 1985, 1986, 1987; Michaelson and others 1961). Using thermal levels of
RF exposure, one study found no effect on autoimmune response (Anane andAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSothers 2003); however, many studies observed either increased or decreased im-mune-cell function (Bogolyubov and others 1987, 1988; Liburdy 1977, 1979,
1980; Takashima and Asakura 1983; Smialowicz and others 1981a,b, 1982a,
1982b) as well as the induction of stress markers (Cleary and others 1980). The
reported effects appear to be similar to the effects of non-RF heating.Summary for Other Physiological ParametersThe originally reported effects of low-level RF exposure on the BBB havenot been confirmed. However, many investigators have produced results that in-
dicate changes in the permeability of the BBB when a significant increase in
temperature occurs as a result of absorption of RF energy. The thermal effects
have been demonstrated through a range of endpoints, including uptake of radio-
tracers, dyes, and proteins. Some studies have even shown uptake of virus par-
ticles and drugs to be influenced by RF-produced thermal increases. Based on
modeling studies, localized exposure of the head at 1.6 W/kg will produce a 0.1oCincrease in brain temperature, an increase that is small in comparison to the tem-
perature increases associated with changes in BBB permeability described above.
The reports of permeability changes in the BBB at SARs <4 W/kg generally are
not useful in arriving at exposure guidelines since the effects at these low levels
have not been confirmed and no dose-response relationship has been established.RF studies investigating hematologic, immunologic, and endocrinologic end-points in animals exposed to RF have produced both positive and negative re-
sults. However, most of the studies in which effects were observed have been
performed at intensities of RF exposure expected to result in increased tempera-
tures. In the few studies that have reported effects at non-thermal exposure levels,
the observations are inconsistent across studies and not in general agreement with
the larger body of evidence pointing toward non-effects at these levels. Certainly,
there is a lack of evidence of RF-induced effects that can be directly related to
adverse health responses.TERATOLOGY, REPRODUCTION, AND DEVELOPMENTTeratogenicityDuring pregnancy, heat stress in animals where maternal body temperaturesare raised to thresholds of 40.5-42.0oC has been demonstrated to increase theincidence of birth defects (Boreham and others 2002; Bennet and others 1990).
Similarly, RF exposure of pregnant rodents, sufficient to increase maternal core
body temperature (whole-body average SARs of > 9 W/kg), has also been shown
to be teratogenic (27 MHz, Lary and others 1982, 1983, 1986; 970 MHz, Berman
and others 1992; 915 MHz, Jensh and others 1982a, 1997; Guillet and Michaelson
1977). Exposure to RF at ~3 W/kg at 2450 or 100 MHz has been reported to causeAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ANIMAL AND HUMAN STUDIES ADDRESSING HEALTH EFFECTS121a decrease in Purkinje cells in the cerebellum of neonatal rats (Albert and others1981a) but not squirrel monkeys (only at 2450 MHz, Albert and others 1981b).
At reduced exposure levels of 2450 MHz RF, lower than those causing mal-
formations but still thermal in nature (~4-5 W/kg), fetal mass appears to be
diminished (Marcickiewicz and others 1986).Lower levels of RF exposure that produce no significant thermal elevation intissue have not been associated with teratogenesis (Schmidt and others 1984).
Continuous exposure of rats during gestation at 0.4 W/kg (2450 MHz) produced
no effect on brain development, brain weight, or DNA, RNA, and protein content
(Merritt and others, 1984). A long-term exposure study in squirrel monkeys, also
conducted at 2450 MHz, with whole-body exposures of up to 3.4 W/kg, found no
effect in a broad array of endpoints including birth defects, development, behav-
ior, EEG, biochemistry, and hematology (Kaplan and others 1982). In contrast,
after exposure of rats to 27 MHz, Tofani and colleagues (1986) have reported
teratogenic effects in the offspring after maternal exposure at whole-body aver-
age SARs as low as 0.0001 W/kg. Clearly, this study, which has not been repli-
cated independently, is inconsistent with the majority of laboratory evidence re-
porting teratogenic effects of RF exposure only when associated with increases in
maternal temperature. Low-level exposures at 428 MHz were reported to cause a
decrease in chick hatching, although there were no developmental abnormalities
or evidence of a dose response associated with the effect (Saito and others 1991;
Saito and Suzuki 1995). In a series of studies in another laboratory, quail eggs
were exposed to RF at 2450 MHz (Braithwaite and others 1991, Gildersleeve and
others 1987; Galvin and others 1981; McRee and others 1983; Inouye and others
1982). There were no observed effects on hatching, body weight, malformations,
or hematologic parameters at power density levels (~14 W/kg) that maintained a
temperature of 37oC, although changes could be observed with exposures pro-ducing higher temperatures.Development and DifferentiationSeveral recent studies have been undertaken to address the potential influ-ence of RF exposure on developmental and differentiation processes. Lary and
Conover (1987) completed a literature review of all teratogenesis studies extant
to that date, including all studies with exposures from 300 to 3000 MHz, and
below the ANSI exposure limit of 0.4 W/kg. They found no reports of teratoge-
nic effects in the absence of organismal heating. However, Saito and Suzuki
(1995), in a study involving exposure of chick embryos to a 428 MHz, 5.5 mW/
cm2 incident field, showed severely-delayed development according to the Ham-burger-Hamilton staging. Ten replications of 10 eggs were completed, with de-
velopmental anomalies observed at SARs in the range of 8.6 mW/kg to 47.1
mW/kg.Klug and others (1997) examined the effects of 150 MHz RF with exposuresAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSof CW, and modulated at 16, 60, and 120 Hz, on the development and differentia-tion of rat embryos. Using SARs of 0.2, 1.0, and 5.0 W/kg, no statistical differ-
ences between exposed and control embryos were observed following 48 hours
of exposure. A few sporadic changes were observed under some exposure condi-
tions, specifically increases in somite numbers at modulation frequencies of 16
and 120 Hz.ReproductionTemporary sterility was reported to occur in male rats exposed to 1.3 GHz atlevels sufficient to cause intra-testicular temperatures of ~40oC (Lebovitz andothers 1983, 1987). Longer-lasting alterations of reproductive efficiency have
been observed with RF exposures producing temperatures greater than 45oC inanimal testes. In several studies examining chickens exposed to moderately high
levels of RF, the exposure was determined to cause a slight decrease in number of
eggs laid (Krueger and others 1975; Giarola and Krueger 1974). However, in
these studies, thermal parameters were not well characterized. A study at 900
MHz by Dasdag and others (1999) reported that exposure to RF for 1 month at
0.141 W/kg resulted in decreased diameter of seminiferous tubes, but no other
effects were observed in a histological examination of all major organ tissues.
There is some question with regard to the non-thermal nature of the observed
effect since the study also reported an increase in rectal temperature. An addi-
tional report indicates an effect of low-level RF exposure on reproductive
competance in rodents (Magras and Xenos 1997), although significant flaws in
study design and control make the interpretation difficult.Summary: Reproduction and DevelopmentAlthough a number of studies have reported teratogenic effects of RF expo-sure in animal models, the positive results have almost always come from stud-
ies where significant temperature increases were observed in the dam. The few
studies in which adverse effects on reproduction and/or development have been
reported from non-thermal levels of RF exposure are relatively isolated. In addi-
tion, there appear to be possible species-specific differences in teratogenic re-
sponses to RF exposure suggesting that extrapolation of animal data to humans
may not be straightforward. Examined in total, the available literature does
not indicate any consistent effect of acute or chronic RF exposure on reproduc-
tion and development in animals unless significant temperature increases
are produced. There are no human laboratory studies addressing this area of
investigation.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ANIMAL AND HUMAN STUDIES ADDRESSING HEALTH EFFECTS123IN VIVO STUDIES: CONCLUSIONSRelatively few human laboratory studies investigating the RF exposure forpossible health effects have been performed. Almost all of these were conductedat fairly low intensity levels using frequencies relevant to cellular telephony. Re-
sults have been mixed in the areas of RF effects on sleep and other behaviors and
brain activity as determined by EEG. The range of effects, however, has been
inconsistent from study to study without robust replication or direct implications
for health impacts. Futhermore, studies examining RF effects on hormone or im-
mune parameters have almost universally been negative.With animal studies, across a wide range of biologic endpoints, a consider-able number of studies have been conducted to evaluate the impact of RF expo-
sure. The majority of laboratory studies have been performed at 2450 MHz, which
is outside the frequency window of interest as defined for the purposes of this
PAVE PAWS study (see Appendix A). However, in some cases, because little
biological information was available from animals exposed at lower frequencies,
some review of 2450 MHz data was utilized. The strong indication from the col-
lected data suggests that various biological effects occur but generally only at
field intensities where temperature is elevated in the biological target. Effects at
non-thermal levels are seen only infrequently and seldom have they been inde-
pendently replicated. Nonetheless, certain studies were sufficiently large, relevant
to PAVE PAWS, and demonstrated robust and significant effects, suggesting that
replication would be merited. Specifically, the Air Force-funded studies on blood-
borne endpoints by Toler and others (1988) indicating depressed dopamine levels
(and not to be confused with the Toler cancer studies noted earlier) deserve to be
replicated utilizing exposure patterns more representative of the PAVE PAWS
system than those used by Toler and others.REFERENCESAbhold, R.H., M.J. Ortner, M.J. Galvin, and D.I. McRee. 1981. Studies on acute in vivo exposure ofrats to 2450-MHz microwave radiation. II. Effects on thyroid and adrenal axes hormones. RadiatRes 88:448-455.Adey, W.R., C.V. Byus, C.D. Cain, R.J. Higgins, R.A. Jones, C.J. Kean, N. Kuster, A. MacMurray,R.B. Stagg, and W. Haggren. 1999. Spontaneous and nitrosourea-induced primary tumors of the
central nervous system in Fischer 344 rats chronically exposed to 836 MHz modulated micro-waves. Radiat Res 152:293-302.Adey, W.R., C.V. Byus, C.D. Cain, R.J. Higgins, R.A. Jones, C.J. Kean, N. Kuster, A. MacMurray,R.B. Stagg, and G. Zimmerman. 2000. Spontaneous and nitrosourea-induced primary tumors of
the central nervous system in Fischer 344 rats chronically exposed to frequency-modulatedmicrowave fields. Cancer Res 60:1857-1863.Akyel, Y., E.L. Hunt, C. Gambrill, and C. Vargas, Jr. 1991. Immediate post-exposure effects of high-peak power microwave pulses on operant behavior of Wistar rats. Bioelectromagnetics 12:183-
195.Albert, E.N., M.F. Sherif, N.J. Papadopoulos, F.J. Slaby, and J. Monahan. 1981a. Effects of nonion-izing radiation on the purkinje cells of the rat cerebellum. Bioelectromagnetics 2:247-257.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSAlbert, E.N., M.F. Sherif, and N.J. Papadopoulos. 1981b. Effects of nonionizing radiation on thepurkinje cells of the uvula in squirrel monkey cerebellum. Bioelectromagnetics 2:241-246.Anane, R., M. Geffard, M. Taxik, D. Bodet, B. Billandel, P.E. Dulou, and B. Veyret. 2003. Effects ofGSM-900 MHz microwaves on the experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE) rat model.Bioelectromagnetics 24:211-213.Anane R., P.E. Dulou, M. Taxile, M. Geffard, F. Crespeau, and B. Veyret. 2003. Effects of GSM-900microwaves on female rats bearing DMBA-induced tumours. Radiat Res 160:492-497.ANSI (American National Standards Institute). 1982. Safety Levels with Respect to Radio FrequencyElectromagnetic Fields, 300 kHz to 100 GHz. Report No. ANSI C95.1 Ð1982. New York, NY:The Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, Inc.ANSI. 1992. IEEE Standard for Safety Levels with Respect to Human Exposure to Radio FrequencyElectromagnetic Fields, 3 kHz to 300 GHz. Report No. C95-1-1992, New York, NY: The Insti-tute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, Inc.Bartsch, H., C. Bartsch, E. Seebald, F. Deerberg, K. Dietz, L.Vollrath, and D. Meeke. 2002. Chronicexposure to a GSM-like signal (mobile phone) does not stimulate the development of DMBA-
induced mammary tumors in rats: results of three consecutive studies. Radiat Res 157:183-190.Bawin, S.M., R.J. Gavalas-Medici, and W.R. Adey. 1973. Effects of modulated very high frequencyfields on specific brain rhythms in cats. Brain Res 58:365-384.Bennet, G.D., V.K. Mohl, and R.H. Finnell. 1990. Embryonic and maternal heat shock responses to ateratogenic hyperthermic insult. Reprod Toxicol 4:113-119.Berman, E., C. Weil, P. Phillips, H.B. Carter, and D. House. 1992. Fetal and maternal effects ofcontinual exposure of rats to 970-MHz circularly-polarized microwaves. Electro Magnetobiol11:43-54.Bogolyubov, V.M., S.B. Pershin, I.D. Frenkel, V.D. Sidorov, A.I. Galenchik, Z.A. Sokolova, and I.B.Laprun. 1987. Immunobiological effect of bitemporal exposure of rabbits to microwaves. B Exp
Biol Med 102:1118-1120.Bogolyubov, V.M., S.M. Zubkova, I.D. Frenkel, Z.A. Sokolova, and I.B. Laprun. 1988. The func-tional state of thymus cells following microwave exposure of endocrine glands. Radiat Res
115:44-53.Borbely, A.A., R. Huber, T. Graf, B. Fuchs, E. Gallmann, and P. Achermann. 1999. Pulsed high-frequency electromagnetic field affects human sleep and sleep eletroencephalogram. Neurosci
Lett 275:207-210.Boreham, D.R., J.A. Rolling, J. Misonoh, and R.E.J. Mitchel. 2002. Teratogenic effects of mild heatstress during mouse embryogenesis: effect of Trp53. Radiat Res 158:443-448.Bornhausen, M. and H. Scheingraber. 2000. Prenatal exposure to 900 MHz, cell-phone electromag-netic fields had no effect on operant-behavior performances of adult rats. Bioelectromagnetics21:566-574.Bortkiewicz, A., B. Pilacik, E. Gadzicka, and W. Szymczak. 2002. The excretion of 6-hydroxymelatonin sulfate in healthy young men exposed to electromagnetic fields emitted by
cellular phoneÑan experimental study. Neuroendocrinol Lett 23:88-91.Braune, S., C. Wrocklage, J. Raczek, T. Gailus, and C.H. Lucking. 1998. Resting blood pressureincrease during exposure to a radio-frequency electromagnetic field. Lancet 351:1857-1858.Braune, S., A. Riedel, J. Schulte-Monting, and J. Raczek. 2002. Influence of a radiofrequency electro-magnetic field on cardiovascular and hormonal parameters of the autonomic nervous system inhealthy individuals. Radiat Res 158:352-356.Braithwaite, L., W. Morrison, L. Otten, and D. Pei. 1991. Exposure of fertile chicken eggs to micro-wave radiation 2.45 GHz, CW during incubation: technique and evaluation. J. Microwave Power
EE 26:206-214.Brown, D.O., S.T. Lu, and E.C. Elson. 1994. Characteristics of microwave evoked body movementsin mice. Bioelectromagnetics 15:143-161.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ANIMAL AND HUMAN STUDIES ADDRESSING HEALTH EFFECTS125Cassel, J.C., B. Cosquer, R. Galani, and N. Kuster. 2004. Whole-body exposure to 2.45 GHz electro-magnetic fields does not alter radial-maze performance in rats. Behav Brain Res 155:37-43.Chagnaud, J.L., J.M. Moreau, and B. Veyret. 1999. No effect of short term exposure to GSM-modu-lated low-power microwaves on benzo(a)pyrene-induced tumours in rat. Int J Radiat Biol75:1251-1256.Chagnaud, J.L. and B. Veyret. 1999. 900 MHz (GSM) exposure on immune parameters in rats. Int JRadiation Biol 75:111-113.Chang, B.K., A.T. Huang, W.T. Joines, and R.S. Kramer. 1982. The effect of microwave radiation 1.0GHz on the blood-brain barrier in dogs. Radio Sci 17:165-168.Chou, C.K., A.W. Guy, L.L. Kunz, R.B. Johnson, J.J. Crowley, and J.H. Krupp. 1992. Long-termlow-level microwave irradiation of rats. Bioelectromagnetics 13:469-496.Cleary, S.F., F. Nickless, L.M. Liu, and R. Hoffman. 1980. Studies of exposure of rabbits to electro-magnetic pulsed fields. Bioelectromagnetics 1:345-352.Cobb, B.L., J.R. Jauchem, and E.R. Adair. 2004. Radial arm maze performance of rats followingrepeated low level microwave radiation exposure. Bioelectromagnetics 25:49-57.Cosquer B., R. Galani, N. Kuster, and J.C. Cassel. 2004. Whole-body exposure to 2.45 GHz electro-magnetic fields does not alter anxiety responses in rats: a plus-maze study including test valida-
tion. Behav Brain Res: in press.Croft, R.J., J.S. Chandler, A.P. Burgess, R.J. Barry, J.D. Williams, and A.R. Clarke. 2002. Acutemobile phone operation affects neural function in humans. Clin Neurophysiol 113:1623-1632.DÕAndrea, J.A., O.P. Gandhi, J.L. Lords, C.H. Durney, L. Astle, L.J. Stensaas, and A.A. Schoenberg.1980. Physiological and behavioral effects of prolonged exposure to 915 MHz microwaves. J
Microwave Power EE 15:123-135.DÕAndrea, J.A., E.R. Adair, and J.O. deLorge. 2003. Behavioral and cognitive effects of microwaveexposure. Bioelectromagnetics Suppl 6:S39-S62.Dasdag, S. 2000. Do cellular phones alter blood parameters and birth weight of rats. ElectroMagnetobiol 19:107-113.Dasdag, S. M.A. Ketani, Z. Akdag, A.R. Ersay, I. Sari, O.C. Demirtas, and M.S. Celik. 1999. Whole-body microwave exposure emitted by cellular phones and testicular function of rats. Urol Res
27:219-223.Djordjevich, Z., N. Lazarevich, and V. Djokovich. 1977. Studies on the hematologic effects of long-term low-dose microwave exposure. Aviat Space Envir Med 1977:516-518.Dubreuil, D., T.M. Jay, and B. Veyret. 2002. 900 MHz and 1800 MHz (GSM) exposure on spatiallearning & memory in rats. Behav Brain Res 129:203-210.Edelstyn, N. and A. Oldershaw. 2002. The acute effects of exposure to the electromagnetic fieldemitted by mobile phones on human attention. Neuroreport 13:119-121.Eulitz, C., P. Ullsperger, G. Freude, and T. Elbert. 1998. Mobile phone modulate response patterns ofhuman brain activity. Neuroreport 9:3229-3232.Finnie, J.W., P.C. Blumbergs, J. Manavis, T.D. Utteridge, V. Gebski, and J.G. Swift. 2001. Effects ofglobal system for mobile communication (GSM)-like radiofrequency fields on vascular perme-
ability in mouse brain. Pathology 33:338-340.Finnie, J.W., P.C. Blumbergs, J. Manavis, T.D. Utteridge, V. Gebski, and R.H. Davies. 2002. Effectof long-term mobile communication microwave exposure on vascular permeability in mouse
brain. Pathology 34:344-347.Frei, M.R., R.E. Berger, S.J. Dusch, V. Guel, J.R. Jauchem, J.H. Merritt, and M.A. Stedham. 1998.Chronic exposure of cancer-prone mice to low-level 2450 MHz radiofrequency radiation.
Bioelectromagnetics 19:20-31.Freude, G., P. Ullsperger, S. Eggert, and I. Ruppe. 1998. Effects of microwaves emitted by cellularphones on human slow brain potentials. Bioelectromagnetics 19:384-387.Freude, G., P. Ullsperger, S. Eggert, and I. Ruppe. 2000. Microwaves emitted by cellular telephonesaffect human slow brain potentials. Eur J Appl Physiol 81:18-27.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.126ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSFrey, A.H., S.R. Feld, and B. Frey. 1975. Neural function and behaviour: defining the relationship.Ann NY Acad Sci 247:433-439.Frey, A.H. and J. Spector. 1986. Exposure to RF electromagnetic energy decreases aggressive behav-ior. Aggressive Behav 12:285-291.Fritze, K., C. Sommer, B. Schmitz, G. Mies, K.A. Hossmann, M. Kiessling, and C. Wiessner. 1997.Effect of global system for mobile communication (GSM) microwave exposure on blood-brainbarrier permeability in rat. Acta Neuropathol 94:465-470.Galvin, M.J., D.I. McRee, C.A. Hall, J.P. Thaxton, and C.R. Parkhurst. 1981. Humoral and cell-mediated immune function in adult Japanese quail following exposure to 2.45 GHz microwave
radiation during embryogeny. Bioelectromagnetics 2:269-278.Giarola, A.J. and W.F. Krueger. 1974. Continuous exposure of chicks and rats to electromagneticfields. IEEE T Microw Theory 22:432-437.Gildersleeve, R.P., M.J. Galvin, D.I. McRee, J.P. Thaxton, and C.R. Parkhurst. 1987. Reproduction ofJapanese quail after microwave irradiation 2.45 GHz CW during embryogeny.Bioelectromagnetics 8:9-21.Gildersleeve, R.P., D.G. Satterless, D.I. McRee, T.E. Bryan, and C.R. Parkhurst. 1988. Plasma corti-costerone in hemorrhaged Japanese quail after microwave irradiation in ovo. Comp Biochem
Physiol 89:415-424.Goldman, H., J.C. Lin, S. Murphy, and M.F. Lin. 1984. Cerebrovascular permeability to RB86 in therat after exposure to pulsed microwaves. Bioelectromagnetics 5:323-330.Gruenau, S., K.J. Oscar, M.T. Folker, and S.I. Rapoport. 1982. Absence of microwave effect onblood-brain barrier permeability to C14-sucrose in the conscious rat. Exp Neurol 75:299-307.Guillet, R. and S.M. Michaelson. 1977. The effect of repeated microwave exposure on neonatal rats.Radio Sci 12:125-129.Haarala, C., L. Bjornberg, M. Ek, M. Laine, A. Revonsuo, M. Koivisto, and H. Hamalainen. 2003.Effect of a 902 MHz electromagnetic field emitted by mobile phones on human cognitive func-
tion: a replication study. Bioelectromagnetics 24:283-288.Heikkanen, P. and J. Juutilianen. 1999. Chronic exposure to 50-Hz magnetic fields or 900-MHzelectromagnetic fields does not alter nocturnal 6-hydroxymelatonin sulfate secretion in CBA/S
mice. Electro Magnetobiol 18:33-42.Heikkinen, P., V.M. Kosma, T. Hongisto, H. Huuskonen, P. Hyysalo, H. Komulainen, T. Kumlin, T.Kumlin, T. Lahtinen, S. Lang, and J.Juutilainen. 2001. Effects of mobile phone radiation on x-
ray induced tumorigenesis in mice. Radiat Res 156:775-785.Hietanen, M., A.M. Hamalainen, and T. Husman. 2002. Hypersensitivity symptoms associated withexposure to cellular telephones: no causal link. Bioelectromagnetics 23:264-270.Hietanen, M., T. Kovala, and A.M. Hamalainen. 2000. Human brain activity during exposure toradiofrequency fields emitted by cellular phones. Scan J Work Env Hea 26:87-92.Higashiukubo, R., V.O. Culbreth, D.R. Spitz, M.C. LaRegina, W.F. Pickard, W.L. Straube, E.G.Moros, and J.L. Roti. 1999. Radiofrequency electromagnetic fields have no effect on the in vivoproliferation of the 9L brain tumor. Radiat Res 152:665-671.Huber, R., T. Graf, K.A. Cote, L. Wittmann, E. Gallmann, D. Matter, J. Schuderer, N. Kuster, A.A.Borbely, and P. Achermann. 2000. Exposure to pulsed high-frequency electromagnetic field
during waking affects human sleep EEG. Neuroreport 11:3321-3325.Huber, R., V. Treyer, A.A. Borbely, J. Schuderer, J.M. Gottselig, H.P. Landolt, E. Werth, T. Berhold,N. Kuster, A. Buck, and P. Achermann. 2002. Electromagnetic fields, such as those from mobile
phones, alter regional cerebral blood flow and sleep and waking EEG. J Sleep Res 11:289-295.Huber, R., J. Schuderer, T. Graf, K. Jutz, A.A. Borbely, N. Kuster, and P. Achermann. 2003. Radiofrequency electromagnetic field exposure in humans: estimation of SAR distribution in the brain,
effects on sleep and heart rate. Bioelectromagnetics 24:262-276.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ANIMAL AND HUMAN STUDIES ADDRESSING HEALTH EFFECTS127Imaida, K., M. Taki, T. Yamaguchi, T. Ito, S. Watanabe, K. Wake, A. Aimoto, Y. Kamimura, N. Ito,and T. Shirai. 1998. Lack of promoting effects of the electromagnetic near-field used for cellularphones (929.2 MHz) on rat liver carcinogenesis in a medium-term liver bioassay. Carcinogen-esis 19:311-314.Inaba, R., K Schishido, A. Okada, and T. Moroji. 1992. Effects of whole body microwave exposureon the rat brain contents of biogenic amines. Eur J Appl Physiol 65:124-128.Inouye, M., N. Matsumoto, M.J. Galvin, and D.I. McRee. 1982. Lack of effect of 2.45 GHz micro-wave radiation on the development of preimplantation embryos of mice. Bioelectromagnetics3:275-283.Jensh, R.P. 1997. Behavioral teratologic studies using microwave radiation: is there an increased riskfrom exposure to cellular phones and microwave ovens? Reprod Toxicol 11:601-611.Jensh, R.P., W.H. Vogel, and R.L. Brent. 1982a. Postnatal functional analysis of prenatal exposure ofrats to 915 MHz microwave radiation. J Am Coll Toxicol 1:73-90.Jensh, R.P., I. Weinberg, and R.L. Brent. 1982b. Teratologic studies of prenatal exposure of rats to915 MHz microwave radiation. Radiat Res 92:160-171.Kaplan, J., P. Polson, C. Rebert, K. Lunan, and M. Gage. 1982. Biological and behavioral effects ofprenatal and postnatal exposure to 2450-MHz electromagnetic radiation in the squirrel monkey.
Radio Sci 17:135-144.Klug, S., M. Hetscher, S. Giles, S. Kohlsmann, and K. Kramer. 1997. The lack of effects of nonthermalRF electromagnetic fields on the development of rat embryos grown in culture. Life Sci 61:1789-
1802.Koivisto, M., C. Haarla, C.M. Krause, A. Revonsuo, M. Laine, and H. Hamalainen. 2001. GSMphone signal does not produce subjective symptoms. Bioelectromagnetics 22:212-215.Koivisto, M., A. Revonsuo, C.M. Krause, C. Haarla, L. Sillanmaki, M. Laine, and H. Hamalainen.2001. Effects of 902 MHz electromagnetic field emitted by cellular telephones on response
times in humans. Neuroreport 11:413-415.Krause, C.M., L. Sillanmaki, M. Koivisto, A. Haggqvist, C. Saarela, M. Laine, and H. Hamalainen.2000a. Effects of electromagnetic field emitted by cellular phones on the EEG during a memory
task. Neuroreport 11:761-764.Krause, C.M., L. Sillanmaki, M. Koivisto, A. Haggqvist, C. Saarela, M. Laine, and H. Hamalainen.2000b. Effects of electromagnetic fields emitted by cellular phones on the electroencephalo-
gram during a visual working memory task. Int J Radiat Biol 76:1659-1667.Krueger, W.F., A.J. Giarola, J.W. Bradley, and A. Shrekenhamer. 1975. Effects of electromagneticfields on fecundity in the chicken. Ann NY Acad Sci 247:391-400.Lai, H., A. Horita, and A.W. Guy. 1994. Microwave irradiation affects radial-arm maze performancein the rat. Bioelectromagnetics 15:95-104.LaRegina, M., E.G. Moros, W.F. Pickard, W.L. Straube, J. Baty, and J.L. Roti. 2003. The effect ofchronic exposure to 835.62 MHz FDMA or 847.74 MHz CDMA radiofrequency radiation on
the incidence of spontaneous tumors in rats. Radiat Res 160:143-151.Lary, J.M. and D.L. Conover. 1987. Teratogenic effects of radiofrequency radiation. IEEE Eng MedBiol Mag, March, 42.Lary, J.M., D.L. Conover, E.D. Foley, and P.L. Hanser. 1982. Teratogenic effects of 27.12 MHzradiation in rats. Health Phys 29:381-383.Lary, J.M., D.L. Conover, P.H. Johnson, and J.R. Burg. 1983. Teratogenicity of 27.12 MHz radiationin rats is related to duration of hyperthermic exposure. Bioelectromagnetics 4:249-255.Lary, J.M., D.L. Conover, P.H. Johnson, and R.W. Hornung. 1986. Dose-response relationship be-tween body temperature and birth defects in radiofrequency-irradiated rats. Bioelectromagnetics
7:141-149.Lass, J., V. Tuulik, R. Ferenets, R. Rilsalo, and H. Hinrikus. 2002. Effects of 7 Hz-modulated 450MHz electromagnetic radiation on human performance in visual memory tasks. Int J Radiat Biol
78:937-944.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSLebedeva, N.N., A.V. Sulimov, O.P. Sulimova, T.I. Korotkovskaya, and T. Gailus. 2001. Investiga-tion of brain potentials in sleeping humans exposed to the electromagnetic field of mobilephones. Crit Rev Biomed Eng 29:125-133.Lebovitz, R.M. 1981. Prolonged microwave irradiation of rats: effects on concurrent operant behav-ior. Bioelectromagnetics 2:169-186.Lebovitz, R.M. and L. Johnson. 1983. Testicular function of rats following exposure to microwaveradiation. Bioelectromagnetics 4:107-114.Lebovitz, R.M., L. Johnson, and W.K. Samson. 1987. Effects of pulse-modulated microwave radia-tion and conventional heating on sperm production. J Appl Physiol 62:245-252.Lebovitz, R.M. and R.L. Seaman. 1983. Pulse modulated and continuous wave microwave radiationyield equivalent changes in operant behavior of rodents. Physiol Behav 30:891-898.Lee, T.M., S.M. Ho, L.Y. Tsang, S.H. Yang, L.S. Li, C.C. Chan, and S.Y. Yang. 2001. Effect onhuman attention of exposure to the electromagnetic field emitted by mobile phones. Neuroreport
12:729-731.Liburdy, R.P. 1977. Effects of radio-frequency radiation on inflammation. Radio Sci 12:179-183.Liburdy, R.P. 1979. Radiofrequency radiation alters the immune system: modulation of T- and B-lymphocyte levels and cell-mediated immunocompetence by hyperthermic radiation. Radiat Res77:34-46.Liburdy, R.P. 1980. Radiofrequency radiation alters the immune system. II. Modulation of in vivolymphocyte circulation. Radiat Res 83:66-73.Lin, J.C. and M.F. Lin. 1980. Studies on microwave and blood-brain barrier interaction.Bioelectromagnetics 1:313-323.Lin, J.C. and M.F. Lin. 1982. Microwave hyperthermia-induced blood-brain barrier alterations. RadiatRes 89:77-87.Lu, S.T., N.A. Lebda, S. Pettit, and S.M. Michaelson. 1985. The relationship of decreased serumthyrotropin and increased colonic temperature in rats exposed to microwaves. Radiat Res
104:365-386.Lu, S.T., S.J. Lu, and S.M. Michaelson. 1986. Effects of microwaves on the adrenal cortex. RadiatRes 107:234-249.Lu, S.T., N.A. Lebda, S. Pettit, and S.M. Michaelson. 1987. Effects of microwaves on three differentstrains of rats. Radiat Res 110:173-191.Lu, S.T., D.O. Brown, C.E. Johnson, S.P. Mathur, and E.C. Elson. 1992. Abnormal cardiovascularresponses induced by localized high power microwave exposure. IEEE T Bio-Med Eng 39:484-492.Lyle, D.P., P. Schechter, W.R. Adey, and R.L. Lundak. 1983. Suppression of T-lymphocyte cytotox-icity following exposure to sinusoidally amplitude-modulated fields. Bioelectromagnetics 4:281-
292.Magras, I.N. and T.D. Xenos. 1997. RF radiation-induced changes in the prenatal development ofmice. Bioelectromagnetics 18:455-461.Mann, K. and J. Roschke. 1996. Effects of pulsed high-frequency electromagnetic fields on humansleep. Neuropsychobiology 33:41-47.Mann, K. and J. Roschke. 2004. Sleep under exposure to high frequency electromagnetic fields. SleepMed Rev 8:95-107.Mann, K., P. Wagner, G. Brunn, F. Hassan, C. Hiemke, and J. Roschke. 1998. Effects of pulsed high-frequency electromagnetic fields on the neuroendocrine system. Neuroendocrinology 67:139-
144.Marcickiewicz, J., B. Chazan, T. Niemiec, G. Sokolska, M. Troszynski, M. Luczak, and S.Szmigielski. 1986. Microwave radiation enhances teratogenic effect of cytosine arabinoside in
mice. Biol Neonate 50:75-82.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ANIMAL AND HUMAN STUDIES ADDRESSING HEALTH EFFECTS129Mausset, A., R. deSeze, F. Mountpeyroux, and A. Privat. 2001. Effects of radiofrequency exposure onthe GABAergic system in the rat cerebellum: clues from semi-quantitative immunochemistry.Brain Res 912:33-46.McRee, D.I., J.P. Thaxton, and C.R. Parkhurst. 1983. Reproduction in male Japanese quail exposed tomicrowave radiation during embryogeny. Radiat Res 96:51-58.Merritt, J.H., A.F. Chamness, and S.J. Allen. 1978. Studies on blood-brain barrier permeability aftermicrowave-radiation. Radiat Environ Bioph 15:367-377.Merritt, J.H., K.A. Hardy, and A.F. Chamness. 1984. In utero exposure to microwave radiation and ratbrain development. Bioelectromagnetics 5:315-322.Michaelson, S.M., R.A.E. Thomson, and J.W. Howland. 1961. Physiological aspects of microwaveirradiation of mammals. Am J Physiol 201:351-356.Mitchell, D.S., W.G. Switzer, and E.L. Bronaugh. 1977. Hyperactivity and disruption of operantbehavior in rats after multiple exposures to microwave radiation. Radio Sci 12:263-271.Mitchell, C.L., D.I. McRee, N.J. Peterson, H.A. Tilson, M.G. Shandala, M.I. Rudnev, V.V. Varetskii,and M.I. Navkatikyan. 1981. Results of a United States and Soviet Union joint project on ner-vous system effects of microwave radiation. Environ Health Persp 81:201-209.Mitchell, C.L., D.I. McRee, N.J. Peterson, and H.A. Tilson. 1988. Some behavioral effects of short-term exposure of rats to 2.45 GHz microwave radiation. Bioelectromagnetics 9:259-268.Moriyama, E., M. Salcman, and R.D. Broadwell. 1991. Blood-brain barrier alteration after micro-wave-induced hyperthermia is purely a thermal effect. I. Temperature and power measurements.Surg Neurol 35:177-182.NCRP (National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements). 1986. Biological Effects anExposure Criteria for Radiofrequency Electromagnetic Fields, NCRP Report 86. Bethesda, MD:
National Council on Radiation Protection.Neilly, J.P. and J.C. Lin. 1986. Interaction of ethanol and microwaves on the blood-brain barrier ofrats. Bioelectromagnetics 7:405-414.Ohmoto, Y., H. Fujisawa, T. Ishikawa, H. Koizumi, T. Matsuda, and H. Ito. 1996. Sequential changesin cerebral blood flow, early neuropathological consequences and blood-brain barrier disruption
following radiofrequency-induced localized hyperthermia. Int J Hyperther 12:321-334.Oscar, K.J. and T.D. Hawkins. 1977. Microwave alteration of the blood-brain barrier system of rats.Brain Res 126:281-293.Oscar K.J., S.P. Gruenau, M.T. Folker, and S.I. Rapoport. 1981. Local cerebral blood flow aftermicrowave exposure. Brain Res 204:220-225.Persson, B.R., L.G. Salford, and A. Brun. 1997. Blood-brain barrier permeability in rats exposed toelectromagnetic fields used in wireless communication. Wirel Netw 3:455-461.Persson, B.R., L.G. Salford, A. Brun, and L. Malmgren. 1992. Increased permeability of the blood-brain barrier induced by magnetic and electromagnetic fields. Ann NY Acad Sci 649:356-358.Prausnitz, S. and C. Susskind. 1962. Effects of chronic microwave irradiation on mice. IRE T BiomedElectr 104-108.Preece, A.W., G. Iwi, A. Davies-Smith, K. Wesnes, S. Butler, E. Lim, and A. Varey. 1999. Effect ofa 915 MHz simulated mobile phone signal on cognitive function in man. Int J Radiat Biol
75:447-456.Preston, E. and G. Prefontaine. 1980. Cerebrovascular permeability to sucrose in the rat exposed to2,450-MHz microwaves. J Appl Physiol: Respiratory Environ Excercise Physiol 49:218-223.Preston, E., E.J. Vavasour, and H.M. Assenheim. 1979. Permeability of the blood-brain barrier tomannitol in the rat following 2450 MHz microwave irradiation. Brain Res 174:109-117.Radon, K., D. Parera, D.M. Rose, D. Jung, and L. Vollrath. 2001. No effects of pulsed radio frequencyelectromagnetic fields on melatonin, cortisol, and selected markers of the immune system inman. Bioelectromagnetics 22:280-287.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.130ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSRepacholi, M.H., A. Basten, V. Gebski, D. Noonan, J. Finnie, and A.W. Harris. 1997. Lymphomas inEÐPim1 transgenic mice exposed to pulsed 900 MHz electromagnetic fields. Radiat Res147:631-640.Roberts, N.J. and S.M. Michaelson. 1983. Microwaves and neoplasia in mice: analysis of a reportedrisk. Health Phys 44:430-433.Roschke, J. and K. Mann. 1997. No short-term effects of digital mobile radio telephone on the awakehuman electroencephalogram. Bioelectromagnetics 18:172-176.Sagan, P.M. and R.G. Medici. 1979. Behavior of chicks exposed to low-power 450-MHz fields sinu-soidally modulated at EEG frequencies. Radio Sci 14:239-245.Saito, K. and K. Suzuki. 1995. Maldevelopment of early chick embryos induced by non-thermogenicdose radio frequency radiation at 428 MHz for the first 48 hours. Cong Anom 35:275-283.Saito, K., K. Suzuki, and S. Motoyoshi. 1991. Lethal and teratogenic effects of long-term low-inten-sity radio frequency radiation at 428 MHz on developing chick embryo. Teratology 43:609-614.Salford, L.G., A. Brun, J.L. Eberhardt, L. Malmgren, and B.R.R. Persson. 2003. Nerve cell damage inmammalian brain after exposure to microwaves from GSM mobile phones. Environ HealthPersp 111:881-883.Salford, L.G., A. Brun, J.L. Eberhardt, and B.R.R. Persson. 1993. Experimental studies of brain tu-mour development during exposure to continuous and pulsed 915 MHz radiofrequency radia-
tion. Bioelectroch Bioener 30:313-318.Salford, L.G., A. Brun, K. Sturesson, J.L. Eberhardt, and B.R.R. Persson. 1994. Permeability of theblood-brain barrier induced by 915 MHz electromagnetic radiation, continuous wave and modu-
lated at 8, 16, 50, and 200 Hz. Microsc Res Techn 27:535-542.Sandstrom, M., J. Wilen, G. Oftendal, and K.H. Mild. 2001. Mobile phone use and subjective symp-toms. Comparison of symptoms experienced by users of analogue and digital mobile phones.
Occup Med (Lond) 51:25-35.Schmidt, R.E., J.H. Merritt, and K.H. Hardy. 1984. In utero exposure to low-level microwaves doesnot affect rat fetal development. Int J Radiat Biol 46:383-386.Sienkiewicz, Z.J., R.P. Blackwell, R.G. Haylock, R.D. Saunders, and B.L. Cobb. 2000. Low-levelexposure to pulsed 900 MHz microwave radiation does not cause deficits in the performance ofa spatial learning task in mice. Bioelectromagnetics 21:151-158.Smialowicz, R.J., J.S. Ali, E. Berman, S.J. Bursian, J.B. Kinn, C.G. Liddle, L.W. Reiter, and C.M.Weil. 1981a. Chronic exposure of rats to 100 MHz (CW) radiofrequency radiation: assessment
of biological effects. Radiat Res 86:488-505.Smialowicz, R.J., C.M. Weil, P. Marsh, M.M. Riddle, R.R. Rogers, and B.F. Rehnberg. 1981b. Bio-logical effects of long-term exposure of rats to 970-MHz radiofrequency radiation.
Bioelectromagnetics 2:279-284.Smialowicz, R.J., M.M. Riddle, R.R. Rogers, and G.A. Stott. 1982b. Assessment of immune respon-siveness of mice irradiated with continuous wave or pulse-modulated 425 MHz radio frequency
radiation. Bioelectromagnetics 3:467-470.Smialowicz, R.J., M.M. Riddle, C.M. Weil, P.L. Brugnolotti, and J.B. Kinn. 1982a. Exposure of ratsto 425-MHz CW radiofrequency radiation: effects on lymphocytes. J Microwave Power EE
17:211-221.Smythe, J.W. and B. Costall. 2003. Mobile phone use facilitates memory in male, but not female,subjects. Neuroreport 14:243-246.Spalding, J.F., R.W. Freyman, and L.M. Holland. 1971. Effects of 800 MHz electromagnetic radia-tion on body weight, activity, hematopoiesis, and life span in mice. Health Phys 20:421-424.Sutton, C.H., Q. Balzano, O. Garay, and F.B. Carroll. 1982. 452 MHz exposure on blood brain barrierpermeability in pigs. J Microwave Power EE 17:280-281.Sutton, C.H. and F.B. Carroll. 1979. Effects of microwave-induced hyperthermia on the blood-brainbarrier of the rat. Radio Sci 14:329-334.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ANIMAL AND HUMAN STUDIES ADDRESSING HEALTH EFFECTS131Sykes, P.J., B.D. McCallum, M.J. Bangay, A.M. Hooker, and A.A. Morley. 2001. Effect ofradiofrequency exposure on intrachromosomal recombination in mutation and cancer. RadiatRes 156:495-502.Takashima, S. and T. Asakura. 1983. Desickling of sickled erythrocytes by pulsed radio-frequencyfield. Science 220:411-413.Takashima, S., B. Onaral, and H.P. Schwan. 1979. Effects of modulated RF energy on the EEG ofmammalian brains: effects of acute and chronic irradiations. Radiat Environ Biophys 16:15-27.Tahvanainen, K., J. Nino, P. Halonen, T. Kuusela, T. Laitinen, E. Lansimies, J. Hartikainen, M.Hietanen, and H. Lindholm. 2004. Acute heart rate and blood pressure responses during cellularphone use. Bioelectromagnetics 25:73-83.Thuroczy, G., G. Kubinyi, M. Bodo, J. Bakos, and L.D. Bakos. 1994. Simultaneous response of brainelectrical activity (EEG) and cerebral circulation (REG) to microwave exposure in rats. Rev
Environ Health 10:135-148.Tofani, S., G. Agnesod, P. Ossola, S. Ferrini, and R. Bussi. 1986. Effects of continuous low-levelexposure to radiofrequency radiation on intrauterine development in rats. Health Phys 51:489-
499.Toler, J., V. Popovich, S. Bonasera, P. Popovich, C. Honeycutt, and D. Sgoutas. 1988. Long-termstudy of 435 MHz radiofrequency radiation on blood-borne end points in canulated ratsÑPartII: methods, results and summary. J Microwave Power EE 23:105-136.Toler, J.C., W.W. Shelton, M.R. Frei, J.H. Merritt, M.L. Meltz, and M.A. Stedham. 1997. Long-term,low-level exposure of mice prone to mammary tumors to 435 MHz radiofrequency radiation.
Radiat Res 148:227-234.Utteridge, T.D., V. Gebski, J.W. Finnie, B. Vernon-Roberts, and T.R. Kuchel. 2002. Long-term expo-sure of EÐPim1 transgenic mice to 898.4 MHz microwaves does not increase lymphoma inci-dence. Radiat Res 158:357-364.Vollrath, L., R. Spessert, T. Kratzsch, M. Keiner, and H. Hollmann. 1997. No short-term effects ofhigh-frequency electromagnetic fields on the mammalian pineal gland. Bioelectromagnetics
18:376-387.Vorobyov, V.V., A.A. Galchenko, N.I. Kukushkin, and I.G. Akoev. 1997. Effects of weak microwavefields amplitude modulated at ELF on EEG of symmetric brain areas in rats. Bioelectromagnetics
18:293-298.Wagner, P., J. Roschke, K. Mann, W. Hiller, and C. Frank. 1998. Human sleep under the influence ofpulsed radiofrequency electromagnetic fields: a polysomnographic study using standardized
conditions. Bioielectromagnetics 19:199-202.Wagner, P., J. Roschke, K. Mann, J. Fell, W. Hiller, C. Frank, and M. Grozinger. 2000. Human sleepEEG under the influence of pulsed radiofrequency electromagnetic fields. Results from
polysomnographies using submaximal high power flux densities. Neuropsychobiology 42:207-212.Ward, T.R. and J.S. Ali. 1985. Blood-brain barrier permeation in the rat during exposure to low-power 1.7 GHz microwave radiation. Bioelectromagnetics 6:131-143.Ward, T.R., J.A. Elder, M.D. Long, and D. Svendsgaard. 1982. Measurement of blood-brain barrierpermeation in rats during exposure to 2450-MHz microwaves. Bioelectromagnetics 3:371-383.Williams, W.M., M. del Cerro, and S.M. Michaelson. 1984a. Effect of 2450 MHz microwave energyon the blood-brain barrier to hydrophilic molecules. B. Effect on the permeability to HRP. Brain
Res 7:171-181.Williams, W.M., W. Hoss, M. Formaniak, and S.M. Michaelson. 1984b. Effect of 2450 MHz micro-wave energy on the blood-brain barrier to hydrophilic molecules. A. Effect on the permeability
to sodium fluorescein. Brain Res 7:165-170.Williams, W.M., S.T. Lu, M. del Cerro, and S.M. Michaelson. 1984c. Effect of 2450 MHz microwaveenergy on the blood-brain barrier to hydrophilic molecules. D. Brain temperature and blood-
brain barrier permeability to hydrophilic tracers. Brain Res 7:191-212.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSWilliams, W.M., J. Platner, and S.M. Michaelson. 1984d. Effect of 2450 MHz microwave energy onthe blood-brain barrier to hydrophilic molecules. C. Effect on the permeability to [C-14] su-crose. Brain Res 7:183-190.Yamaguchi, J., G. Tsurita, S. Ueno, S. Watanabe, K. Wake, M. Taki, and H. Nagawa. 2003. 1439MHz pulsed TDMA fields affect performance of rats in a T-maze only when body temperature
is elevated. Bioelectromagnetics 24:223-230.Zook, B.C. and S.J. Simmens. 2001. The effects of 860 MHz radiofrequency radiation on the induc-tion or promotion of brain tumors and other neoplasms in rats. Radiat. Res. 155:572-583.Zwamborn, A.P., S.H.. Vossen, B.J. van Leersum, M.A. Ouwens, and W.N. Makel. 2003. Effects ofglobal communication system radio-frequency fields on well being and cognitive functions of
human subjects with and without subjective complaints. Netherlands Organization for Applied
Scientific Research (TNO), FEL-03-C148.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1338Epidemiological Studies of thePossible Adverse Health Effects of
Pulsed Radar EmissionsIn this chapter we discuss a limited range of studies that addressed potentialhealth effects among populations exposed to pulsed-radiofrequency wavelengths.
Ideally, the best studies would be carried out in the fields of radar stations. Unfor-
tunately, such studies are very limited in number and quality. One of the reasonsis the difficulty of determining the precise dosage of the radar waves received bythe population over a long period of exposure. As a result, epidemiological stud-
ies in such populations are few in number. When such studies are undertaken,
they usually occur after long exposures and often within the context of occupa-
tional exposures. A large number of such studies deal with implied exposures due
to assignment on death certificates such as Òelectrician.ÓWe include in this chapter those studies which have been undertaken in situ-ations where there have been serious concerns about possible health effects, such
as in the case of the exposure in the Moscow Embassy (Lilienfeld and others
1978). In other instances there has been a defined cohort exposed to radar emis-
sions of various types with follow-up for specific outcomes (Hill 1990; Robinette
and others 1980; Groves and others 2002). We also include studies of Polish
military personnel and of the region that was irradiated by the Skrunda radar
facility, which report health effects of radar emissions not previously or subse-
quently confirmed by other observations.EXPOSURES AT THE U.S. EMBASSY IN MOSCOWA substantial RF exposure of employees working in the U.S. Embassy inMoscow (Lilienfeld and others 1978) occurred between 1953 and 1976. Those
employees were exposed to microwave energy (500 MHz-3.0 GHz) at levels of 5An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.134ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSW/cm2 to 15 
W/cm2 for periods of 9 to 18 hours per day. To determine the
possible effects on morbidity and mortality, the health status of 1827 Department
of State employees at the Moscow Embassy was compared with the health status
of 2561 employees and their dependents at other U.S. Embassies in neighboring
Eastern States using health records, health questionnaires, and death certificates.
It was concluded that personnel working at the U.S. Embassy in Moscow from
1953 to 1976 suffered no ill effects from microwaves beamed at the building.EXPOSURES AT THE MIT RADIATION LABORATORYA cohort of 1592 white male physicists and engineers participating in a radarresearch and development project during Word War II was evaluated for mortal-
ity (Hill 1990). It was not possible to assign precise personal exposures although
classes of exposure were assigned. Overall and cause-specific mortality, using
standardized mortality ratios, was examined up until 1980 for an average survival
of 36 years. Comparisons were made with all U.S. white males, and with a cohort
of physicians. The MIT Radiation Laboratory experienced a lower than expected
mortality based on a comparison with age-adjusted mortality in U.S. males, as
well as with the comparison with the cohort of physicians. Among the different
causes of death there was a slight elevation of rates for HodgkinÕs disease andcirrhosis of the liver, neither of which reached statistical significance.TWO STUDIES OF A U.S. NAVY COHORTA total of 40,890 U.S. Naval personnel, believed to be exposed to radar en-ergy while aboard navy ships, was studied for potential adverse health effects. No
RF measurements were taken of the cohort, consisting only of men, who were
categorized into high exposure and lower exposure based only upon job classifi-
cation. This cohort was the subject of two separate investigations, including the
original report by Robinette and others (1980) and subsequently by Groves and
others (2002), which included an extended follow-up period.In the initial investigation (Robinette and others 1980), the individuals werefrom U.S. Navy technical schools (1950-1954). Follow-up in this study was via
hospital records, the Social Security Administration, and the National Death In-
dex. Cause of death was obtained from death certificates. In the first study, there
was a finding of significantly increased trauma mortality in the group with sig-
nificantly elevated microwave exposure. On further examination, this increased
mortality was the result of military aircraft accidents. Total mortality was not
significantly different in the two groups. While mortality from cancer, stroke,
chronic nephritis, influenza and pneumonia, and liver disease was elevated among
the group with the higher level of exposure, none reached statistical significance.The subsequent study of this cohort by Groves and others (2002), including afollow-up period of approximately 40 years, provided an opportunity to identifyAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EPIDEMIOLOGICAL STUDIES135potential delayed health effects. In this study, comparisons of mortality were made
between the two exposure groups and age-specific mortality rates in the U.S.
white population. A total of 8393 deaths were identified for a cumulative crude
mortality rate of 20.7%. The result for the comparison of the low radar exposure
with that of the U.S. population was 0.80 (0.78-0.82) and for the high radar expo-
sure rate it was 0.69 (0.67-0.71). This indicates that the whole cohort was in
better health than the whole U.S. white male population of the same age distribu-
tion, an effect often referred to as the Òhealthy worker effect.Ó The only causes of
death with a statistically significant elevated SMR were for war-related deaths
and for accidents involving air transportation in the high-exposure cohort (49.6
[27.5-89.6]) and (4.74 [3.89-5.76]), and war injuries were also significantly el-
evated in the low-exposure cohort (9.13 [2.28-36.5]). Non-significant elevations
in the SMR were observed for lymphocytic leukemia (1.12 [0.69-1.83]) and non-
lymphocytic leukemia (1.24 [0.90-1.69]) in the subgroup defined as high-poten-
tial exposure. There were some weaknesses in the studies consisting of lack of
exposure measurements and potential losses in the follow-up which would have a
tendency to lower SMRs. The authors of the more recent study conclude, ÒRadarexposures had little effect on mortality in this cohort of U.S. Navy veteransÓ.RADIO LOCATION STATION AT SKRUNDAThe Radio Location Station at Skrunda in Latvia was part of the Early Warn-ing System of the Soviet Union (Romancuks 1996). The station had 2 pulsed-
radar systems operating at 152 to 162 MHz, at a power of 1250 kW. The pulse
duration was 0.8 msec with an interpulse interval of 41 msec and a pulse repeti-
tion rate of 24.5 Hz. The average-power level at nearby residential locations was
less than 10 W/cm2 and the peak power level at these locations was 500 
W/cm2. The radar systems were equipped with a pair of antennas measuring 250 12 m, which were angled slightly towards each other.Selected children in the vicinity of the Skrunda Station underwent psycho-physical testing. A total of 609 children aged 9-18 living within 20 km of the
Skundra station were assumed to be exposed. The test battery (Polytest 8802),
requiring 70 minutes to complete, including 11 tests that measure tapping rates,
reaction to visual and auditory stimuli, attention, and memory (Kalmins and oth-
ers 1996), was administered to 609 children. Among participants, 224 children
lived where they were directly exposed, 385 children lived nearby but were not
directly exposed, and an additional 357 children lived in non-exposed areas and
served as controls. The authors concluded that children living in the exposed area
performed worse on the tests than children living in the nearby area and even
worse than the children in the control group. Many of the differences in perfor-
mance were not statistically significant and many of the differences were found
to show correlation differences of 0.25 and were barely significantly different
from 0.0. In some categories performance on psychophysical tests appeared to beAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSstatistically impaired for children living in the radar line of sight compared tothose living behind the radar and those living in a nearby community. The impair-
ment occurred in all ages tested (9-18 years) in a tapping test, but in other cases
the effect was only in one sex or in certain age groups. For instance, reaction
times to auditory stimuli were significantly impared in ages 9-12 years, while
ages 13-14 years showed no statistical difference on this test. The authors note
that Òevidence for a factor other than electromagnetic fields having caused theobserved results was not found, but its existence cannot be ruled out . . .Ó. Thesmall populations exposed in the Skrunda radio stations do not make it likely that
further epidemiological studies in this population can be mounted.POLISH MILITARY STUDIESOver the years 1971-1985 there was a study of cancer morbidity (first diag-nosis of cancer) in a population consisting of career personnel in the armed
forces of Poland (Szmigielski 1996). This population varied over the years from
118,500 to 142,200 with a mean of 127,800 (9620). Based on military records,the authors designated a fraction of this population, which varied between 3400
and 3700 persons (mean 3720  360), as exposed to RF/microwave radiation.
This population was divided into 4 age-groups (20-29, 30-39, 40-49, and 50-59
years). The study consisted of a series of annual cross-sectional assessments of
morbidity in a series of populations. This approach would be sensitive to changes
in age makeup in each of the population groups over the period of study, or to
possible changes in the exposure characteristics, but it also makes it difficult to
compare the results of this study with conventional cohort studies that follow a
particular cohort over a period of years. The exposed part of the population was
exposed to pulse-modulated 150-3500 MHz radiation with 80-85% not exceed-
ing 0.2 mW/cm2 and 15-20% at 0.2-0.4 mW/cm
2. Individual exposures couldnot be determined. The total incidence of cancer diagnoses was determined by
age groups for the total population and for the exposed population. Cancer oc-
currence was determined for the following sites: oral cavity, pharynx, esophagus
and stomach, colorectal, liver/pancreas, lung, bones, skin including melanoma,
kidney and prostate, brain and nervous system, thyroid, and hematopoietic and
lymphatic systems. Cancer incidence in the non-exposed population was used as
the expected rate for the total population. The overall cancer morbidity rate was
57.6 per 100,000 per year and the cancer morbidity rate was 119.1 per 100,000
per year in the exposed population. The gross observed/expected ratio therefore
was 2.07 (1.12-3.58). The study reported significantly increased cancer morbid-
ity in all exposed age groups except in 50-59-year-old subjects exposed to radia-
tion. The largest subclass increases were from chronic myelocytic leukemia,
acute myeloblastic leukemia, and non-HodgkinÕs lymphoma (13.9, 8.62, and5.82, respectively).An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EPIDEMIOLOGICAL STUDIES137SUMMARYThe results of the studies cited here are mixed in characteristics. On the onehand are the results of studies of populations that are reasonably described in
terms of radar exposure such as the population in the U.S. Embassy (Lilienfeld
and others 1978). They are reinforced by similar exposures in the MIT radiation
laboratory (Hill 1990), which also indicate a lack of health effect. In the MIT
study the exposure characteristics were doubtful, but the duration of the expo-
sure was early in 1942 until 1980. In all these studies there was uncertainty in
the exposure classification. The total exposure in terms of people was small, but
the follow-up was adequate to determine that there were negligible effects of
exposure.The next investigation was of a large cohort in the U.S. Navy (40,890 people)that was followed-up by two study groups that were relatively independent of
each other (Robinette and others 1980; Groves and others 2002). In the first study,
follow-up was from 1950 to 1974. The group was divided up into two cohorts, the
first of which comprised 20,109 individuals who, based on their job description,
had a higher exposure than the second cohort of 20,780 individuals, who received
a much lower exposure. There were no direct exposure measurements made in
either group after the initial assignment of dose. Neither investigation identified
statistically significant associations with exposure and adverse health-related out-

comes.The committee has reviewed two studies that were connected with theSkrunda Radio Location System. This system was operating at a slightly lower
frequency than PAVE PAWS but at a higher power level of 1250 kW. The first
study reported a lower annual tree-ring width following the startup of the facility
in 1971 and is reported in a previous chapter (Chapter 6 on biological effects). A
second report addressed performance in a psychophysical test administered to
youths of 9-18 years. The annual tree-ring width appeared affected (diminished)
after the Skrunda Radio Location System became operational. In some catagories
performance on psychophysical tests appeared to be statistically impaired for chil-

dren living in the radar line of sight compared to those living behind the radar and
those living in a nearby community (all ages tested 9-18 year-olds in a tapping
test and ages 9-12 in reaction time to auditory stimuli; ages 13-14 showed no
statistical difference on this latter test). Other tests were not statistically conclu-
sive and the overall health impact on the children living in the line of sight to the
beam, if any, is unclear.The last study we report on is by Szmigielski (1996). Szmigielski studiedcancer morbidity (first-cancer morbidity) in a varying population of 118,500 to
142,200 with a mean of 127,800 (127,800  9620). The authors designated a
fraction of this population as exposed to radar 150-3,500 MHz with 80-85% not
exceeding 0.2 mW/cm2 and 15-20% exposed to 0.2-0.6 mW/cm
2. The exposedpopulation consisted of 3400 to 4600 men with a mean of 3720  360. The cancer
An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSincidence in the non-exposed population was used as the background rate. For thewhole population the SMR was 2.07 (1.12-3.58) for the observed/expected ratio,
and the highest subclasses were for chronic myelocytic leukemia, acute myelo-
blastic leukemia, and non-HodgkinÕs lymphoma (13.9, 8.62, and 5.82). The inter-pretation of this study and its relevance to PAVE PAWS is problematic because
the radar exposure is 0.17  3,720 (
 360) 
 0.4 mW/cm
2 or 250 
V/cm2, anamount considerably above the power densities experienced by the PAVE PAWS
public. Because the 250 V/cm2 is elevated above the comparison levels and
because the measurement of SMR is different from most of the other studies we
have, the committee concludes that this finding is sufficiently different from the
PAVE PAWS findings in Chapter 9 of this report that additional data would be
required to determine its significance with respect to possible health effects re-
sulting from exposures to PAVE PAWS.REFERENCESGroves, F.D., W.F. Page, G. Gridley, L. Lisimaque, P.A. Stewart, R.E. Tarone, M.H. Gail, J.D. Boice,and G.W. Beebe. 2002. Cancer in Korean War technicians: mortality survey after 40 years. Am
J Epidemiol 155:810-818.Hill, D. 1990. A longitudinal study of a cohort with past exposure to radar: the MIT radiation follow-up study (meeting abstract). Bioelectromagnetics Society, 12th Annual Meeting 10-14 June,
San Antonio, TX Abstract No. A-2-6 p. 6.Kalmins, T., R. Krizbergs, A.A. Kolodynski, and V.V. Kolodynska. 1996. Motor and psychologicalfunctions of school children living in the area of the Skrunda radio location station in Latvia. Sci
Total Environ 180:87-93.Lilienfeld, A.M., J. Tonascia, S. Tonascia, C.H. Libauer, G.M. Cauthen, J.A. Markowitz, and S.Weida. 1978. Foreign Service Study: Evaluation of Foreign Service and Other Employees from
Selected Eastern European Posts. NTIS Document No. PB-28B 163/9GA p. 436.Robinette, C.D., C. Silverman, and S. Jablon. 1980. Effects upon health of occupational exposure tomicrowave radiation (radar). Am J Epidemiol 112:39-53.Romancuks, A. 1996. Measurement of the intensity of the electromagnetic radiation from the SkrundaRadio Location Station. Sci Total Environ 180 (1):51-56.Szmigielski, S. 1996. Cancer morbidity in subjects occupationally exposed to high frequency (radiofrequency and microwave) electromagnetic radiation. Sci Total Environ 180:9-17.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1399Health Considerations in theCape Cod PopulationINTRODUCTIONThis chapter begins with a discussion of issues in epidemiologic research andthen describes the status of disease on Cape Cod. This discussion is followed byan assessment of the sample size and statistical power needed to evaluate health
risks of the PAVE PAWS radar. Finally the committee presents a geographical
correlation study of health effects associated with exposure to the PAVE PAWS
radar in the upper Cape Cod region surrounding the Massachusetts military re-
serve where PAVE PAWS is located.The population characteristics of Cape Cod are important in interpretation ofobserved health effects and evaluation of epidemiological studies and are de-
scribed briefly here.Trend in CommutingThe trend in commuting to Boston has risen dramatically over the past 40years (CCCR 2003). While the population of Barnstable county has tripled, off-
Cape commuting has increased 1440 percent. In 2000, approximately 15% of
Barnstable CountyÕs working residents commuted off-Cape to work, almost a
50% increase over the number commuting off-Cape in 1990. Nearly half the com-
muters went to the greater Boston Area.Age Structure of the PopulationThe percent of the population on Cape Cod aged 65-plus rose from 22.8% in1996 to 23.1% in 2000. This represents 36.7% of all households on Cape Cod.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.140ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSOverall, 26% of Cape households have retirement income (US Census Bureau,Census 2000). Based on analysis of the 2000 Census, all 15 Cape towns saw
growth in the 85-plus age group. Barnstable County led the 14 Massachusetts
counties with the highest median age of 44.6. Furthermore, 11 Cape towns ranked
in the top 20 oldest communities in Massachusetts.The poverty level of Cape Cod is comparable to the state of Massachusetts asa whole. Overall, for families with children, the demographic poverty level is
3.4% for the state and 3.5% for Cape Cod. For those without children, the corre-
sponding numbers are 2.2% and 2.1%.Population GrowthCensus data from 1980 and 1990 indicate that the growth of the state overallwas 1.049% during this decade and for Barnstable County (Cape Cod) it was
1.26%. This reflects the trend of more retired elders moving to the Cape and a
growing population commuting to jobs in the greater Boston area, in part with
better intrastate road access.The MISER data resource1 used to project the annual and decade-level growthin future Massachusetts populations indicates that the actual recorded growth from
1990 to 1995 was 1.026% for the state of Massachusetts as a whole and 1.068%
for Cape Cod. Furthermore, the projected growth from 1990 to 2000 was 1.053%
for the decade for the state as a whole and 1.180% for Barnstable County.Prevalence of Risk Factors on the CapeThe committeeÕs access to historic data on risk factors was limited by theiravailability on BRFSS and insufficient numbers of responders to provide accu-
rate estimates for counties. The Cape does have a lower prevalence of obesity
than the state of Massachusetts as a whole through the 1990s (BRFSS data).ISSUES IN EPIDEMIOLOGIC RESEARCHEpidemiologic research can encompass a spectrum of strategies and method-ological approaches to describe the occurrence of and risk factors for disease.
Research designs can include descriptive, ecologic, case series, cross-sectional,
case-control, cohort, and clinical trials. The type of information derived from
these different strategies typically differs substantially with regard to the metrics
obtained and the level of causal inference. Within the context of considering po-1The Massachusetts Institute for Social and Economic Research (MISER) was founded in 1981 bythe University of Massachusetts. MISER is an interdisciplinary research institute of the College ofSocial and Behavioral Sciences.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH CONSIDERATIONS IN THE CAPE COD POPULATION141tential health effects from the PAVE PAWS facility, a combination of epidemio-logic approaches can be recommended, which will provide information relevant
to this issue.As a general rule, most epidemiologic investigations are hypothesis-related.While the hypothesis focus can be hypothesis generating, the nature of epidemio-
logic research is typically hypothesis testing. Hypothesis generation is restricted
to situations where there exists a lack of substantive data on an underlying mecha-
nism of disease causation. Any observed associations are then evaluated for any
existing or speculative mechanisms that may support the observation. One com-
mon outcome is the proposal of laboratory- or animal-based experiments that
might provide confirmatory data relating to the observed association. Within a
hypothesis-generation study, it is possible to define either the exposure(s) or the
effect(s) of interest. For example, within a cohort-study design, multiple effects
and/or exposure can often be addressed, depending on the cohort characterization
and follow-up. In the situation of a case-control study, the hypothesis-generation
component would be focused on exposure-specific factors. A subject of impor-
tance in research designated as hypothesis generating is the issue of multiple
comparisons. That is, when researchers investigate many different factors and/or
effects the probability of observing some significant associations increases due torandom chance.Hypothesis testing is within the context of available data to support a tenablebiologic mechanism between a given exposure (e.g., PAVE PAWS-related) and a
specific health effect. By definition, hypothesis-testing epidemiologic research
specifies the exposure and outcome of interest as well as the direction of effect
(i.e., increase of risk or protective effect).Given the lack of sufficient supportive data to propose specific hypotheses tobe tested (that is, supported by a reasonable and justified underlying biological
rationale) the spectrum of health-related effects that could be considered within
the context of the PAVE PAWS is almost unlimited. Thus, associations observed
as the result of multiple comparisons must be viewed with extreme caution and
considered tentative until reproduced in another population or supported by bio-
logically based evidence. Some examples of possible health effects that might be
considered within a hypothesis-generating exercise include cancer, cardiovascu-
lar disease, immunodeficiency, autoimmune disease, infertility, pregnancy out-
comes, birth defects, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, autism, depression,
dementia, asthma, or endocrinopathies. The ability to conduct scientifically valid
research is dependent on (1) the feasibility of complete ascertainment and charac-
terization of disease state(s) of interest, many of which include a heterogeneous
group of diseases, (2) a sufficient level of statistical power to detect levels of risk
considered to be of importance, and (3) the ability to accurately characterize, in
detail, the exposure of interest among the relevant population. Deficiencies in one
or more of these attributes can invalidate the results and corresponding conclu-
sions of epidemiologic research.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.142ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSHEALTH ON CAPE CODThe health of the population can be monitored using a range of measuresincluding the incidence or onset of new cases of disease, the prevalence or fre-quency of the condition in the population, and mortality, usually reported as the
rate of death in the population. Other measures such as a person-years of life lost
may be used to rank the impact of conditions on the population. The Massachu-
setts Department of Public Health produces reports that summarize both the bur-
den of disease and the prevalence of risk factors for chronic conditions for the
state as a whole. Data on cancer are reported using the resources of the state
tumor registry and birth defects are reported using specialized data collection
procedures. Many other conditions, however, are not routinely summarized either
for the state as a whole or for smaller subdivisions such as counties or towns.
Therefore we have available extensive data on cancer, more recent data on birth
defects, and no comparable data on heart disease, stroke, or other major leading
causes of disability and death.Premature Mortality The overall burden of illness for the state has been summarized in the mea-sure of premature mortality (Eyles and Birch 1993). This is defined as the deaths
occurring before age 75, and may be considered to reflect a general measure of
the overall health of the population. While premature mortality reflects both the
community-level health status and other correlates, such as access to care, it is
important to note that the figures also include deaths from external causes (e.g.,
accidents, suicides, homicides, etc.). Moreover, premature mortality does not give
us a source to identify why an area may be high or low, and because it is a general
measure of early death, it may not precisely measure overall health. In fact, from
time to time, it may obscure important disease burdens in subgroups of the popu-
lation. The most recently reported data from Massachusetts draw on the reported
deaths in 2001.2 The state average premature mortality rate was 347 (95% confi-dence interval 342 to 352) deaths per 100,000 persons ages 0-74, after adjustment
to the age distribution of the 2000 census. The premature-mortality rates for towns
on upper Cape Cod are summarized in Table 9-1.Of note, only one of the towns, Bourne, has a premature mortality rate in2001 that is higher than the state average of 347 (342-352), though this difference
is not statistically significant. Importantly, many factors can contribute to this
measure. The reports summarized below focus on the incidence of cancer and
birth defects, which are more proximate in time to any environmental exposure
than is mortality, except in the situation of natural disasters associated with trauma
and death.2Premature Mortality 2001: http://www.state.ma.us/dph/bhsre/death/2001/premtrmortal2001.pdf.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH CONSIDERATIONS IN THE CAPE COD POPULATION143TABLE 9-1Age-Adjusted Premature Mortality
Rates (deaths per 100,000) for Upper Cape CodTownsPremature Mortality RateTown(95% Confidence Interval)
Barnstable275 (233-324)
Bourne388 (307-489)
Falmouth333 (276-400)

Mashpee332 (241-454)
Sandwich288 (218-379)
SOURCE: Premature mortality rates, Massachusetts Depart-
ment of Public Health. (Premature Mortality 2001,  www.state.ma.us/dph/bhsre/death/2001/pretrmortal2001.pdf).CancerFrom the inception of the Massachusetts Cancer Registry and the initialanalysis of cancer incidence by towns, there has been concern that the rates ofcancer are elevated in the Cape Cod population. This has led to a range of analy-
ses that the committee has summarized in this section. In December 1987, the
Massachusetts Department of Public Health issued a request for proposals to re-
spond to three important public health issues affecting the upper Cape Cod
(Barnstable, Bourne, Falmouth, Mashpee, and Sandwich).Apparent elevations in cancer incidence and mortality were observed for cer-tain kinds of cancer as compared to the statewide averages and the lower Cape
Cod region. Consistently elevated mortality rates for lung cancer and leukemia
were seen for the towns of Falmouth and Bourne. In addition, since the inception
of the Massachusetts Cancer Registry in 1982, statistically significant excesses
were seen in the incidence of cancers of the breast, colon and rectum, lung, and
blood forming organs, and statistically variable increases were seen for cancers
of the pancreas, kidney, and bladder in at least one of the upper Cape towns.Secondly, there were many known or suspected environmental hazards af-fecting the upper Cape. These included both groundwater and air contaminants
from a variety of sources including the Massachusetts Military Reservation.Third, there was substantial concern among citizen advocates who pressedforcefully and consistently for an in-depth evaluation of the relationship between
the environmental hazards and cancer rates. The upper Cape Cod cancer-inci-
dence study was conducted by Drs. Aschengrau and Ozonoff of Boston Univer-
sity School of Public Health and submitted to the department of public health in
September 1991. These investigators undertook a population-based case-control
study that evaluated the relationship between exposures to known or suspected
environmental hazards and nine types of cancer. Cases consisted of newly diag-An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.144ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSnosed cancers in the years 1983 to 1986 among permanent upper Cape residents.The main environmental exposures considered were air and water pollution asso-
ciated with the Massachusetts Military Reservation, Canal Electric Plant, the
Barnstable airport, and other sources, perchlorethylene in water distribution sys-
tem pipes, radiofrequency radiation from PAVE PAWS, electromagnetic radia-
tion from 115 kV transmission lines and substations, and possible exposure to
pesticides among residents who lived near cranberry bogs.The study consisted of incident cancer of lung, n = 251, breast, n = 265,colon and rectum, n = 315, bladder, n = 62, kidney, n = 35, pancreas, n = 37,
leukemia, n = 36, brain, n = 37, and liver, n = 4, as reported by the Massachusetts
Cancer Registry in the years 1983 to 1986. Since many individuals were deceased
by the start of the study, the living and deceased upper Cape residents were se-
lected as controls (n = 1285). Trained interviewers queried all subjects or the
next-of-kin either by telephone or in person to obtain demographic, occupational,
and residential history and information on potential confounding variables such
as cigarette smoking. Overall, approximately 81% of cases and 79% of controls
were interviewed. The majority of the environmental exposure data was collected
independently of the interview and linked to the study subjects using the residen-
tial histories.Each exposure was examined separately in relation to all cancers combined,and then for the individual cancer sites. Most exposures were categorized as di-
chotomous variables, and then further analyzed according to distance, cumulative
duration, and direction. The strength of the association between a particular expo-
sure and each cancer site was measured by the odds ratio. Most analyses were
conducted with and without latency to account for the possibility that the expo-
sures under study could be either cancer initiators or a combination of both initia-
tors and promoters.Few study subjects had potential exposure to drinking-water contaminantsfrom groundwater plumes emanating from various sites on or off the Massachu-
setts Military Reservation. Those plumes, including the Ashmet Valley plume, do
not appear to account for much, if any, of the cancer burden to the population.Results suggest approximately twofold elevations in the risk of brain canceramong those who ever had a residence supplied with public water on the upper
Cape, particularly from the Barnstable Water Company. These findings cannot be
considered conclusive because of limitations in the data. These limitations in-
clude the lack of details regarding the historical pattern of water contamination in
the area and patterns of water use among the subjects, the large number of sub-
jects dropped from these analyses because of missing data, and the almost com-
plete overlap between exposures to the Barnstable Water Company and Barnstable
airport for which an elevation in brain-cancer risk is also seen.The investigators examined another public drinking-water exposure,perchlorethylene (PCE) from the water-distribution pipes, in relation to leuke-
mia, bladder, and kidney cancer. A twofold increase in the risk of leukemia andAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH CONSIDERATIONS IN THE CAPE COD POPULATION145bladder cancer among those supplied with water from pipes that leached PCEwas observed. These risk estimates were not statistically stable, a reflection of
small numbers. For these reasons, the results are consistent with the hazards of
PCE contamination in some of the distribution systems of the upper Cape.Among residents located in proximity to the gun and mortar position on theMassachusetts Military Reservation, the investigators observed associations be-
tween possible airborne exposure and the risk of lung and breast cancer. Subjects
who lived closer to the gun and mortar positions had a modest increase in the risk
of lung cancer. Likewise, there was an increase in risk of breast cancer among
subjects who lived closer to the sites. Among residents exposed for more than 20
years, the investigators found an increase in the risk of lung and breast cancer.
Non-meaningful elevations were seen for the other cancer sites.While no association was seen for PAVE PAWS, the exposure data wereinadequate for these investigators to draw sound conclusions (greatly enhanced
power-density data and modeled power-density estimates became available in
2004 (BSL 2004)). Possible pesticide exposure associated with living near the
cranberry bogs was also examined. Again, an increase in risk of brain cancer was
seen among individuals who ever lived within half a mile of a bog. The risk
remained elevated when subjects with other relevant exposures were excluded.
Other potential environmental exposures were also considered, including electro-
magnetic radiation from transmission lines. Results suggest that extremely low-
frequency electromagnetic fields may relate to increases in the risk of bladder
cancer and breast cancer. An association was also observed for brain cancer
among those who ever swam in Johns Pond and leukemia among those ever swim-
ming in local ponds.A comparison of the calculated SIR for 5 categories consisting of total can-cers, breast, colon, lung, and prostate cancer during 1987-1994 versus 1995-
1999 for 5 towns in upper Cape Cod (see Table 9-2) demonstrated no consistent
pattern of increase during the latter time period. During these two time periods,
a decrease was observed in 15 out of 25 SIRS, no change in 4 out of 25 SIRS,
and an increase in 6 out of 25 SIRs, thus suggesting that increasing duration of
the presence of the PAVE PAWS radar has not resulted in increased incidence of
cancer. Analyses covering longer durations may be required to confirm this ini-
tial observation.In summary, these results across the spectrum of potential environmentalexposures point to numerous potential associations that require further investiga-
tion as the results were largely inconclusive. The limited number of cases in-
cluded in the study for each cancer site preclude definitive conclusions.It should be noted that multiple comparisons are an issue whenever a statetumor registry breaks out incidence data for every town. Data are presented for
351 cities and towns in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. Rothman and
Greenland in their text point to the limitations of using tumor registry data for
such descriptive statistics. Smaller towns will have higher variability and be atAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.146TABLE 9-2Comparison of Standardized Incidence Ratios for Upper Cape Cod During Periods 1987-1994 vs. 1995-1999
Total CancerBreastColonLungProstate
Town1987-19941995-19991987-19941995-19991987-19941995-19991987-19941995-19991987-19941995-1999
Barnstable1131021151011197912396124125
Bourne114114117101110118123109116114
Falmouth122114119118120101116106154121
Mashpee121151101142113137109155178196

Sandwich10997119110999910468134106
SOURCE: Massachusetts Department of Public Health.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH CONSIDERATIONS IN THE CAPE COD POPULATION147increased risk of reporting significant variation from the state average. Also, ad-jacent towns are at risk of increased (or decreased) cancer incidence because of
autocorrelation among risk factors that are not accounted for in the age-standard-
ized data. (Rothman and Greenland,1998).The results from the upper Cape cancer-incidence study stimulated additionalinvestigations, of both the health effects associated with environmental expo-
sures from the Massachusetts Military Reservation, and the Silent Spring investi-
gation of breast cancer. In addition, the Bureau of Environmental Health Assess-
ment of childhood cancer incidence on Cape Cod commissioned a study from
1982 for 1994. These are reviewed in sequence.MASSACHUSETTS MILITARY RESERVATIONRyan and colleagues (MDPH 2002) employed extensive analytic techniquesto explore the possible associations between the Massachusetts Military Reserva-
tion and health among upper Cape Cod residents. In particular, they observed that
the female lung-cancer rates were higher than expected in the immediate upper
Cape area, especially in the vicinity to the south, east, and west of the Massachu-
setts Military Reservation. Rates of lung cancer begin declining in regions further
away from the Massachusetts Military Reservation, although there are isolated
areas of apparently high rates. While lung-cancer rates were high in the upper
Cape, particularly for females, the excesses occur over a broad area of approxi-
mately 20 to 30 square miles, making it unlikely that a single nearby point source
of exposure is responsible.With respect to birth weights, Ryan and colleagues extended analysis over alarger spatial area, and across a 7-year time frame, showed good consistency
among different methodologic approaches. Unlike the cancer studies, the analy-
sis showed that additional data added in this analysis attenuated the previous
reported associations. Birth weights in the upper Cape appear now, on average,
modestly higher than the statewide average. While there has been a downward
trend in birth weights across the state of Massachusetts, some of this trend is
explained in terms of changes in time periods, particularly an increase in the
number of multiple births. The lower than expected birth weights found in the
Wareham area and in a few other locations, including Mashpee in the later years,
do not suggest any particular relationship with the Massachusetts Military
Reservation.The investigators concluded that lack of a consistent finding between thelung-cancer rates and birth-weight maps leads to the conclusion that although
some exposures from the Massachusetts Military Reservation may have contrib-
uted to the induction of lung cancers this does not seem to lend support for an
association with birth weights.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.148ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSBreast CancerThe Massachusetts Department of Public Health awarded funds to the SilentSpring Institute, which conducted a study of breast cancer in relation to environ-mental risk factors drawing on data from 1982 to 1990. The investigators noted
that 9 of the 15 towns in Massachusetts with significantly elevated breast cancer
were located on Cape Cod, for the period from 1982 to 1990. Furthermore, towns
in the mid-Cape and lower Cape were among those with the highest incidence
compared to the rest of the state. Five of these mid- and lower-Cape towns had
incidence rates that were 25 to 55% higher than the state average. The Silent
Spring study looked in substantial detail at the potential environmental contami-
nation that may relate to risk of breast cancer, focusing on environmental estro-
gens, PCE exposure, DDT exposure, and the role of the Massachusetts Military
Reservation as potential sources of exposure. The investigation concluded that
breast-cancer rates on Cape Cod do not appear to be fully explained by the indi-
vidual characteristics of the women (including, for example, age, family history,
reproductive history, alcohol consumption, smoking, and age at onset of men-
struation and menopause). A number of specific environmental facilities of con-
cern including the PAVE PAWS radar system, the Massachusetts Military Reser-
vation, Canal Electric Plant, and Pilgrim Nuclear Power Station were considered
and fail to explain why breast-cancer rates are elevated Cape-wide. However, the
investigators could not rule out localized effects from these various facilities.Breast cancer is predominantly driven by female hormones (Colditz 1998;Willett and others 2000). While the studies of breast cancer on Cape Cod have
considered a number of reproductive risk factors (Aschengrau and others 1998;
Coogan and Aschengrau 1998; Coogan and Aschengrau 1999; Aschengrau and
others 2003; McKelvey and othes 2004), it appears that in these analyses, the use
of postmenopausal estrogens, which significantly increase the risk of postmeno-
pausal breast cancer, were not included. The investigators did, however, note that
the use of mammography could not explain the increase in incidence that was
observed.A detailed analysis of residence on Cape Cod and risk of breast cancer(McKelvey and others 2004) included some 1121 cases of breast cancer occur-
ring between 1988 and 1995 and 992 controls. These cases and controls were
drawn from the entire Cape. After adjusting for age, family history, parity, age at
first birth, education, body mass index, and history of breast cancer, longer dura-
tion of residence on Cape Cod was associated with increased risk of breast can-
cer. In general, after excluding women with a history of breast cancer, those
women who had lived 20 or more years on Cape Cod had significantly elevated
risk. For example, those living 40 to 47 years on Cape Cod had an adjusted rela-
tive risk of 1.57 (95% CI 1.07 to 2.29). Although uncontrolled confounding can-
not be ruled out, it is unlikely that duration of residence is related to use of post-
menopausal hormones or other established risk factors. Importantly, this elevatedAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH CONSIDERATIONS IN THE CAPE COD POPULATION149risk of breast cancer is not limited to the upper Cape, or other defined sub-regionon the Cape.Upper Cape Cod Cancer-Incidence Review, 1986 to 1994The Massachusetts Department of Public Health, Bureau of EnvironmentalHealth Assessment, reported the cancer rates for towns in Cape Cod through the
ÒUpper Cape Cod Cancer Incidence Review, 1986-1994Ó released in June 1999.The study population for the statistical review included individuals who were
residing in the Massachusetts towns of Barnstable, Bourne, Falmouth, Mashpee,
and Sandwich between January 1986 and December 1994. Those five towns are
collectively referred to as upper Cape Cod. The 1990 United States census data
were used to represent the population of those towns for the year 1990. Cases
were identified through the Massachusetts Cancer Registry. A total of 6244 pri-
mary-cancer cases were diagnosed between 1986 and 1994 among residents of
the five upper Cape towns.Cancer cases were selected for inclusion based on the reported address ofresidence, not the address of the diagnosing hospitals. Massachusetts residents
diagnosed at out-of-state hospitals were also included in the series because of the
Massachusetts Cancer RegistryÕs reciprocal reporting agreements with stateswhere Massachusetts residents may be diagnosed including Connecticut, Florida,
Maine, New Hampshire, New York, and Rhode Island. It is estimated that the
Massachusetts Cancer Registry files contain data on 90 to 95% of reportable
cases.To estimate the standardized incidence ratios (SIRs) for each town, the inci-dence in the town is compared to the incidence for a given cancer in the state as a
whole, which is used to represent the cancer experience of a comparable Ònor-malÓ population. Thus the expected number of cases was estimated using stan-dard approaches, within age-specific strata, of age, and then summed across age
groups, to provide the overall expected number of cases for each town.The descriptive analysis of cancer-incidence data for the upper Cape townsaddressed 23 specific cancer types as well as total cancer incidence for the upper
Cape as a whole, for each of the five towns, and for each of the 30 census tracts
that compose the upper Cape. Cancer incidence for cancer types combined for the
upper Cape as a whole was elevated significantly compared to the Massachusetts
statewide experience. Cancer, however, is not one disease but rather a collection
of different diseases, with distinct etiologies. The majority of cancers among up-
per-Cape residents were diagnosed in the lung, breast, prostate, and colorectal
organs. These four cancer sites comprise slightly more than half of all cancers
observed both on Cape Cod and in the United States overall. For the five upper-
Cape towns combined, statistically significant elevations were observed for fe-
male breast cancer, colorectal cancer among males and both sexes combined,
female lung cancer, and prostate cancer. In addition, statistically significant el-An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.150ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSevations were seen for melanoma. No statistically significant elevations for theupper Cape as a whole were seen in the other leading specific cancer types evalu-
ated in this study (see Table 9-3).The overall excess incidence of cancer in the upper Cape towns was 11%(SIR = 111; 95% CI 108-113). This was consistent for men (SIR = 112) and for
women (SIR = 110).It is of note that there is no common risk factor for breast, prostate, lung, andcolorectal cancer other than increasing age. Breast and prostate cancers are largely
hormonal in origin, cigarette smoking predominantly causes lung cancer, and
colorectal cancer has many lifestyle factors that reflect a western lifestyle (in-
cluding lack of physical activity, obesity, alcohol, low folate intake, height, etc.).TABLE 9-3Cancer Cases Diagnosed on Upper Cape Cod, 1986-1994, and
Standardized Incidence Rate Ratios (SIR)TypeMaleFemaleTotalSIR95% CI
Bladder16757224102(89-116)
Brain50469699(80-121)

Breast5935940110(103-117)
Cervical06262118(90-151)
Colon/rectum491427918112(105-120)

Esophagus42216397(74-124)
Hodgkins281543116(84-156)
Kidney8157138106(89-125)

Larynx66975103(81-129)
Leukemia6833101105(85-127)
Liver21113299(68-139)

Lung & bronchus497417916112(105-120)
Melanoma (skin)9676172135(116-157)
Mouth and pharynx9652149101(86-119)

Multiple myeloma20254590(66-121)
NHL869418095(82-110)
Ovary0101101100(81-122)

Pancreas6266128112(93-133)
Prostate100101001130(122-139)
Stomach673810593(76-112)

Testis33033122(84-172)
Thyroid123547107(79-143)
Uterus014614694(79-110)

Other221201422102(93-112)
Total321029276137111(108-113)
SOURCE: Upper Cape Cod Cancer Incidence Review 1986-1994. Final Report Volume 2. AppendixC. Mass. Department of Public Health, Bureau of Environmental Health Assessment, Environmental
Epidemiology Unit, June 1999.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH CONSIDERATIONS IN THE CAPE COD POPULATION151This raises concern that the estimation of the expected number of cases of cancermay be distorted due to the population characteristics of Cape Cod residents, the
distribution of age within any five-year age group, and the general construct of
the definition of residents. For this definition of residence, for example, is a resi-
dent defined for the Massachusetts Cancer Registry the same as a resident de-
fined for the United States Census?The Massachusetts Department of Public Health updated information of can-cer incidence and mortality with its report ÒCancer Incidence and Mortality inMassachusetts 1996-2000.Ó Through 2000, total cancer-mortality rates declinedsignificantly while incidence rates varied according to cancer site. The City and
Town Supplement reports the cancer data for towns and is most recently avail-
able for the period 1995-1999.3 Data for upper Cape Cod towns are summarizedin Table 9-4.These updated data indicate that the incidence of cancer remains elevated inthree of the five upper Cape towns, breast cancer in two, and prostate cancer in
three. On the other hand, significantly lower than expected rates of colon cancer
are observed in Barnstable, while lung cancer is significantly elevated in Mashpee
but significantly reduced in Sandwich. While the small number of cases in each
town may contribute to this variability, it is clear that the picture of elevated
incidence across these four leading cancers has changed considerably in these
more recent data.Childhood CancerThe Bureau of Environmental Health Assessment of the Massachusetts De-partment of Public Health released a report in September 1999 ÒAssessment of3http://www.state.ma.us/dph/bhsre/mcr/99/supplement/tables.htm.TABLE 9-4Standardized Incidence Ratios, 1995-1999, for Upper Cape Cod
TownsTotalBreastColonLungProstate
TownCancer(f)(total)(total)(m)
Barnstable10210179 (p < 0.01)96125 (p < 0.001)
Bourne114 (p < 0.01)101118109114
Falmouth114 (p < 0.001)118 (p < 0.05)101106121 (p < 0.001)

Mashpee151 (p <  0.001)142 (p < 0.05)137155 (p < 0.001)196 (p < 0.001)
Sandwich971109968 (p < 0.001)106
SOURCE: Cancer Incidence In Massachusetts 1995-1999: City and Town Supplement.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.152ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSChildhood Cancer Incidence on Cape Cod, Massachusetts, 1982 to 1994.Ó Thisreport addressed cancer among children up to and including age 19 at the time ofdiagnosis on Cape Cod. All cancers diagnosed in children between 1982 and
1994 and reported through the Massachusetts Cancer Registry were included.
The purpose of the evaluation was to discuss the types of cancer that were occur-
ring among Cape Cod children and to identify areas with a greater than expected
occurrence of childhood cancer. Like other health evaluations, this investigation
was initiated at the request of Cape Cod citizens who were concerned that child-
hood cancer might be a problem on Cape Cod.Each cancer case was geocoded to the location of the childÕs residence at thetime of diagnosis. Standardized incidence ratios were calculated to estimate the
number and types of cancers diagnosed among children, and determine if this was
different from what was expected based upon statewide childhood cancer rates.A total of 101 cancers were diagnosed among children on Cape Cod between1982 and 1994. Overall, this total represents 19% more cancer than would have
been expected over this 12-year period. In absolute terms, this is 17 excess cases.
The three most common types of cancer diagnosed were lymphomas (n = 26),
leukemias (n = 23), and central nervous system tumors (n = 17) (other cancers
were renal 8, soft tissue 10, carcinoma 9, other 7). The observed elevation in total
cancer was mostly due to elevations in lymphomas and leukemia among mid-
Cape children, and to a lesser extent leukemia among lower-Cape residents (see
Table 9-5). Childhood cancer did not appear to concentrate in specific areas within
towns or within specific time periods over the 12 years of data accumulation. In
addition, the types of cancer most commonly observed in the ages of diagnosis
generally followed patterns observed elsewhere in Massachusetts. These results
do not suggest common environmental factors being responsible for the observed
excess childhood cancer.Birth DefectsIn 1996, the Centers for Diease Conrol and Prevention awarded five years offunding to the Massachusetts Department of Public Health to establish the Mas-
sachusetts Center for Birth Defects Research and Prevention. An active birth de-
fects surveillance system involves trained personnel who validate passive reports
of birth defects cases to the Department, and actively seek cases in hospitals and
other health facilities. This approach provides more complete ascertainment of
cases, more accurate data on cases, and more rapid reporting of cases. The center
collected data on birth defects in the eastern part of Massachusetts from October
1997 to October 1998. Since October 1998, the surveillance program has been
collecting cases statewide from the 53 birth hospitals and ChildrenÕs Hospital,Boston. The report of 1999 statewide data represents the first full year of surveil-
lance data (MDPH 2001).All cases represent diagnoses before the infant reached one year of age. TheAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH CONSIDERATIONS IN THE CAPE COD POPULATION153TABLE 9-5Standardized Incidence Rates, Childhood Cancer, Cape Cod,
1982-1994ObservedExpectedSIR (95% CI)
All of Cape CodLeukemia2320.5112 (71-169)
Lymphoma2613.3195 (127-286)
CNS1721.380 (46-128)
Upper Cape CodLeukemia1213.092 (48-192)

Lymphoma118.3132 (66-236)
CNS1013.574 (35-136)
Mid Cape CodLeukemia75.9120 (48-246)
Lymphoma133.9332 (177-568)

CNS76.1114 (46-235)
Lower Cape CodLeukemia41.6Nc
aLymphoma21.1Nc

CNS01.7Nc
aNot calculated.infant or fetus must have a structural defect that met diagnostic criteria, and theinfant was live born, or the fetus was stillborn with gestational age greater than or
equal to 20 weeks or with a weight of at least 350 grams.Overall for Massachusetts in 1999, 1.1% of births in the state had one ormore birth defects. The rate of birth defects per 10,000 births was 108.2 (95%
confidence interval 101.2 to 115.5). This was based on a total of 875 diagnosed
and reported birth defects. The most common defects among live births and still-
births in 1999 were atrial septal defect (95 cases), ventricular septal defect (71
cases), cleft lip with and without cleft palate (69 cases), trisomy 21 (Down syn-
drome, 67 cases), hypospadias (2nd and 3rd degree, 49 cases), cleft palate with-
out cleft lip (44 cases), obstructive genitourinary defect (42 cases), pulmonary
valve atresia and stenosis (34 cases), coarctation of the aorta (25 cases), and en-
docardial cushion defects (25 cases).When the rate is evaluated by region in the state, the lowest rate is reportedfor the southeast, a region that includes the Cape and islands and extends north to
encompass a total population generating 15,000 births. The 130 cases of birth
defects diagnosed in 1999 represents a rate of 86.1 per 10,000 births (95% confi-
dence interval 71.9 to 101.5). The apparently lower rate may be because of some
births being delivered in Rhode Island where Massachusetts surveillance was notAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.154ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSconducted. The limited number of birth defects each year precludes firm conclu-sions and requires accumulation of additional years of surveillance data to gener-
ate stable estimates of rates.SAMPLE SIZE AND STATISTICAL POWER TO INVESTIGATEHEALTH RISKS OF THE PAVE PAWS RADARIntroductionWhen investigating the occurrence of disease within a defined population, itis important to recognize the inherent limitations that may be encountered when
making a determination of whether or not there is an excess in the number of
expected cases. Disease rarely occurs in a uniform manner within the general
population. That is, disease within a defined population can, by random chance,
vary in occurrence according to time and place. Thus, in order to evaluate if
disease is occurring in excess, one must take into consideration the random varia-
tion that can occur. This is done by statistically considering the probability that a
given observation may occur by chance alone. Conversely, one is often faced
with the question of what level of excess can be ruled out with some reasonable
level of confidence.The concept of statistical power refers to the ability to detect a given level ofexcess within a defined population. Calculation of statistical power requires as-
sumptions and/or estimates of the (1) expected incidence of disease, (2) propor-
tion of the population exposed to the factors of interest, (3) size and composition
of the population, and (4) level of risk one would like to detect/rule out. Consider
the following example. Prior to embarking on a study to determine if there is two-
fold or greater occurrence of a specific disease among the residents of a desig-
nated city, a researcher calculated the statistical power to be 0.75. This means

that if a twofold excess truly does exist the researchers will have a 0.75 (i.e., 3 out
of 4) chance of detecting the twofold difference.Power CalculationsUsing cancer as an example, the following calculations have been made forthe upper Cape Cod population assuming (1) cancer rates for the United States
obtained from the Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results Program,
(2) 12% of the residents in upper Cape Cod reside in a location that results in
exposure to the sidelobes of the PAVE PAWS radar beam, (3) the population
size and composition of upper Cape Cod is that obtained for the 2000 U.S. Cen-
sus (see Figure 9-1) and would be observed over a 10-year period, and (4) alpha
= 0.05 for a two-sided test. The power calculations have been made for a spec-
trum of risk, ranging from 1.1 (i.e., 10% increase) to 2.5 (250% increase).However, it is not likely that any single-source exposure would etiologicallyAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH CONSIDERATIONS IN THE CAPE COD POPULATION155FIGURE 9-1Power to detect total cancer (excluding non-melanoma skin cancer) occur-
rence.be associated with an increase in the broad spectrum of malignancies seen in thegeneral population. Rather, it is more likely that if the PAVE PAWS radar is
associated with an increase in cancer risk, there will be some level of specificity
as to the types/forms of malignancy. Therefore, it is important to consider statis-
tical power within a cancer-specific context.Summarized in Table 9-6 is the diagnosis-specific power calculation for theupper Cape Cod population. Highlighted are those cancer-specific groups where
power would be considered sufficient to detect a modest level of risk (i.e., less
than twofold).Concerns have been raised regarding the potential excess of malignanciesamong the pediatric population in the upper Cape. Since the incidence of cancer
in children under the age of 15 years is relatively low, compared to rates among
the adult populations, it is not surprising that the power to detect anything except
extremely large (i.e. >100-fold) risks does not exist. Even when considering all
diagnoses combined, there would be 80% power to detect a 9-fold (900% in-
crease). As with adult malignancies, it is unlikely that a single exposure (e.g.,
radar) would increase the occurrence of multiple types of malignancy. Accord-
ingly, it is not possible to study increases of specific pediatric cancers in the
upper Cape Cod in order to rule out risks less than 100-fold in excess.For the residents of Cape Cod, it is unclear what minimal level of risk wouldprovide sufficient assurance that the PAVE PAWS facility is not adversely im-
pacting health. If the answer is 99% assurance that there is not an increase ofAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.156TABLE 9-6 Minimum Relative Risk Detectable in Population Followed for 10 Years, Assuming 12.5% of the Population
Exposed, and Background SEER Cancer Incidence Rates 1975-2001 (All Ages), Alpha = 0.05 Two-Sided Test
Total population (25,300)Males (13,000)Females (12,300)
Power =. 8Power = .9Power =. 8Power =. 9Power= . 8Power = .9
Any Cancer1.121.141.181.211.171.20
Colon & Rectum1.421.491.691.841.651.78
Lung & Bronchus1.381.451.621.751.591.70
Breast1.341.40>100.00>100.001.351.41
Corpus UteriÑÑÑÑ3.114.01
Ovarian2.893.64
ÑÑ5.098.30
ProstateÑÑ1.551.65
ÑÑTesticularÑÑ78.52>100.00
ÑÑBladder1.812.002.492.992.372.81
Kidney & Renal Pelvis2.332.733.815.343.534.78
Hodgkin Lymphoma3.8022.18>100.00>100.0062.79>100.00
Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma1.852.062.593.132.462.93
Lymphoid Leukemia3.945.6210.6733.849.0023.22
Myeloid Leukemia3.534.788.4320.337.2815.33
Myeloma3.634.998.9623.017.6916.99

Pancreas2.342.753.845.413.554.83
Liver3.945.6210.6733.849.0023.22
Soft Tissue7.8117.4970.25>100.0043.74>100.00
Bone & Joint>100.00>100.00>100.00>100.00>100.00>100.00
An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH CONSIDERATIONS IN THE CAPE COD POPULATION157greater than 1%, then research would not be able to satisfactorily address suchconcerns. Using cancer as an example and assuming 10 years of observation of
the population, one could reasonably anticipate that well-designed and well-con-
ducted research, either prospective or retrospective in design, could address mod-
erately low levels of risk (i.e., between 1.4 and 2.0) for some of the more common
cancers (i.e., colo-rectal, lung, breast, prostate, bladder, and non-HodgkinÕs lym-phoma). For other diagnoses the ability to address less than a twofold risk would
require extended length of observation of exposed residents.STATISTICAL ANALYSESIntroductionTo characterize challenges inherent in the epidemiological assessment of thehealth effects associated with exposure to the PAVE PAWS radar, we conducted
a geographical correlation study within the upper Cape Cod region surrounding
the Massachusetts Military Reservation (MMR) where PAVE PAWS is located.
Our statistical analysis focused mainly on the 30 census tracts in five towns shown
in Map 1, and it was organized as follows. First, we conducted an exposure-MAP 1Location of 30 census tracts in upper Cape Cod region studied in statistical
analysis.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.158ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSassessment study where we estimated: (a) the percent of the population in theCape that is exposed to the PAVE PAWS radar by age and gender; and (b) the
power-density exposure (average and peak) from three different sources at each
census tract weighted by population density. Second, we performed a geographic
correlation study to estimate associations between Standard Incidence Ratios
(SIR) and estimated exposure to PAVE PAWS adjusted by socio-economic status
and other spatially correlated factors.EXPOSURE ASSESSMENT STUDYPercent of Population Exposed to PAVE PAWS Radar BeamWe first estimated the geographical areas in the Cape that had a non-zeroexposure to the PAVE PAWS radar beam. Those areas were identified by taking
into account: (a) that exposure occurs only in the area with direct line of sight to
the radar, and (b) the operating triangle of the radar (an area has direct line of
sight to the PAVE PAWS radar only if there is no higher ground in between).
Because the main beam of the radar ends at 0.1 degree above the horizontal, these
areas are exposed to the power radiated primarily by the sidelobes of the radar,
which have much lower power densities than the main beam. We determined
regions with line of sight to the PAVE PAWS radar by using a digital elevation
map (Map 2) from the GeoComm International corporation.4We then further refined the calculations by taking into account the totalheight of the radar (105 feet) and the PAVE PAWS radar scanning angle (347
degrees to 227 degrees). The regions with non-zero exposure are shown in Map
3.  Map 4 shows the estimates areas with non-zero exposures as provided bo use
by MITRE.To estimate the percent of the population exposed to the PAVE PAWS radarbeam we proceeded as follows. First, we used the 1990 and the 2000 census-
bureau data to determine the population size by age and gender at each location.
Because of the small sample size within each census block, we aggregated the
population density by census-block group (Map 5).Within each census-block group, we estimated the number of persons ex-posed to the radar by multiplying the population in that census-block group by
the proportion of area within that census block group with non-zero exposure. We
then summed the estimated number of persons exposed across the 117 census-
block groups (102 census-block groups in year 2000), and divided the sum by the
total population. Overall we estimated that in 1990, 11.8% of the population liv-
ing in upper Cape Cod was exposed to the PAVE PAWS radar beam. Percentages
of the total population exposed to the PAVE PAWS radar beam by age and gen-
der are presented in Table 9-7.4http://gisdatadepot.com/dem May 2004.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH CONSIDERATIONS IN THE CAPE COD POPULATION159Digital elevation model 
MAP 2 Digital elevation model. Data from GeoComm International Corporation.MAP 3Shaded areas over land indicate non-zero exposures.
An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.160ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSMAP 4 Estimated areas with non-zero exposure as provided by MITRE.117 Census block groups wthn 30 census tracts n 1990 MAP 5117 Census block groups within 30 Census tracts in 1990.
An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.161TABLE 9-7Estimated Proportion of Population Living Under the Line of Sight of PAVE PAWS Radar
1990 Census2000 Census
MaleFemaleMaleFemale
Age GroupPopulationProportionPopulationProportionPopulationProportionPopulationProportion
SizeExposedSizeExposedSizeExposedSizeExposed
All ages51,75911.8%56,48111.8%63,21312.4%69,07112.4%
0-43,98912.3%3,77412.5%3,73613.5%3,50513.8%
5-146,95912.5%6,75712.7%9,21613.4%8,81913.2%
15-246,47810.3%5,97011.1%6,64911.0%5,94911.6%

25-348,23811.6%8,84111.7%6,50712.1%7,12812.3%
35-448,22612.5%8,65312.2%10,28212.6%11,25912.5%
45-545,01012.0%5,46911.8%9,28312.4%10,14912.5%

55-644,85111.8%5,75411.3%6,59312.3%7,80512.3%
65-745,11311.8%6,22711.7%6,30212.3%7,32311.9%
75-842,34811.8%3,61710.7%3,75112.0%5,16111.9%
85+54710.3%1,4199.7%89411.2%1,97311.3%
An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.162ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSThere was little difference in exposure between each age and gender group.Based on 2000 census data, the estimated proportion of population living in thearea exposed to the PAVE PAWS radar beam increased slightly to 12.4%. The
changes in population distribution in the past decade had little effect on the pro-
portion of population living under the line of sight from the PAVE PAWS radar.Average and Peak Power-Density AssessmentBecause cancer-incidence data was made available to us only at census-tractlevel, to carry out a geographic correlation study and to estimate association be-
tween cancer incidence and exposure to the PAVE PAWS radar beam, we needed
to estimate average and peak power density at each census tract. Three sets ofpower-density data were used in this analysis. The first set was calculated based
on two simple assumptions. The first assumption was that only the area with
direct line of sight to the radar and under the radarÕs operation angle would beexposed to the radar beam. The second assumption was that power density de-
creased as the distance from the radar increased. This relationship was estimated
by fitting a power curve between the average power-density obtained from theMITRE Technical Report (MITRE 2000) and the distance to the radar. The fitted
curve is equal to average power density (W/cm2) = 8972*distanceÐ1.325(meters).With these two assumptions, we calculated both average and peak power-density at locations 180 meters apart within the study region (Map 6).The committee is aware that these are very simplistic assumptions. Nonethe-less, this first dataset provided a good basis for validating datasets from other
sources. In this report, we refer to this estimated exposure to the PAVE PAWS
beam as Òsimple.ÓThe second estimated power-density dataset was provided by MITRE Cor-poration at locations 200 meters apart (Map 7).Detailed descriptions of the PAVE PAWS radar power-density calculationscan be found in the MITRE technical report (MITRE 2000). The third dataset was
obtained from Broadcast Signal Lab (BSL) (Map 8).To estimate the radiofrequency exposure from the PAVE PAWS radar ineach census-block group on Cape Cod (BSL 2004), BSL utilized 
Òthe ComStudypropagation modeling softwareÓ in conjunction with an analytical model of thePAVE PAWS antenna supplied by the MITRE Corporation. We obtained power-

density estimates at locations 140 meters apart in the east-west direction and 188
meters apart in the north-south direction (Map 8).We then estimated exposure at each census tract by weighting power-densityvalues in W/cm2 at each location by the corresponding population density at thecensus block (Map 9).Population density was calculated by dividing the number of individuals liv-ing in the census block in 2000 by total square miles of dry land. The 2000 census
data were used because the census bureau did not provide 1990 census informa-An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH CONSIDERATIONS IN THE CAPE COD POPULATION163MAP 6Simple average power densities.
 MAP 7MITRE average power densities.
An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.164ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSMAP 8BSL average power densities.
pyMAP 9Population densities at census block level.
An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH CONSIDERATIONS IN THE CAPE COD POPULATION165tion at the census-block level. We then aggregated the exposure estimates at eachlocation to obtain average and peak power-density exposures in each census tract
in 1990. The resulting average power-density exposure estimates at the census-
tract level from the three data sources are shown in Figure 9-2. (Note that results
shown for BSL are magnified by a factor of 100.)As expected, since the ÒsimpleÓ exposure estimates partly depended on MI-TRE power-density estimates, these two set of results were very similar. Although
BSL predicted non-zero exposure in almost the whole study region, its resulting
estimates were generally lower than those from MITRE. Most census tracts hav-
ing high exposure estimates from the MITRE dataset also had relatively high
estimates from the BSL dataset. For census tract 137, the difference was due to a
large proportion of its area being situated outside the PAVE PAWS operating
angle and that BSL estimates took into account reflection of the radar signal in
this region. It is important to notice that the absolute magnitude of the density
estimates would not affect the statistical significance of the variable of interest in
our geographic-correlation study.Socio-economic Factor AdjustmentIn the period of 1986-1994, total-cancer incidence was 11% higher in upperCape Cod compared to the state of Massachusetts (SIR 95% CI: 108-113; see
Table 9-2). This elevated SIR might be caused by three potential confounding
factors: age distribution, smoking behavior, and socio-economic status (SES).
Confounding due to age distribution can be controlled in the calculation of the
expected cancer-incidence counts. In the upper Cape Cod cancer-incidence re-0.000.020.040.06
0.08
0.100.120.140.16122123124125126127128129130131132133134135136137138139140141143144145146147148149150151152Census tract
power density (
W/cm2)SimpleMITREBSL x 100FIGURE 9-2 Average density estimate comparison.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.166ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSview, the expected counts were calculated using 10 age categories in lieu of 6 agecategories used by Massachusetts Cancer Registry in its 1997 report. These addi-
tional age groups provided extra precision in the calculation of the expected can-
cer-incidence count, addressing the concern of confounding by age. Since smok-
ing has been identified as a risk factor of multiple cancers, it is important to find
out if differences in smoking behavior exists between the population in upper
Cape Cod and in the state of Massachusetts. Results from Massachusetts Behav-
ioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) for the period 1999 to 2001 esti-
mated similar proportions of current smokers with 19% and 20% in upper Cape
Cod and the state of Massachusetts, respectively. The small sample size in this
study (304 in upper Cape Cod) provides little statistical power to demonstrate any
difference in the estimates. In the Health Risks and Preventive Behaviors report
that combined BRFFS results from 1994 to 1999, the estimate of current smokers
in the Cape and islands was 18.3% (95% CI 14.8%-21.7%) compared to 21.2%
(95% CI 20.4%-21.9%) in Massachusetts. This difference is not statistically sig-
nificant. The last concern is the difference in SES between the population in
upper Cape Cod and in the state of Massachusetts that may change the expected
number of cancer incidences. For example, if one type of cancer has a higher
detection rate in a population with high socio-economic status due to better ac-
cess to health care and one supposes that a wealthy population lives in upper
Cape Cod, then one should expect to see more cancer diagnosed in upper Cape
Cod. Failing to adjust for this higher than expected number of cancer incidences
will over-estimate the SIR. To assess the potential confounding due to SES dis-
parity, we examined the percentage of population older than 18 years living be-
low the line of poverty from the 1990 census data.Upper Cape Cod has 6.5% of its population living below the poverty linecompared to 8.3% in Massachusetts (see Figure 9-3). This difference required the0%5%10%15%20%25%30%122123124125126127128129130131132133134135136137138139140141143144145146147148149150151152Census tract
% below poverty
(Massachusetts)FIGURE 9-3 Percent population (18 years +) living below line of poverty 1990.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH CONSIDERATIONS IN THE CAPE COD POPULATION167adjustment of the cancer SIR by socio-economic status in addition to the standardadjustment by age and gender.Model 1 describes the indirect adjustment made to obtain SIR further ad-justed by socio-economic status. One important data requirement is the knowl-
edge of the cancer incidence rate for a particular age, gender, and poverty group
in Massachusetts. However, limited SES-related information is collected by the
Massachusetts Cancer Registry.Because of data unavailability for indirect SES adjustment on cancer-inci-dence ratios, we explored the potential association of SES and cancer SIR using
data from the ÒUpper Cape Cod Cancer Incidence Review, 1986-1994Ó and SESdata from the Census Bureau. Since 62% of all cancer incidences in upper Cape
Cod during that period were one of the four major cancer types (colo-rectal, breast,
lung, prostate cancer), we used the SIR of these four major cancer types as re-
sponse variable, and the percentage of population older than 18 living below the
poverty line as a measure of socio-economic status. These data were fitted using
a log-linear model (Model 2) taking into account unobserved explanatory vari-ables that are assumed to be spatially correlated (MDPH 2002). The parameter in this model represents the association between SIR and SES, namely how SIR
varies with respect to changes in SES. This association will be presented as per-Model 1SIROEEn
SESadjusted
cccc
ijk
ckji/*where
rr
ijkccEccnijkcicrijkciModel 2ii iilog i i0*SESi i0 i An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.168ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWScent change in relative risk of cancer incidence for each percent increase in popu-lation above age 18 living below the line of poverty.All models were implemented in WinBUGS 1.4 statistical programming lan-guage. We employed a standard procedure reporting small coefficient estimates and 1 as a percent change in relative risk per unit change in SES and exposure,respectively. Besides colo-rectal cancer, our analyses of cancer incidence on up-
per Cape Cod demonstrated little association between socioeconomic factors and
the standardized incidence ratio of three major cancer types (see Table 9-8).In the case of colo-rectal cancer, data showed 2.5% increase in relative risk(95% CI: 0.5-4.6%) per 1% additional population living below poverty. This sug-
gested that colo-rectal cancer SIR could be understated for higher-income census
tracts with higher-income levels.Furthermore, if these higher-income census tracts had higher exposure, thenwe might underestimate the association between exposure and SIR. Plotting SES
by exposure (Figure 9-4) revealed no strong relationship between these two vari-
ables; hence, results from our geographic correlation study should not be sensi-
tive to the SES adjustment.TABLE 9-8 Association Between Socio-economic Status and Cancer IncidenceRatio% Change in Relative Riskper 1% Increase inCancer TypesPopulation Below Poverty95% C.I.
Colo-rectal cancer2.480.54 - 4.57
Breast cancerÐ1.04Ð2.72 - 0.59Prostate cancerÐ0.90Ð3.79 - 1.90Lung cancer1.49
Ð0.78 - 3.530.00.10.10.2RicherÉPoorer
Census tract ranked by SES
Power density (
W/cm2)FIGURE 9-4Census tract MITRE average-density exposure by SES ranking,
An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH CONSIDERATIONS IN THE CAPE COD POPULATION169GEOGRAPHIC CORRELATION STUDYTo measure the association between the estimated PAVE PAWS power-den-sity exposure (average and peak) and cancer incidence at census-tract level, wefitted a log-linear model taking into account spatial correlation for unobserved
variables. In addition, we controlled for SES by introducing the percentage of
population over 18 years of age living below the poverty level in our model
(Model 3). For each of the four major cancer types, the cancer incidence data
revealed little evidence of association with our estimated exposure and we deter-
mined that controlling for SES did not lead to qualitative changes in the relative
rate estimates (Figure 9-5).-ˇ0˘-40˘-ˆ0˘0˘ˆ0˘40˘˙˙˝˙P˙˛˙˙˙˝˙P˙˛˙
W/cmˆ w˚o˚ SES
FIGURE 9-5 Association between MITRE average power-density exposure and cancerincidence with/without controlling for SES. CCÑcolo-rectal cancer, BCÑbreast cancer,PCÑprostate cancer, LCÑlung cancer.Model 3ii iilog i i01* i *SESi i0 1 PAVE PAWS
i An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.170ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSBased on Model 3, we found no statistically significant association betweenMITRE average power-density exposure estimates and any of the four major can-cer types (Figure 9-6). We also conducted a sensitivity analysis by fitting the
same model using BSL average power-density exposure estimates (Figure 9-7)
and MITRE peak power-density exposure estimates (Figure 9-8). We found that
our result was not sensitive to the choice of exposure estimates.Due to the large power-density estimates at census tracts 133-6 and 138,results in Figures 9-6 to 9-8 might be highly influenced by these few census
tracts. We, therefore, refitted the statistical model by using BSL average power-
density expressed in decibels with respect to microwatts per centimeter square
(dBW/cm2) where exposure in dBW/cm2 = 10*log10 exposure in W/cm2. Simi-lar to the spatial correlation analysis conducted in the W/cm2 scale, after con-trolling for SES, the associations between exposure and cancer incidence were
not statistically significant for all four major cancers (Figure 9-9).-80%-60%-40%-20%0%20%40%CC MCC FCCBCPCLC MLC FLC
% change in RR per 0.1W/cm2 increse in average density
FIGURE 9-6 Association between MITRE average density exposure and cancer incidence.CCÑcolo-rectal cancer, BCÑbreast cancer, PCÑprostate cancer, LCÑlung cancer. M =male, F = female.-80%-60%-40%-20%0%20%40%CC MCC FCCBCPCLC MLC FLC
% change in RR per 0.001W/cm2 increse in average density
FIGURE 9-7 Association between BSL average density exposure and cancer incidence.CCÑ colo-rectal cancer, BCÑbreast cancer, PCÑprostate cancer, LCÑlung cancer. M =male, F = female.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH CONSIDERATIONS IN THE CAPE COD POPULATION171-80%-60%-40%-20%0%20%40%CC MCC FCCBCPCLC MLC FLC
% change in RR per 1mmW/cm2 increse in peak densityFIGURE 9-8Association between MITRE peak-density exposure and cancer incidence.
CCÑcolo-rectal cancer, BCÑbreast cancer, PCÑprostate cancer, LCÑlung cancer. M =male, F = female.-80%-60%-40%-20%0%20%40%CC MCC FCCBCPCLC MLC FLC
% change in RR per 1mW/cm2 increse in peak densityFIGURE 9-9 Association between BSL average density exposure (decibel) and cancerincidence. CCÑcolo-rectal cancer, BCÑbreast cancer, PCÑprostate cancer, LCÑlungcancer. M = male, F = female.Geographic Correlation Study SummaryTo combine evidence of all 24-cancer types, we fit a hierarchical model asspecified in Model 4. Neither of the two exposure estimates showed statisticallysignificant association with cancer incidence between 1986 and 1994. For peak-
density exposure, we estimated a 6.5% decrease in relative risk (95% CI: Ð14.2 -1.2%) per 1 W/cm2 increase in the level of peak exposure. In addition, we esti-mated a 6.6% decrease in relative risk (95% CI: Ð11.8 - 0.1%) per 0.1 W/cm2increase in average-density exposure.Findings of the National Research Council committeeÕs geographical corre-lation study by census tract of exposure to PAVE PAWS radar and cancer inci-
dence should be interpreted with caution. First, because of the lack of sufficient
health-related statistics and confounders at a geographical resolution smaller than
a census tract, our results could be affected by ecological and confounding bias.
In addition, as in most environmental risk-assessment studies, our census-tractAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.172ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSexposure estimates could be affected by exposure-measurement error. In fact,census-tract exposure estimates are residential and might not represent the actual
personal exposures. Epidemiological studies that use health-related statistics
(mortality, morbidity, and pregnancy outcomes) and potential confounders (smok-
ing, pollution, SES) at a smaller level of spatial aggregation (i.e., census-block
group) and that take into account daily activity patterns in the exposure assess-
ment would provide a more precise and comprehensive assessment of the poten-
tial health effects associated with an exposure to the PAVE PAWS radar.SUMMARY1. Evaluation of previously reported data demonstrates that:¥In general, there is an absence or lack of sufficient health-related statis-tics available for Cape Cod residents to allow for a detailed descriptive analysiswithin smaller and more specific subdivisions such as counties, towns, census
tract, and census block. Population-based data are available only for outcomes
relating to cancer, birth defects, birth weight, and premature mortality, although
the size of the population within geopolitical areas of interest does not always
allow for a sufficient number of outcomes to allow adequate evaluation.¥The observed elevated cancer-incidence rates among residents of CapeCod have not been adequately explained through subsequent investigations.¥While previous case-control and ecologic correlation studies have notprovided compelling evidence for elevated cancer risk associated with exposure
to the PAVE PAWS radar, it cannot be concluded from these studies that
the PAVE PAWS radar is not associated with cancer risk. The previous studies
have limitations relating to cancer-specific sample size and detailed exposure
assessment.¥Because of the limited population of upper Cape Cod, it will not beModel 4Oµµik
ikikikPcr
ccer
Eiloglog*
µExposure
ikkk
01iii
kkokbNN

00111

1PAVE
An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH CONSIDERATIONS IN THE CAPE COD POPULATION173possible to conduct cancer-specific research studies with statistical power to ruleout small or moderate levels of increased risk related to exposure to the PAVE
PAWS radar beam.¥The International Epidemiology Institute has proposed a study at thecounty level using counties west of PAVE PAWS (out of PAVE PAWS operat-
ing angle) as a control. This study proposes to evaluate health outcomes before
and after the startup of the PAVE PAWS radar, which should strengthen any
association, or lack thereof, of health effect with the PAVE PAWS radar.2.Geographical correlation by census tract of exposure to PAVE PAWS
radar and cancer incidence (analysis conducted by this NRC committee):¥Using available information on population density, topography, and di-rection of the PAVE PAWS radar beam it is estimated that about 16,400 people in
Cape Cod reside in the sidelobes of the main PAVE PAWS beam.¥Analysis of the occurrence of specific cancers, including colorectal,breast (female), prostate, and lung, did not identify any significant association
with estimated peak or average power-density exposure to the PAVE PAWS
beam.¥Statistical adjustment for socioeconomic status, utilizing the percent ofpopulation below the poverty level, had little impact on the observed correlations.
The lack of census-tract level information on confounding factors such as smok-
ing and diet remains a limitation of our geographical correlation study. However,
for a confounding factor to have significant effect on the results, it needs to be
strongly related to the cancer incidence and inversely correlated with exposure
estimates.REFERENCESAschengrau, A., C. Paulu, and D. Ozonoff. 1998. Tetrachloroethylene-contaminated drinking waterand the risk of breast cancer. Environ Health Persp 106 (Suppl 4):947-953.Aschengrau, A., S. Rogers, and D. Ozonoff. 2003. Perchloroethylene-contaminated drinking waterand the risk of breast cancer: additional results from Cape Cod, Massachusetts. Environ HealthPersp 111:167-73.BSL (Broadcast Signal Lab). 2004. Draft Final Test Report on a Survey of Radio Frequency EnergyField Emissions from the Cape Cod Air Force Station PAVEPAWS Radar Facility, Broadcast

Signal Lab, Medfield, MA.CCCR (Cape Cod Commission Reporter). April 17, 2003. Vol 13, no 4.Colditz, G. 1998. Relationship between estrogen levels, use of hormone replacement therapy, andbreast cancer. J Natl Cancer I 90:814-823.Coogan, P.F. and A. Aschengrau. 1998. Exposure to power frequency magnetic fields and risk ofbreast cancer in the Upper Cape Cod Cancer Incidence Study. Arch Environ Health 53:359-367.Coogan, P.F. and A. Aschengrau. 1999. Occupational physical activity and breast cancer risk in theUpper Cape Cod Cancer Incidence Study. Am J Ind Med 36(2):279-285.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.174ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSEyles, J. and S. Birch. 1993. A population needs-based approach to health care resource allocationand planning in Ontario: a link between policy goals and practice. C J Public Health 84:112-
117.McKelvey, W., J.G. Brody, A. Aschengrau, and C.H. Swartz. 2004. Association between residenceon Cape Cod, Massachusetts, and breast cancer. Ann Epidemiol 14(2):89-94.MDPH (Massachusetts Department of Public Health). 1999. Upper Cape Cod Cancer Incidence Re-view, 1986-1994 Final Report Appendices. Bureau of Environmental Health Assessment Envi-
ronmental Epidemiology Unit. Boston: Boston University School of Public Health.MDPH. 2001. Massachusetts Birth Defects, 1999. Bureau of Family and Community Health, Bureauof Health Statistics Research and Evaluation. Boston: Boston University School of Public Health.MDPH. 2002. Technical AdvisorsÕ 3rd Report (2000-2001). Research on Health and EnvironmentalExposure Massachusetts Military Reservation, Louise Ryan, Joel Schwarz, Robert Goble, andDale Hattis. Boston: Harvard School of Public Health.MDPH. 2003. Cancer incidence and Mortality in Massachusetts 1996-2000: statewide report. Boston:Massachusetts Department of Public Health.MITRE. 2000. MITRE technical report RF power density exposure at ground level for the PAVEPAWS radar at Cape CodÑquestions and answers. MITRE Corporation, Bedford, MA.Rothman, K.J. and S. Greenland. 1998. Modern Epidemiology. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williamsand Wilkins.US Census Bureau. Census 2000. http://www.census.gov/main/www/cen2000.html (November 2004).Willett, W.C., B. Rockhill, S.E. Hankinson, D.J. Hunter, and G.A. Colditz. 2000. Epidemiology andnongenetic causes of breast cancer. Pp. 175-220 in Diseases of the Breast, Second Edition. J.R.
Harris, M.E. Lippman, M. Morrow, and C.K. Osborne, eds. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams
& Wilkins.ANNEX 9-1: DATA SOURCES¥Cancer incidence data from 1986 to 1994 for 24 cancer types in 30 cen-sus tracts in upper Cape Cod (Upper Cape Cod Cancer Incidence Review 1986-1994[3])¥Peak and average PAVE PAWS power density from MITRE (Map4&7)¥Average PAVE PAWS power density from Broadcast Signal LabÑPAVE PAWS Average Exposure.RMX [Map 8]¥Digital elevation model (DEM) downloaded from the GeoComm Inter-national Corporation (http://gisdatadepot.com/dem [Map2 & Map 3])¥Total population in 1990 and 2000 by gender and by age at block grouplevelÑCensus bureau (web Table QT-P1A & P12) [Map 5 & Table 1]¥Total population in 2000 by census block in the form of GIS Datalayerfrom Massachusetts Geographic Information System (http://www.state.ma.us/
mgis/cen2000_blocks.htm [Map 9])¥Poverty status in 1989 by gender and by ageÑCensus bureau (web TableP118) [Figure 2 & Figure 3]An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH CONSIDERATIONS IN THE CAPE COD POPULATION175ANNEX 9-2: GEOBUGS CODE#



 RR'i(  S!R'i(   100*mu'i(/E'i( )



  1 )





An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.17610Summary ofConclusions and RecommendationsRADAR CHARACTERISTICSBoth phased-array antennas and reflector antennas have time delays at wideangles. Arrays and dishes of comparable size have comparable delays. PAVE

PAWS is a narrow-band system (5 MHz) with significant filtering for interfer-
ence reduction. This results in waveform rise and decay times that are several

times the maximum delay time of 60 nsec. Effects of delay time were not ob-

served in the extensive Phase IV measurements.The large number of PAVE PAWS active elements (1792), and their irregu-lar spacing, make the discrete-beam formation almost indistinguishable from a
continuous formation. There is no evidence to indicate that phased-array radar
effects are different from those of dish radars; the Phase IV-measured waveforms
affirm this.Precursors are portions of the signal waveform that can travel faster or slower
than the main part of the signal. Those precursors may occur in dispersive media

for signals with large bandwidths. They have been calculated and measured, but

only for wideband signals, typically, 10,000 MHz bandwidth, in dispersive me-
dia. They may decay slowly, but only after significant attenuation in the cellular

media. With respect to narrow-band PAVE PAWS radar exposure, any precur-

sors introduced into the human body would likely be below the noise level, and
are unlikely to be of consequence. Precursor formation is directly related to band-
width (rise time) in nsec, and dispersion, but not to slope (V/m/nsec).Extremely-low-frequency (ELF) electric fields have been shown to producebiological effects at low-field intensities. Because PAVE PAWS is modulated at
ELF frequencies, it is theoretically possible that exposure to PAVE PAWS radarAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS177could result in inducing very low levels of ELF fields in the body. To determinethe possible levels of ELF energy induced by PAVE PAWS radar exposure, a
Fourier analysis could be made of a representative search-pulse pattern, including
the dead (maintenance) interval. This information, in combination with measure-
ments of the non-linearities in human tissue impedance at the carrier frequency,
would allow an estimation of the extent to which the sideband energy is con-
verted to ELF energy in an exposed body and this in turn could be evaluated for
possible biological effects if the ELF-exposure levels are large enough to corre-
spond to observed effects at ELF frequencies. It should be noted that many radars
employ diagnostic intervals in their waveforms that result in a small ELF modu-
lation.EXPOSURE LEVELSPower-density measurements recorded by different groups at different timeswithin the communities surrounding the Cape Cod PAVE PAWS radar are gener-
ally consistent with each other and with modeled results. They show distribution
patterns that are strongly influenced by site-specific local topography and inter-
vening terrain at any given location. The available data and models of the PAVE
PAWS power-density emissions adequately characterize the spatial distribution
of the exposures occurring throughout the communities of Cape Cod. The mod-
eled power densities tend to be higher than measured power-densities, perhaps
due to conservative assumptions made in the modeling effort.BIOLOGYNo biological studies have been identified that used RF exposures identicalto the PAVE PAWS system. However, a variety of biological studies have been
undertaken based on short-term (hours), medium-term (weeks to months), and
long-term (years) RF exposures in the frequency range of PAVE PAWS.Short Exposure TimesMany short-exposure-time studies (hours to days) have addressed the possi-bility of DNA damage and other cellular responses following exposure to RF.
DNA damage is a normal occurrence in living cells, with estimates that mamma-
lian cells encounter thousands of DNA strand breaks/cell/day, most of which are
repaired without adverse effects. In numerous short-term exposure studies, no
reproducible effects on DNA damage have been observed, as measured by a num-
ber of different methods (micronucleus formation, DNA strand-break analysis,
apoptosis, and others). While some studies have shown significant effects on
gene expression due to modulated RF exposure of cells in culture, these do not
include endpoints traditionally associated with carcinogenesis.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.178ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSIntermediate Exposure TimesIn studies involving exposure times on the order of weeks to months at levelsof 900/1900 MHz, and in one case, 60 Hz, there are reports of statistically signifi-
cant changes in development and differentiation of tissues and organisms. In par-
ticular, studies of exposures of chick embryos have shown a delay in develop-
ment and reduced fertilization. A decreased developmental stability was also
observed following exposure of fruit fly eggs. The implications of this observa-
tion for human embryonic development are unknown at this time.Perhaps of greatest interest are the studies undertaken at 435 MHz (similar tothe central frequency of the PAVE PAWS system), which demonstrated a sub-
stantial and significant reduction in dopamine levels in exposed animals.Long Exposure TimesLong-term exposure studies (multiple years) are principally two-year bioas-say experiments or carcinogenesis studies in animals and studies of changes in
plant growth. A wide range of carcinogenesis studies have been conducted in
animals exposed to RF fields. Such studies can generally be described as those
with field intensities high enough to cause an increase in temperature in tissue
(thermal) and those with field intensities below that level (athermal; comparable
to the PAVE PAWS signal). Review of the lower-intensity animal studies identi-
fied some potential influences of exposure, but no reproducible indications of
increased cancer risk with exposure have been shown.Tree growth studies have been undertaken with radar exposures similar tothose of PAVE PAWS at an early-warning radar installation in Latvia. Those
studies showed a dose- and distance-dependent decrease in tree-ring width. Plant
growth-response effects have been confirmed by changes in cell-wall synthesis
activity after RF exposure.Theoretical MechanismsAt the present time there has been no physical mechanism shown to connectelectromagnetic fields at the exposure levels associated with the PAVE PAWS
radar to changes in chemical reactions that would lead to biological effects.Biology RecommendationsGiven the observation of long-term RF-exposure effects in plants and theseveral (though unreproduced) reports of effects in intermediate-duration expo-
sures, the committee concludes certain additional studies on the biological effects
of PAVE PAWS-specific RF exposures are warranted. In particular, studies using

large-scale genomic screening for gene and protein expression at the cellular levelAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS179and studies of plant growth in the area around the PAVE PAWS facility wouldimprove our understanding of possible biological effects of long-term exposures
to this radar.While biological responses do not necessarily translate into health effects, itis important to follow-up on known biological effects to determine if they relate
to an identifiable health effect. The committee concludes that there is a need for
three types of studies:1.Studies are recommended that include large-scale genomic and
proteomic screening to identify gene- and protein-expression patterns in cell and
animal studies after exposure to simulated PAVE PAWS radiation, both at levels
approximating peak-exposure levels of the CAPE COD population and at higher
power levels to identify potential threshold power densities for biological effects.
The committee recognizes that the limitation of these studies is that they may
have limited applicability to the human situation. However, the strength of these
studies is that they will provide information covering a wide range of cellular
activity in a limited number of experiments and the information gained may be
useful in generating theoretical mechanism-related hypotheses of the possible
effects of PAVE PAWS exposures.2.Studies to further investigate the potential influence of PAVE PAWS
exposure on neurotransmitter (e.g., dopamine) concentrations in the central ner-
vous system are also recommended. The observation of a robust depression in
dopamine levels (~50%) with an onset concurrent with the start of exposure, and
lasting for the duration of the exposure, could prove to be of great importance if
this effect can be replicated. Dopamine is closely involved in motor control (e.g.,
depressed levels of dopamine are believed to be causal in the etiology of
Parkinsons disease) and so there could be a direct link between these observa-tions and health effects. It is recommended that these studies be undertaken utiliz-
ing modulation frequencies more representative of the PAVE PAWS system
rather than the 1 kHz utilized by Toler and others, as these lower modulation
frequencies are closer to dominant brainwave frequencies.3.Studies of tree growth in the vicinity of the PAVE PAWS facility are
also recommended. Evaluation of tree-ring width, comparing rings from trees
before and after the facility became operational with similar trees in areas that
provide similar growth conditions outside the beam, should be possible with mini-
mal or no impact on the environment. While these studies have the limitation of
not being directly applicable to human health, they have the specific strength of
involving long-term exposures (years). In addition, if the findings replicate the
Latvian tree-growth results, it is anticipated that the information from these stud-
ies could lead to mechanism-generating hypotheses.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.180ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSEPIDEMIOLOGYMassachusetts Department of Public Health Statistics for Upper Cape CodUsing the upper Cape Cod cancer incidence review of 1986-1994 from theMassachusetts Department of Public Health, statistically significant increases in
the standardized incidence ratio (SIR) are seen for the following cancers:
colorectal (SIR 112), breast (SIR 110), prostate (SIR 130), and lung (SIR 112)
(Table 9-2 in Chapter 9).As an overall measure of health for the upper Cape Cod towns, prematuremortality before age 75 is a useful indicator. Based on 2001 data, Barnstable,
Falmouth, Mashpee, and Sandwich have lower mortality than the Massachusetts
state average, while Bourne has elevated mortality. The observed elevated can-
cer-incidence rates among residents of upper Cape Cod have not been adequately
explained through subsequent investigations. A comparison of the calculated SIR for 5 categories consisting of total can-cers, breast, colon, lung, and prostate cancer during 1987-1994 versus 1995-1999
for 5 towns in upper Cape Cod (see Table 9-2) demonstrated no consistent pattern
of increase during the latter time period. During these two time periods, a de-
crease was observed in 15 out of 25 SIRS, no change in 4 out of 25 SIRS, and an
increase in 6 out of 25 SIRs, thus indicating that increasing duration of exposure
to the PAVE PAWS radar has not resulted in increased incidence of cancer.Human Epidemiology of Pulsed-RF ExposuresStudies of the U.S. Embassy in Moscow, the Radiation Laboratory at MIT,and of 40,000+ U.S. Navy personal all showed no health effects ascribable to the
exposure to radars. Studies of the Polish military and the populations near Skrunda
in Latvia can be considered as indicative of a possible need for follow-up studies.
However, the difficulties in defining possible confounders reduces the weight
given to these studies by the committee until they are supported by other epide-
miological studies.Committee Analysis of PAVE PAWS and Cancer IncidencePeak and average power-density measurements obtained by use of (1) digitalelevation maps, which take into account the height and operating angle of the
radar, (2) MITRE data, and (3) the BSL report, all provided similar estimates of
the exposure to the PAVE PAWS beam at each census tract within upper Cape
Cod (see Figure 10-1 below) with the exception that the modeled estimates are
consistently higher than the measured power densities.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS181The analysis conducted by the NRC committee, based on 2000 data (Table 9-7 in Chapter 9), and using available information on population density, topogra-
phy, and direction of the PAVE PAWS radar beam, estimated that the proportion
of the population of upper Cape Cod residing (primary residence) in areas that
result in direct exposure to the PAVE PAWS beam was 11.8% in 1990 and 12.4%
in 2000.The analysis conducted by the NRC committee of the occurrence of all can-cers combined, as well as specific cancers, including colorectal, breast (female),
prostate, and lung, did not identify any increase in cancer risk with estimated
peak or average power-density exposure to the PAVE PAWS beam. Statistical
adjustment for socioeconomic status, utilizing the percent of population below
the poverty level, had little impact on the observed correlations (Figures 9-7 to 9-
11 in Chapter 9).Epidemiology RecommendationsThe size of the population on upper Cape Cod is sufficient (with 10 years ofobservation) to design and conduct research, either prospective or retrospective,
that could address increases in risk levels between 40% and 100% for some of the
more common cancer outcomes (i.e., colo-rectal, lung, breast, prostate, bladder,
and non-Hodgkin lymphoma; see Table 9-6 in Chapter 9).Because of the limitations of exposure estimates, confounders, and range ofhealth outcomes it is recommended that future investigations integrate (1) expo-
sure assessment and health at the census-block level; (2) personal exposure char--80-70-60-50
-40-30-20-100122124
126
128130132
134
136138140143
145147149151Census Tract
dBW/cm
2BSL Avg Density
MITRE Avg Density
FIGURE 10-1Comparison of the two sets of census tract specific average power-density
estimates. Census tracts 123 and 124 have zero exposure estimates based on MITRE dataand are omitted.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.182ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROM PAVE PAWSacteristics other than just residential location; (3) extensive consideration of po-tential confounders; and (4) health outcomes other than cancer. In addition, it is
recommended that geographical-correlation studies should be carried out for age-
specific strata (e.g., under 30 or 45).An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.183DIVISION ON EARTH AND LIFE STUDIESBoard on Radiation Effects ResearchNovember 15, 2002
Lt. Col. Richard Ashworth, ChiefBioenvironmental Engineering
Office of the Command Surgeon
Headquarters Air Force Space Command
150 Vandenberg Street, Suite 1105
Peterson AFB, CO 80914-4550Dear Col. Ashworth,The National Research Council has been asked to update its 1979 report onthe analysis of exposures to and potential biologic effects of the PAVE PAWSradar system. This update will be completed at a later date after an extensive
review of available data. The committee is to first determine whether available
research data on continuous and pulsed radiofrequency (RF) energy are adequate
for determining the biologic and potential health effects of the PAVE PAWS
phased-array system (see Appendix, lines 1Ð3 of Statement of Task). The Air
Force has asked that this determination be communicated as a letter report. The
committeeÕs initial assessment is that the data on continuous and pulsed RF en-
ergy are not adequate for determining the biologic and potential health effects of
the PAVE PAWS phased-array system at this time. This conclusion is based ontwo observations.First, issues related to the rise and fall portions of the PAVE PAWS wave-form have been raised, but cannot be addressed, because we have available onlyAppendix AInterim Letter ReportNational Academy of Sciences National Academy of Engineering
Institute of Medicine 
National Research Council Advisers to the Nation on Science, Engineering, and MedicineAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.184APPENDIX Apreliminary, but inadequate, measurements of the PAVE PAWS waveform. Thesemeasurements are important to characterize transient aspects of PAVE PAWS
radiation and to answer a question raised by others about the comparability of the
PAVE PAWS phased-array radiation with radiation emitted by non-phased array
systems. Hopefully, the significance of the PAVE PAWS wave shape will be
clarified by the Phase IV measurement data .Second, although more than 2 decades of exposure to PAVE PAWS phased-array radiation has been experienced by the Cape Cod population which should
allow a direct evaluation of any adverse health effects, there are currently inad-
equate data about the distribution of population exposures in the Cape Cod re-
gion. Adequate exposure data would be necessary to carry out this direct evalua-
tion of the effects of the PAVE PAWS waveform. The 1978 and 1986 PAVEPAWS power-density measurements are limited to 37 locations in proximity to
the PAVE PAWS site. Apparently these measurements were not designed to cover
a wide range of census tracts for epidemiologic purposes. Use of epidemiologic
methods is considered by this committee to be important to the determination of
possible health effects of the PAVE PAWS radar. Accordingly, adequate power-
density measurements that discriminate the PAVE PAWS emissions and that
cover relevant census tracts are deemed necessary to facilitate the determination
of possible health effects. It is our understanding that power-density measure-
ments will be commissioned by the PAVE PAWS Steering Group for use in their
epidemiology effort and that this information may be available to our committee
as well. The committee considers access to these data to be important to items 2
and 3 of the committeeÕs Statement of Task (see Appendix, items 2 and 3 of theStatement of Task). After the phase IV data are evaluated and during the
committeeÕs update of the 1979 National Research Council report, the committeewill re-evaluate the adequacy of the existing RF energy literature for determining
the potential biologic and health effects of the PAVE PAWS phased-array sys-
tem. The committee further expects that the Phase IV measurement data, addi-
tional power density measurements, and computed exposure estimates that in-
clude a propagation model will be extremely useful in its attempts to evaluate the
potential health effects of the PAVE PAWS radar on the Cape Cod population.
The committee recognizes that much research has been conducted over the past
23 years that may provide insight into the possible biologic and health effects of
PAVE PAWS radiation, and the committee will be reviewing the cellular, ani-
mal, and epidemiologic RF exposure and health effect data in detail. To this end
the committee has constructed a set of potentially relevant RF field characteris-
tics that will be used as guidelines in the identification of experiments in the
literature that could be relevant to the update of the 1979 Research Council report
(see Table).The ranges described are to indicate the focus of the committeeÕs review,though the committee may determine that certain data obtained under other expo-
sure conditions are relevant to its task. It is beyond the scope of this letter reportAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A185to list all possible sources of data that fall within the committeeÕs proposed crite-ria to be reviewed. The committee is using a database with more than 37,000references in addition to the information that various members have acquired in
working in the field of bioelectromagnetics for many years. It should be further
noted that the extensive literature on power-frequency fields is not considered
relevant to the evaluation of PAVE PAWS health effects in our study because thephysical mechanisms of interaction between power-frequency fields and tissue,Characterization of the PAVE PAWS Waveform and Identification ofWaveform Characteristics Suitable for the Evaluation of Biologic and PotentialHealth Effects of PAVE PAWS RadarRelevant Range ofData to BeConsidered byCharacteristicPAVE PAWSthe CommitteeComments
Frequency420-450 MHz10 MHz-2 GHz
aThere are common mechanismsof interaction in the 10 MHz-2GHz frequency rangeIncident Average<280 
W/cm2b<1 mW/cm2Specific Absorption RatePower Densityor SAR <1 mW/gincreases for a given incident
(<1 W/kg)power with increasing frequency
ModulationPulsePulse (CDMA,To include all existing RF
TDMA, IDEN,pulse-modulation technologies
GSM, etc.)Pulse Width0.25-16 ms0.001-100 ms
Pulse Repetition Rate0.02-20 Hz0.01 Hz-10 kHz
Pulse Rise Time>20 ns10 ns < 
R < 10 sR should be less than the(R)charge relaxation time (
/ forbiologic tissue, where  is thedielectric permittivity of tissue,and  the conductivity. Maxestimated relaxation time is
10 ms.Exposure DurationContinuousContinuous-1 hr/day
aUpper limit is intended to include cell-phone-frequency research (which goes as high as 1.9 GHz).The 2.45 GHz research in the literature is continuous RF energy and would be excluded by the modu-
lation criteria (pulsed exceptions will be considered).bThe MITRE report on PAVE PAWS (2000) indicates that at the perimeter fence line the energylevel does not exceed the IEEE thirty-minute average limit for human exposure. The IEEE limit is 280
microwatts per square centimeter.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.186APPENDIX Aon the one hand, and RF energy and tissue at low field strengths, on the other, areexpected to be different. Furthermore, studies of power-frequency fields tend to
concentrate on the effects of magnetic fields whereas studies on the effects of RF
energy focus on power-density measurements or SARÕs. In addition, the commit-tee proposes to focus on pulsed modulated fields rather than continuous wave
fields. Continuous wave RF exposure experiments do not involve the same broad
spectrum of energy and also utilize far lower peak exposure levels to attain the
same average exposure levels. As a result, inclusion of continuous wave studies
in the literature review may unfairly bias the observed results against any poten-
tial effects of exposure.References CitedMITRE. 2000. Kramer, A.G., B.P. Nelson, and R.E. Wakefield. RF Power Density Exposure atGround Level for the PAVE PAWS Radar at Cape Cod - Questions and Answers. Bedford, MA.NRC (National Research Council). 2002. Letter Report to the Department of the Air Force from theCommittee to Assess Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-levelPhased-array Radiofrequency Energy: Recommendations for Phase IV Measurements. Wash-

ington, D.C.: National Academy Press http://www.nap.edu/books/NI000468/html/Sincerely,Frank Barnes, Ph.D.Chairman
Committee to Assess Potential Health Effects from Exposures to
PAVE PAWS Low-level Phased-array Radiofrequency EnergyAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A187COMMITTEE TO ASSESS POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS FROMEXPOSURES TO PAVE PAWS LOW-LEVEL PHASED ARRAYRADIOFREQUENCY ENERGYFRANK E. BARNES (Chair), University of Colorado at Boulder, Boulder, COROBERT C. HANSEN (Vice Chair), R. C. Hansen, Inc., Tarzana, CA
LARRY E. ANDERSON, Battelle Pacific Northwest National Laboratories,Richland, WAGRAHAM A. COLDITZ, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
FRANCESCA DOMINICI, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD
KENNETH J. McLEOD, State University of New York, Binghamton, NY
KEITH D. PAULSEN, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH
LESLIE L. ROBISON, University of Minnesota Cancer Center, Minneapolis,MNSUSAN L. SANTOS, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey andEast Orange, War Related Illness and InjuryStudy Center, Medford, MAJAN A. J. STOLWIJK, Professor Emeritus, Yale University, New Haven, CT
GAYLE E. WOLOSCHAK, Northwestern University, Chicago, ILNATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL STAFFEVAN DOUPLE, Study DirectorRICK JOSTES, Study DirectorTAJUANA CLAYTON, Project AssistantDORIS E. TAYLOR, Staff AssistantSPONSORÕS PROJECT OFFICER
LT. COL. RICHARD ASHWORTH, U.S. Air ForceAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.188APPENDIX AAPPENDIXAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposures to PAVEPAWS Low-level Phased-array Radiofrequency EnergyStatement of TaskThe committee will first determine whether continuous and pulsedradiofrequency (RF) energy research data are adequate for determining the bio-logical and potential health effects of the PAVE PAWS phased-array system.
This determination will be communicated to the sponsor as a letter report. If the
research data from continuous and pulsed RF energies are considered to be appli-
cable for the determination of possible health effects of phased-array RF energy,
the committee will use this information to update the 1979 National Research
Council analysis of the exposure levels and potential biologic effects of the PAVE
PAWS Radar System. If the data are not applicable, the committee will use other
information that it determines to be relevant to phased array health effects to
update the 1979 report. In this update the committee will evaluate potential bio-
logical and health effects, evaluate exposures of the public to electromagnetic
energy from the PAVE PAWS system, and make recommendations for the need
for, and focus of, additional scientific studies to address continued scientific un-
certainty related to health outcomes and exposure to low-level radiofrequency
energy emitted by the PAVE PAWS Radar System. At the completion of its work,
the committee will provide an update of the 1979 Research Council report that
includes a discussion of:1.The applicability of, and the level of uncertainty associated with, using
data derived from cell, animal, and epidemiological studies employing continu-
ous-wave exposure for evaluation of potential adverse health effects following

phased-array exposures;2.The extent of the exposure of the public to electromagnetic energy from
the PAVE PAWS system;3.Potential biological and health effects of the PAVE PAWS Radar Sys-
tem, and4.Recommendations for appropriate follow-on study design issues, includ-
ing the strengths and limitations of the approaches suggested and the potential
value of the proposed work.REFERENCENRC (National Research Council). 1979. Analysis of the Exposure Levels and Potential BiologicEffects of the PAVE PAWS Radar System. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.189Appendix BAcronyms and Abbreviations
polarizability; or lowest frequency dispersionAFBAir Force Base

AFRLAir Force Research Laboratories (at Brooks Air Force Base,
San Antonio, Texas)AGNIRAdvisory Group on Non-ionizing Radiation

ANSIAmerican National Standards Institute
Bmagnetic flux density
B-dotsensor that measures the derivative of a magnetic field

BBBblood-brain barrier

BPblood bressure

BRFSSMassachusetts Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System

BSLBroadcast Signal Laboratories

second frequency dispersionCACanada
Ca++calcium ionCCCRCape Cod Commission Reporter

CCECCape Cod Environmental Coalition

CDMACode Division Multiple Access (cellular telephone technology
originally known as IS-95)CIconfidence interval

CNScentral nervous system

COPPSCoalition for the Operation of PAVE PAWS Safely

CRCCRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida

CWcontinuous wave
An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.190APPENDIX BDreflector diameter 
inD

tDFcos
sin)
D-dotsensor that measures the derivative of an electric field
Dadalton

dBdecibel

DCdirect current

DDTdichloro-diphenyl-trichloroethane

DEDDirected Energy Directorate (of the Air Force Research
Laboratories at Brooks Air Force Base, San Antonio, Texas)DEMDigital Elevation Model

DMBA

DNAdeoxyribonucleic acid

dsbdouble-strand breaks

degreesfbandwidth (delta frequency)
Eelectric field
EEGelectroencephalogram



EIG
Biloxi, Mississippi)EISEnvironmental Impact Statement

ELFextremely low frequency

EMFelectro-magnetic field

EPAEnvironmental Protection Agency
ffrequency; focal length 
inD

tDFcos
sin)
frsprincipal frequency of the rise timeFforce; frequency 
inD

tDFcos
sin)
FDMAFrequency Division Multiple Access (cellular telephone
technology)FMfrequency modulation

ftfeet
third frequency dispersionGAOGeneral Accounting Office

Gygray
cGy
 gray)
GPSGlobal Positioning System

GSM
h
An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B191

Laboratories at Brooks Air Force Base, San Antonio, Texas)high performance liquid chromatography

heart rate



hertz

 hertz)

 hertz)

9 hertz)

 hertz)
ICNIRPInternational Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation
Protection

IRinfrared

IEEEInstitute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers

IITRIIllinois Institute of Technology Research Institute


k
kg
 gram)
wavelength inD

tDFcos
sin)
mmeter
cm
meter)km
 meter)
MAMassachusetts

Magmagnitude



MISERMassachusetts Institute for Social and Economic Research

MMRMassachusetts Military Reservation

MPEMaximum Permissible Exposure

MSMississippi

N
NANational Academies

NASNational Academy of Sciences

Ncnot calculated
An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.192APPENDIX BNCRPNational Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements


NRCNational Research Council

NRPBNational Radiological Protection Board

NSWCNaval Surface Weapons Center


PAVE PAWS
for Phased Array Warning SystemPCEperchloroethylene

PIPhysics International



ˇpercent

azimuth angleqcharge
ˆratio of stored energy to dissipated energy


technique for sending data over coaxial cable or radio)R
RFradiofrequency

RFEMFradiofrequency electromagnetic field

type of coaxial cable

RNAribonucleic acid
S
SARSpecific Absorption Rate

secsecond
msec
 second)
nsec
9 second)
psec
 second)
SESsocio-economic status

SIRstandard incidence rates or standardized incidence ratio

SMRstandard mortality rates or standardized mortality ratio

SRIStanford Research Institute (type of dish antenna)

ssbsingle-strand breaks

SSISwedish Radiation Protection Institute

T
mT
 tesla)
TEMTransverse Electro-Magnetic (type of antenna)
An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B193TPA
TRTransmit-Receive modules

TVtelevision

polar anglerpulse rise time
ultra-high frequency




ulraviolet

type of ultraviolet light

type of ultraviolet light
vvelocity
V
kV
 volt)
very-high frequency
W
kW
 watts)
watts per centimeter squared (power density) watts) per centimeter squared (power density)
An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.194Committee Biosketches
FRANK S. BARNES, Ph.D. (Chair), is Distinguished Professor in the Depart-
ment of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Colorado at
Boulder. He received a Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering from Stanford University.
His career has included research in a wide variety of applications in physics andelectrical engineering, focusing on fundamental research on the biological effectsof electromagnetic fields, surgical procedures, and telecommunications educa-
tion. His research has included the effects of radio waves, fields from power
lines, and ultrasonic fields on biological systemsÑtrying to understand the

mechanisms of interaction that might lead to identification of hazards, the setting
of safety standards. Dr. Barnes is an AAAS Fellow, received the Centennial
Award and Third Millennium Medal of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers, and was elected to the National Academy of Engineering in 2001. He
currently is an Ex Officio Member of the U.S. National Committee for the Inter-
national Union of Radio Science and a past-president of the Bioelectromagnetics
Society. In 2004 he was awarded the Bernard M. Gordon Prize by the National
Academy of Engineering.ROBERT C. HANSEN, Ph.D. (Vice-Chair), received his doctorate in electricalengineering from the University of Illinois. Since 1971, he has been a consulting
engineer for electromagnetic antennas and systems-related problems and is rec-
ognized as an expert in near-field phased-array radar systems. In 1960, Dr. Hansen
became a senior staff member in the Telecommunications Laboratory of STL
(now TRW), and was engaged in communication satellite telemetry, tracking,
and command. From 1964 to 1966 he formed, and was director of, the Test Mis-
sion Analysis Office responsible for computer programs for the planning andAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMITTEE BIOSKETCHES195control of classified Air Force satellites. He is a Fellow of IEEE and IEE, a regis-tered professional engineer in California and England, and a member of the
American Physical Society and Sigma Xi, the Scientific Research Society, and
Tau Beta Pi, the Engineering Honor Society. He was awarded an honorary Doc-
tor of Engineering degree by the University of Missouri-Rolla in 1975 and was
elected to the National Academy of Engineering in 1992. Dr. Hansen has written
over 100 papers on electromagnetics and is the editor of several books, including
the 3-volume Microwave Scanning Antennas, and author of Phased Array Anten-nas. He received the IEEE 2002 Electromagnetics Award.LARRY E. ANDERSON, Ph.D., received his Ph.D. in Biochemistry (neuro-chemistry) from the University of Illinois. Dr. Anderson was program manager
for research efforts investigating the interactions between biological systems and
non-ionizing radiation at Battelle, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory and has
a faculty position at Washington State University in Biological Science. He is a

specialist in neurochemistry whose research has included investigations on neu-
rohormones and associated circadian biochemistry as well as the carcinogenecity
of environmental physical agents principally power-frequency fields, radiofre-
quency energy, and visible light. He is a past-president of the Bioelectromagnetics
Society and has served on a number of national and international committees on
non-ionizing radiation and health, including the National Council on Radiation
Protection; International Conference on High Voltage Systems; International
Agency for Research on Cancer Working Group on Extremely Low Frequency
Electromagnetic Fields; International Union of Radio Science, Commission K;
International Commission on Non-ionizing Radiation Protection; National Insti-
tute of Environmental Health Sciences, Working Group on Biological Effects of
Static and ELF Electric and Magnetic Fields; and the World Health Organization
Working Group on Health Protection, Non-ionizing Radiation.GRAHAM A. COLDITZ, M.D., Dr.P.H., received his M.D. from the Univer-sity of Queensland, Australia, and his Dr.P.H. from Harvard. He is currently a
Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Professor of Epidemiology,
Harvard School of Public Health, and Epidemiologist, Brigham and WomenÕshospital. Dr. Colditz has a major interest in the etiology and prevention of cancer
and is working with the Massachusetts Department of Public Health to translate
research findings from ongoing cohort studies into public health strategies for
prevention. He is the author or co-author of 461 original reports and 85 reviews.
One of his publications is among the top 5 most-cited breast cancer papers of the
1990s.FRANCESCA DOMINCI, Ph.D., received her Ph.D. in Statistics from the Uni-versity of Padua, Italy. She is currently an Associate Professor in the Departmentof Biostatistics, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.196COMMITTEE BIOSKETCHESDr. DominiciÕs research has concentrated on time-series analysis in environmen-tal epidemiology, models for meta-analyses, and imputation techniques for in-
complete data sets. Dr. Dominici is a member of the American Statistical Asso-
ciation and International Biometric Society. Dr. Dominici is the recipient of the
Walter A. Rosenblith New Investigator Award, the Health Institute, Boston, MA,
and the 2001 Young Investigator Award of the Statistics in Epidemiology Section
of the American Statistical Association.KENNETH J. McLEOD, Ph.D., obtained his doctorate in Electrical Engineer-ing from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and did his postdoctoral work
in Cell Biology at Tufts University School of Medicine. Dr. McLeod is presently
Professor and Chairman of the Department of Bioengineering at Binghamton
University. Dr. McLeodÕs primary research interests are directed toward under-standing the mechanism of interaction of biophysical factors in the processes of
tissue development, healing, and adaptation, including endogenous and exog-
enously induced electromagnetic fields. Dr. McLeod is a past-president of the
Bioelectromagnetics Society and the Society for Physical Regulation in Biology
and Medicine. He received the Kappa Delta Award for Outstanding Bioelectrical
Research in 1990 and the State University of New York Award for Excellence in
Invention, Creation, and Discovery in 2004.KEITH D. PAULSEN, Ph.D., obtained his doctorate in Biomedical Engineeringfrom Dartmouth College and was an Assistant Professor in the Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Arizona from 1986 to
1988. He is currently Professor, Thayer School of Engineering, and Director,
Radiobiology and Bioengineering Research Program, Norris Cotton Cancer Cen-
ter, Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Center. He is a recognized expert in modeling
and calculating the deposition of radiofrequency energies in various media and in
tissues. Dr. Paulsen received the Morgan Parker Memorial Fellowship for poten-
tial contribution in biomedical engineering. He has served on technical review
groups at the National Cancer Institute, the National Science Foundation, the
U.S. Army Breast Cancer Research Program, and the National Institutes of Health.
He is currently a member of the Radiation Study Section, National Institutes of
Health.LESLIE L. ROBISON, Ph.D., received his Ph.D. in Public Health from theUniversity of Minnesota. Dr. Robison is Director, Division of Pediatric Epidemi-
ology/Clinical Research; Associate Director, University of Minnesota Compre-
hensive Cancer Center; and Professor, Department of Pediatrics, School of Medi-
cine and Division of Epidemiology, School of Public Health. Dr. RobisonÕsresearch has focused on the epidemiology of pediatric malignancies and long-
term outcomes of pediatric cancer survivors. He is Associate Chair of the
ChildrenÕs Oncology Group and principal investigator of the Childhood CancerAn Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMITTEE BIOSKETCHES197Survivor Study. He holds the ChildrenÕs Cancer Research Fund Endowed Chairin Pediatric Cancer, University of Minnesota Cancer Center (1993Ðpresent). Dr.Robison is an author of over 200 publications and has served on numerous boards,
committees, and the NIH Epidemiology and Disease Control Study Section.SUSAN L. SANTOS, Ph.D., M.S., has an M.S. in Civil Engineering and PublicHealth from Tufts University and a Ph.D. in Law, Policy, and Society (Concen-
tration in Risk Communication) from Northeastern University. Dr. Santos is cur-
rently Assistant Professor in the Division of Health Education and Behavioral
Sciences at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New JerseyÕs School ofPublic Health. She is also Director, Risk Communication, for the War Related
Illness and Injury Study Center in the East Orange VA Medical Center. She is
owner and president of FOCUS GROUP Risk Communication and Environmen-
tal Management, a consulting firm, and is a Senior Faculty Member at Boston
College Carroll School of Management. In the past, she served as Research Pro-
gram Director at the Columbia University Center for Risk Communication, Di-
rector of Risk Assessment Services for ABB Environmental, and was an environ-
mental engineer at the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) where she won
the EPA Bronze medal (1981) and the EPA Sustained Superior Performance
Award (1984). Dr. Santos is a member of the Society for Risk Analysis, the
Massachusetts Public Health Association, The American Public Health Associa-
tion (sections on Environment and Epidemiology), and the International Associa-
tion of Public Participation Professionals.JAN A.J. STOLWIJK, Ph.D., is the Susan D. Bliss Professor of Epidemiology
and Public Health, Emeritus, at the Yale University School of Medicine. He was
chair of the Department of Epidemiology and Public Health from 1981 to 1989
and from 1993 to 1994. Dr. Stolwijk has been a member of a number of National
Research Council committees studying possible health effects of electromagnetic
fields including the Committee to Assess Possible Health Effects of Ground Wave
Emergency Network, the Committee to Assess Possible Health Effects of Expo-
sure to Residential Electric and Magnetic Fields, and the Committee to Evaluate
Research on Power-Frequency Fields Completed Under the Energy Policy Act of
1992. He has also served as a member of the EPA Science Advisory Board and
committees dealing with indoor air pollution and with particulate air pollution.An Assessment of Potential Health Effects from Exposure to PAVE PAWS Low-Level Phased-Array...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.